S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9241st meeting

Thursday, 12 January 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Laboti
Mr. Muniz Pinto Sloboda
Mr. Tian Bingxu
Mr. Escobar Ullauri
Mrs. Meyer
Ms. Betoe Ndojombouet
Mr. Anyanah
Mr. Ciscaldi
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Proskuryakov
Mrs. Chanda
Mr. Azzam
Mr. Hollis
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security
The rule of law among nations
Letter dated 3 January 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-01356 (E)
*2301356*

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): At the outset, I would like to
thank Japan for organizing this important meeting on the
rule of law among nations and to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Japan to the United Nations.
The rule of law among nations and in international
relations has faced many challenges over the decades
since the establishment of the United Nations. Despite
the fact that the Organization was established to
promote and maintain international peace, security
and development, based on respect for the rule of law,
time and time again we have witnessed violations of
the objectives and purposes of the Organization. The
use of force and the threat of the use of force, as well as
serious violations of international law, remain rampant.
Sovereign equality is increasingly becoming an empty
slogan. The right of peoples to self-determination
is constantly being undermined and the expansive
interpretation of the right to self-defence has been an
affront to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States. Furthermore, States in general remain reluctant
to voluntarily submit their disputes to peaceful
settlement mechanisms owing in part to the lengthy and
costly proceedings that ensue.
Despite the development over the past few decades
of the regime of international criminal law, international
criminal justice remains hard to attain and perpetrators
of international crimes are evading accountability.
International criminal tribunals do not have the
capacity to bring all perpetrators to justice and States
are generally unable or unwilling to exercise national
criminal jurisdiction over such international crimes.
Double standards are a core challenge in the
application of the rule of law. That is becoming more
obvious by the day. Some of those who call for respect
for the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations somehow forget such principles,
including the right to self-determination, when it
comes to the Palestinian question. The inviolability of
the acquisition of territory by force has been a cardinal
2/54

12/01/2023

principle of international law since the adoption of the
Charter. Unfortunately, conquest, which has its roots
in the era of colonialism, is the premise of Israel’s
occupation of Palestinian territory and of its unlawful
settlement policy. The international community must
take a firm stand against such a grave breach of
international law.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has
exacerbated and exposed the deficiencies in the
application of the rule of law, especially with regard to
development, human rights and sovereign equality. The
gap between developed and developing States and their
peoples is growing larger as a result of COVID-19 and
thereby undermining the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
It is against that background that Jordan calls
on other members of the international community
to engage in meaningful discussions of the rulesbased international order with a view to identifying
the challenges and providing solutions. Jordan’s
understanding of the term is that it is synonymous
with the term “the rule of international law”. Do we
need new rules? How do we implement and enforce
the existing rules? Do we need structural changes,
including to the United Nations system? And how can
the United Nations be true to its objective of resolving
conflicts and not merely managing them? Those are
some of the questions that need to be answered. It is
our hope that the Summit of the Future will be able to
contribute to the debate on such questions and solutions.
It is in our common interests to promote the rule of law
and its application. Without joint action at all levels, the
world will continue to depart from the principles and
objectives that bind us together.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and His Excellency Minister Hayashi Yoshimasa on
Japan’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and on choosing the important
topic that the Council is discussing today. Egypt also
expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his briefing at the beginning of this meeting, as well as
to Mr. Dapo Akande for his valuable presentation and
to the President of the International Court of Justice for
her briefing.
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

Egypt agrees with what is stated in the concept note
(S/2023/1, annex): the promotion of the rule of law and
the maintenance of international peace and security are
interlinked. In fact, establishing the rule of law among
nations is the main guarantor for achieving the purposes
and principles of the United Nations in general, foremost
of which is the maintenance of international peace and
security, which can be considered the main purpose of
the establishment of the United Nations.
I would like to make few brief remarks on the topic
of discussion in an attempt to explain Egypt’s vision
regarding some of the guiding questions contained in
the concept note.
First, talking about the role of the rule of law among
nations requires, first of all, a definition of that law.
In that regard, Egypt believes that the principles of the
United Nations contained in Article 2 of the Charter,
and the Declaration on the Principles of International
Law of 1970, are the basic reference for the rule of law
at the international level, which enjoys unquestioned
international consensus.
We are pleased to recall in that regard that Egypt
has always been at the forefront of countries supporting
the consolidation of the rule of law internationally,
through its continuous alignment with the principles of
the United Nations, which is confirmed by the pattern
of Egypt’s voting on various United Nations resolutions,
in addition to the pioneering role that Egypt has played
in all the work of the Special Committee that developed
the Declaration of Principles of International Law of
1970, from its inception in 1963 until the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV).
Secondly, unfortunately, there are many challenges
to achieving the rule of law at the international level,
foremost of which is the questioning of the basic
pillars of the rule of law at the international level,
such as the principle of state sovereignty and other
principles. However, I would like to highlight in
particular the following two challenges: The first
challenge is the continuous attempt by some countries
to introduce concepts and standards that are not agreed
upon and to impose them on the rest of the countries,
while considering that collective adherence to them
is an activation of the principle of the rule of law at
the international level. In that context, we refer, for
example, to the issue of the death penalty, which is
addressed in the reports of the Secretary-General in
the context of the rule of law. We affirm that what is

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

considered a component of the rule of law in some
societies does not necessarily enjoy the same status in
other societies, which have their own uniqueness and
social and cultural development. We also affirm that
such repeated attempts undermine, in fact, due respect
for the rule of law at the international level.
The second challenge relates to double standards
when talking about the application of the rule of law
at the international level. It is obvious, if one follows
the voting patterns of Member States on various
United Nations resolutions, that they often vary
according to subjective political considerations, despite
the unity of principles that are supposed to be applied
and adhered to collectively. In that regard, we refer,
for example, to the adoption of inconsistent positions
by many countries on issues of annexation of territory
by force, aggression and violations of international
humanitarian law, although it is assumed that principles
are principles in all cases. Egypt stresses here the
extreme danger of double standards in establishing
and consolidating the rule of law internationally, as
it wastes the credibility of international law and the
system of multilateral collective action as a whole.
Thirdly, there remains, however, a glimmer of
hope in the acknowledgment of a real problem facing
multilateral collective action and the credibility of the
United Nations, which is something that already exists
and has been revealed by successive international
crises, as stated in the Secretary-General’s report
entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982). We therefore
agree on the importance of strengthening the role of
the various organs of the United Nations based on
the rule of law, foremost of which is the International
Court of Justice, by activating its judicial and advisory
jurisdiction in various matters to the maximum extent.
As for the Security Council, it is difficult to talk about
a real activation of its role in strengthening the rule of
law without talking about reforming and expanding the
Security Council, ensuring fair representation in it,
lifting the historical injustice that has befallen Africa
and achieving fair representation for it in accordance
with the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
There will be no meaningful and real reform of the
Security Council without dealing with all the problems
of the veto power, and what it allows: the upholding of
the position of one permanent Member State over the
will and position of the rest of the combined members
of the international community.

23-013563/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Japan for assuming the presidency of
the Security Council, and I commend it for its initiative
in convening today’s debate on the important topic of
promoting and strengthening the rule of law. I also
want to thank the Secretary-General, the President of
the International Court of Justice and Professor Akande
for their very important remarks this morning.
The Security Council has debated the topic of the
rule of law several times over the course of the past two
decades. Nevertheless, this debate is both relevant and
timely because the context of peace and security today
is vastly different. The events of the past year have
shown us all that the rule of law cannot be taken for
granted. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and annexation
of sovereign Ukrainian territory have undermined
international peace and security and violated the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. The war in Ukraine poses a direct
challenge to the multilateral system founded on the
basis of the Charter and international law.
In a context of war and conflict, multilateralism
and international law may very well be the first
casualties. However, the international response to the
invasion and annexation of Ukraine clearly shows
that the world has overwhelmingly rejected the path
of invasion, annexation and aggression. The adoption
of resolutions in the General Assembly with an
overwhelming majority condemning Russia’s invasion
and annexation is a clear demonstration that members
of the United Nations want a multilateral system based
on the Charter and international law. It is disappointing
but not surprising that the Security Council has been
unable to discharge its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
therefore important that every United Nations Member
State and every principal organ of the United Nations
do their part for peace and security by upholding the
rule of law. The rule of law cannot be replaced by
the notion of “might is right”, and the United Nations
must always be the custodian of the rule of law at the
international level. In that regard, please allow me to
make a few points.
First, every Member of the United Nations has a
responsibility to comply with its obligations under the
Charter and international law at all times. However,
4/54

12/01/2023

expressing support for the rule of law through
statements is not good enough. Every State must
be judged by its actions and by its adherence to and
respect for its obligations under international law. We
cannot allow United Nations Members, especially the
large and powerful countries, to pick and choose which
international law obligations they seek to uphold. A la
carte multilateralism is not multilateralism. A selective
or unilateral approach to international law will
only weaken the multilateral system and undermine
international peace and security.
Secondly, every Member of the United Nations
must support preventive diplomacy and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The Secretary-General, too,
has a crucial peace-making role, as reflected in Article
99 of the Charter, and must be fully supported in that
regard. The means of peaceful settlement of disputes
that are laid down in Article 33 of the Charter should
be fully utilized.
Thirdly, the General Assembly, which is the main
deliberative and the most representative organ of the
United Nations, must continue to enhance its ability to
contribute to the implementation of the obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
By doing so, the Assembly can contribute materially
to the maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly when the Security Council is unable to act.
Finally, the rule of law applies at all levels. The rule
of law at the international level cannot exist without the
rule of law at the national and regional levels. That is
why Singapore has been a strong advocate of regional
organizations contributing, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In Southeast
Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) has played a crucial role in maintaining
peace and security by providing a framework regional
dialogue and cooperation. Later in this open debate,
ASEAN as a group will deliver a statement, with which
we entirely associate ourselves. The relative peace that
the Southeast Asia region enjoys is also due to a regional
commitment to the rule of law, as exemplified by the
ASEAN Political-Security Community Blueprint.
The rule of law was, and remains, one of Singapore’s
foundational principles. As a small State, Singapore’s
ability to survive and thrive against the odds is in a large
part due to our insistence on applying the rule of law,
both in our domestic and foreign affairs. As a nation
that stands for the rule of law, Singapore stands ready
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

to work with members of the Security Council and all
other Members of the United Nations to strengthen the
multilateral system and our collective commitment to
the rule of law in order to build a more peaceful and
secure world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Feruță (Romania): I commend the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate on such a highly important topic. I am also
grateful to the Secretary-General, the President of the
International Court of Justice and Professor Akande for
setting the scene for this discussion.
Respect for the fundamental norms and principles
of international law governing relations between States,
many of which are reflected in the founding document
of this Organization, provides a solid prerequisite
for stable peace among nations. The opposite, that
is, violation of those basic rules, triggers devastating
consequences. While ensuring respect for international
law and its rule is a task shared by all United Nations
Members, the Charter of the United Nations has
entrusted the States seated at this table with a special
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
In a severe departure from its responsibilities, a
permanent member of the Security Council, Russia,
has for almost a year now been sustaining a brutal
and unprovoked aggression against its neighbouring
country, Ukraine. The scale of violations of international
law has called into question the resilience of the global
rule of law and the credibility of the United Nations
system as a whole.
While much more is needed to address the impact
of such a blatant violation, it is encouraging to see
the renewed focus of the international community
on accountability and justice. A key component
of the international response was the involvement
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and the
International Court of Justice within their respective
mandates. Romania has full trust in the independent
and impartial ability of the ICC and the International
Court of Justice to bring about justice.
That brings me to the second major component of
a well-functioning global rule-of-law system, namely,
the crucial role of international judicial institutions in

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

the peaceful settlement of disputes and in support of
maintaining peace and security worldwide.
Romania remains committed to supporting the
International Court of Justice as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations and its role in promoting
and reinforcing the rules-based international order.
With the aim of encouraging a wider use of the
Court, in 2021, Romania, together with a group
of supporting countries, put forward an initiative
promoting the broader recognition of the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice. The declaration
lists the main arguments for accepting the Court’s
contentious jurisdiction and encourages States to
confer jurisdiction on the International Court of Justice
by any of the means envisaged in its Statute, as deemed
appropriate. The document reaffirms the important
contribution of the International Court of Justice to the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the promotion of
the rule of law globally, while inviting States to make
better use of that potential. We renew our invitation to
all States Members of the United Nations to endorse
the declaration.
Several defence measures could prove invaluable
to address the current challenges to, and attacks on,
the rule of law. Consistent support to and cooperation
with international courts and tribunals are needed. In
relation to the International Court of Justice, respect
for its judgments and orders is paramount. States could
build a predictable basis for accessing the Court’s
jurisdiction by making declarations recognizing the
jurisdiction of the Court as compulsory and through
the introduction of compromissory clauses in treaties.
States should defer their disputes to the Court and
engage third parties, if appropriate, by making
interventions before the Court. All States are invited to
send a strong signal of general support to the Court by
endorsing our above-mentioned initiative.
In relation to the ICC, we should continue to strive
for the universality of the Rome Statute. Continued
political and financial support for the Court is
also crucial, given its vital role in the fight against
impunity and in providing assistance and reparations
to victims of mass atrocities. The Security Council has
a particular responsibility to ensure that outstanding
arrest warrants issued in the situations that it deferred
to the ICC are executed.
Finally, Romania stands ready to continue to play
its part in all such efforts, living up to its own words

23-013565/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

as a responsible actor in the international arena and a
strong supporter of the global rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statements to be delivered by the Head of Delegation
of the European Union and by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Rule
of Law.
Let me also commend Japan for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and for convening
today’s open debate. We welcome this opportunity to
focus on the rule of law in international relations as a
key ingredient to ensuring peaceful and just relations
among nations and peoples.
Ten years have passed since our Heads of State and
Government gathered at United Nations Headquarters
to reaffirm their solemn commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and justice and an international order
based on the rule of law. Unfortunately, that solemn
and unanimous pledge remains unfulfilled. In fact, as
we gather today, those foundations are being shaken by
the brutal war of aggression waged by Russia against
Ukraine. Italy continues to stand firm in defence of
the Charter of the United Nations, the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of nations and the self-determination
of peoples.
A multilateral system of peaceful relations among
States based on the rule of law requires a constant and
long-term commitment in five different respects.
First, it requires strict adherence to international
legal obligations, whether derived from treaties or
from customary international law. Compliance with
international legal obligations is not a matter of
choice; it is mandatory for all. That also applies to the
obligations stemming from the Charter of the United
Nations, including those of a procedural nature aimed at
ensuring the proper functioning of the Security Council.
Secondly, breaches of international law committed
by States, especially when related to peremptory norms,
must bear consequences. The Charter of the United
Nations, in particular its Chapter VII, as well as the
customary law on international responsibility codified
by the International Law Commission, sets out those
legal consequences. It is our collective responsibility to
ensure that they do not remain on paper.
6/54

12/01/2023

Thirdly, individuals responsible for egregious
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law must be held accountable. In
that vein, Italy remains convinced that a universal,
independent and impartial judicial institution, such as
the International Criminal Court, complementing the
efforts of the national authorities, is a key instrument
in fighting impunity. Effective cooperation between
the ICC and the Security Council is also essential if we
want to end impunity.
Fourthly, disputes that are likely to endanger
international peace and security must be settled
peacefully in accordance with Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations. That includes resorting
to international courts and tribunals and abiding
by their judgments and decisions. In particular, the
International Court of Justice plays a critical role in
promoting the peaceful settlement of international
disputes, and it contributes to the development and
strengthening of international law as a fundamental
condition for stability. Therefore, cooperation between
the International Court of Justice and the Security
Council must also be strengthened in accordance with
the Charter.
Fifthly and finally, the codification and progressive
development of international law must be pursued as a
means to achieve legal certainty and good governance
and to adapt the law to the ever-changing realities of
international relations. Italy continues to support the
important work of the International Law Commission
and of the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly
in that respect, including in important areas such as the
law of State responsibility.
Ten years have passed since we declared at the
highest political level our commitment to the rule of
law in international relations.
It is now time to act. The international community
can continue to count on Italy in the collective effort
to reinforce the rule of law in international relations,
including through the reform of the United Nations
aimed at making the Organization — and this very
organ — more democratic, representative, accountable,
transparent and effective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): We thank Japan for
convening this important debate, and the briefers for
their informative presentations.
Indonesia aligns with itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of the Philippines on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
The current state of our world is worrisome.
Crisis after crisis continues to unfold. Violations of
international law have become the norm in the pursuit
of narrow self-interests. The spirit of multilateralism,
which is key to upholding the international rule of law,
continues to fade. We are indeed heading towards a
slippery slope to a world where the law of the jungle
reigns. Against that backdrop, let me make three points.
First, the rule of law is critical to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Adherence by all
Members to the Charter of the United Nations and
international law is therefore fundamental. Any effort
to maintain international peace and security must also
be founded on genuine respect and preservation of the
rule of law among nations. The rule of great Powers
or the rule of force must never triumph over the rule
of law. All countries — big or small, developed or
developing — have an equal responsibility to uphold
the rule of law. As the declaration of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at
the national and international levels states, the rule of
law applies to all States equally.
Secondly, we must ensure a strong multilateralism
that delivers and is underpinned by firm respect for the
rule of law. We must work for a multilateralism that
promotes dialogue and cooperation; a multilateralism
that rejects a take-it-or-leave-it approach; and a
multilateralism whereby the voices of all countries are
heard and matter. In turn, a strong multilateralism will
enable us to ensure that the rule of law is respected and
upheld, which will contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Thirdly, we must promote the pacific settlement
of disputes. Indonesia condemns any threat or use of
force to settle international disputes. As the guardian
of international peace and security, the Security
Council must play a key role to ensure that the rule
of law is upheld. We also advocate that all countries
settle their differences peacefully, including through
the International Court of Justice. In that regard, the
Security Council also needs to make use of all tools

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

to foster stronger relations with the Court to assist the
Council in its work.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Indonesia’s
commitment to ensuring that the rule of law will always
guide our response to global challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): Let me commend Japan
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for January and convening today’s debate. Let me also
congratulate Ecuador, Japan, Malta, Mozambique and
Switzerland on starting their terms as elected members
of the Council.
Austria has the honour to deliver this statement
on behalf of the 50 member States of the Group of
Friends of the Rule of Law. For brevity’s sake, I will
refer everyone to the list of their names in my written
statement. Since 2005, this cross-regional Group has
devoted itself to standing up for international law
and the rule of law. We welcome this opportunity to
stress the relevance of the rule of law when it comes
to fulfilling the purposes of the United Nations and
upholding the Charter of the United Nations.
We thank you, Sir, for the concept note (S/2023/1,
annex), and the briefers for setting the scene
this morning.
In many ways, 2022 was a challenging year,
especially for those who believe in the rule of law and who
believe we should conduct our international relations in
compliance with treaties and customary international
law. As we heard this morning, the Charter is at the
core of how nations should coexist peacefully. Through
our ratification, all Member States agreed to be legally
bound by the Charter. The key difference between a
political commitment and a norm of international law
is the binding, obligatory nature of the latter. If a State
breaches an obligation under international law, it must
bear the legal consequences of State responsibility,
as elaborated in detail by the International Law
Commission in its articles on responsibility of States
for internationally wrongful acts.
Adherence to the rule of law is intended to ensure
that the principles and norms that we agreed on are
respected and implemented by all in good faith. That
is in the interest of all States, large and small. By
means of the Charter, the Member States agreed on the
principles of sovereign equality and to refrain from the

23-013567/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State. Several General
Assembly resolutions adopted last year reaffirmed the
validity of those principles — for example, when they
underlined the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine and rejected attempts to acquire territories by
force, called for an end to violations of international
law in Myanmar, reaffirmed the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and recalled the
obligations of Afghanistan under international law.
Clearly, United Nations Member States continue to
value those fundamental principles and the obligation
to act in accordance with them.
Adherence to international law serves our collective
security and guarantees the safety of our citizens. Many
conflicts could be avoided if States showed respect for
the rule of law and complied with their obligations
under the law, especially the Charter. That includes the
obligation to settle international disputes by peaceful
means — an obligation that was complied with in
several instances and practice — for example, by
Italy and Austria with regard to the German-speaking
minority 30 years ago and, more recently, by Canada
and Denmark, together with Greenland, regarding their
maritime and land-border dispute in the Arctic.
If States do not resolve a conflict peacefully, the
Security Council has the responsibility to maintain or
restore international peace and security, including by
restoring compliance with the law. In that context, the
misuse of the veto and the non-observance of Article
27, paragraph 3, of the Charter is a grave concern. We
welcome ideas to limit the use of the veto in certain
cases, such as the French-Mexican initiative on the
suspension of the veto in cases of mass atrocities and
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, as well as Liechtenstein’s
veto initiative, which was adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 76/262. At the same time, the
United Nations must not give up if the Security Council
cannot deliver. We saw that in the General Assembly
most recently, when members resorted to the “Uniting
for peace” resolution, last resorted to in February 2022.
Perhaps the time is right to consider further means
of strengthening adherence to the Charter, reflecting
better its legally binding nature. Perhaps we could
explore possible ways to more effectively, consistently
and directly respond to grave violations of the Charter
when the Security Council does not act.
8/54

12/01/2023

Probably no other international institution
embodies the principle of the rule of law among States
better than the International Court of Justice. We
emphasize our appreciation for the Court’s work and
reiterate the need for all States to fulfil their obligation
to respect and implement the Court’s judgments and
other binding measures. Similarly, we have the highest
regard for other international courts and tribunals, such
as the Permanent Court of Arbitration, the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the International
Criminal Court. The Security Council should continue
to draw upon the expertise of those institutions.
When considering situations constituting a threat to
international peace and security, the Council should
consider whether they could be seized of the matter to
enable the peaceful settlement of a dispute.
The number of challenges that the international
community faces remains high. The rule of law must
be part of the foundation on which we build our
relationships and enable us to face those challenges
together. Over the past years, many have complained
about a lack of trust and a lack of confidence among
United Nations Member States. Compliance with
international law is an excellent way to establish such
trust. If we can rely on each other to adhere to the
law, we will have an excellent foundation for peaceful
international relations. Let us not succumb to the
temptations of power and force. Let us build on the
power of law.
That concludes the statement on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Rule of Law. I have three
additional sentences that I would like to say in my
national capacity.
Since joining the United Nations in 1955, Austria’s
contribution has always been guided by the purposes
and principles of the Charter, international law and
the interests of the United Nations, as a whole. Our
high regard for the rule of law is reflected in our
report entitled “The United Nations Security Council
and the rule of law: the role of the Security Council
in strengthening a rules-based international system”,
which guided us during our previous term on the
Council. Austria is fully committed to adhering to
those principles for when we will next serve on the
Council. And we will let our membership be guided
by the rule of the law and international law and strive
to focus discussions on strengthening them, especially
adherence to the Charter.
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): At the outset, let me
warmly congratulate Japan for its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and
you, Mr. President, for taking this excellent initiative.
I also thank the Secretary-General, the President of the
International Court of Justice and Mr. Akande for their
briefings earlier today.
As we have all agreed today, the rule of law is the
foundational edifice of modern nation States. This
foundation is underpinned by the United Nations
Charter, where the principle of the sovereign equality of
States is the basis for our collective actions. In the face
of the interconnected challenges that we face today, the
United Nations represents our collective recognition
that only cooperative and effective multilateralism can
ensure peace and stability. While we firmly believe
in the principles of multilateralism and the peaceful
settlement of disputes in accordance with principles
of international law, this can succeed only if the
interaction between States is based on rules that aspire
to greater collective welfare.
In our view, a rules-based international order is
one that is free from coercion and based on respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity, transparency and
the peaceful resolution of disputes. In that regard, allow
me to make three points that we believe are critical
to ensuring and strengthening the rule of law in the
conduct of international relations.
First, the peaceful settlement of disputes is the key
factor. The rule of law necessitates that countries respect
each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as they
would expect their own sovereignty to be respected. The
principle of pacta sunt servanda is a binding norm of the
rule of law, requiring countries to respect agreements
signed with others, bilateral or multilateral, and that
they do not take unilateral measures to undermine or
nullify those very arrangements.
Secondly, the application of the rule of law at the
international level should protect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States from aggression, including
terrorism, and including cross-border terrorism. States
that use cross-border terror to serve narrow political
purposes must be held accountable. This is only feasible
when all countries stand together against common
threats such as terrorism and do not engage in double
standards for political expediency.

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, strengthening the rule of law would also
necessitate reforming international institutions of
global governance, including those charged with the
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security. Debates on strengthening the rule of law
while holding on to anachronistic structures that lack
representative legitimacy would serve little purpose in
our endeavour to strengthen the rule of law.
The purpose and relevance of multilateral
organizations is increasingly being put into question.
We have a collective responsibility and obligation
to enhance the credibility and legitimacy of the
international order. Let us strive to achieve this end
before it is too late.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): Allow me first
to congratulate the new elected members of the
Council — Ecuador, Japan, Malta, Mozambique and
Switzerland. I would also like to congratulate Japan for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
high-level open debate on the rule of law. I also thank
the briefers for their insightful briefings.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the representative of the European Union, in its
capacity as observer, and I would like to add a few
thoughts in my national capacity.
The rule of law is a core principle of governance
fundamental to international peace and security and
political stability. It is the backbone of protecting
people’s rights and fundamental freedoms and of
achieving economic and social progress, development
and prosperity. The rule of law ensures a context of
justice and fairness in which all citizens and the State
itself are accountable to publicly promulgated and
equally enforced laws. In contrast to a Hobbesian world,
the rule of law accords predictability and legitimacy to
the actions of States, forming a fundamental framework
for the conduct of peaceful and mutually beneficial
relations between us. While most progress on the rule
of law is achieved during the times of peace, it is most
in demand during war times.
Unfortunately, one country is still pursuing
the rule of force instead of the rule of law. Russia’s
barbaric war of aggression against the sovereign
nation of Ukraine is the most blatant violation of the

23-013569/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

United Nations Charter since the Second World War.
The unanimously adopted United Nations Charter,
the 1970 Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and the General Assembly resolutions
affirming the importance of the rule of law are not
only being trampled upon, but they will also be flushed
down the drain unless the global community reacts and
holds those responsible accountable.
Lack of accountability in the era of global
connectedness is a legitimate concern for the
international community as a whole. The crime of
aggression is the mother of all crimes in international
law, as it sets the scene for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and the crime of genocide. All these were
unleashed by the Russian Federation in Ukraine.
In that context, I would like to highlight the
importance of establishing an international tribunal
for the crime of aggression in Ukraine, to guarantee
that not only the perpetrators but also the masterminds
of the aggression will not escape responsibility.
Unfortunately, there is no judicial body that has
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression in Ukraine
because the International Criminal Court does not have
jurisdiction in this case, and, in any case, Russia would
veto a Security Council referral if one were proposed.
An international tribunal would fill this void and send
a clear signal to all potential aggressors that starting a
war will be very costly and will not be tolerated, and
that justice will be assured, and international law and
the rule of law will always prevail.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): The past year in
particular has made it clear that the respect for the rule
of law at the international level cannot be taken for
granted. The brutal aggression by a permanent member
of the Security Council against a founding Member
of the United Nations is an unprecedented attack
against the United Nations Charter, which is the very
foundation of the international rules-based order we are
discussing today. And it is a stark reminder of the need
to stand up for this order at all times.
The United Nations Charter is clear on the
prohibition of the illegal use of force and the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. Aggression, as defined by the
General Assembly by consensus in 1974 in the middle
10/54

12/01/2023

of the Cold War, is one of the most blatant assaults on a
rules-based international order and must be met with a
clear response. The Security Council, with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security on behalf of the United Nations
membership as a whole has an obligation to act. In the
case of Ukraine, the Security Council has delegated
its responsibility to the General Assembly, as it was
unable to make any meaningful decision owing to the
veto power. Enforcement of the key provisions of the
United Nations Charter also entails accountability
where they are violated in a blatant manner, including
through individual criminal responsibility for the crime
of aggression, which falls on individuals in leadership
positions. As a referral to the International Criminal
Court by the Council, which would be the ideal course
of action, seems very unlikely at best, we have the
obligation to think about alternative paths to ensure
accountability for the aggression against Ukraine.
When Council action is blocked by the veto,
the General Assembly must step in, as it has done
successfully on various occasions in the past year.
The General Assembly is the only universal organ of
this Organization, and the main guardian of the rule
of law. Efforts to strengthen the Assembly’s role thus
remain crucial. General Assembly resolution 76/262,
also known as the veto initiative, adopted last year by
consensus, is an essential step towards that end. It has
increased the accountability and transparency of the
work of this Organization, including through its impact
on the use of the veto itself. Going forward, we also
see an urgent need to discuss the manner in which
Article 27, paragraph 3, of the United Nations Charter,
stipulating that a party to a dispute shall abstain from
voting, is and should be applied.
Liechtenstein continues to support the efforts of
the International Court of Justice to safeguard the rule
of law at the international level, including its advisory
role on legal questions. That is also exemplified by
Liechtenstein’s most recent declaration of intervention
under Article 63, in the case of allegations of genocide
under the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide — Ukraine v. Russian
Federation. The Council too has the competence to ask
the International Court of Justice for advisory opinions
on any legal question.
Justice and peace necessarily go hand in hand and
must be at the centre of our common efforts, especially
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

this year, including in the context of the New Agenda
For Peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): My delegation
appreciates Japan’s convening of this open debate on
this important and timely topic.
International peace and security can be maintained
only when relations among nations are based on
commonly agreed rules. After the Second World War,
there was a common understanding on the need to have
basic rules, which include the principles of respecting
sovereign equality and refraining from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. That became the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations and the United Nations
system — the fundamental framework of international
relations for more than 75 years.
Unfortunately, in recent years, threats to basic
international norms have been increasing. To address
such challenges and promote the rule of law, I would
like to highlight the following three points.
First, taking insufficient action or no action
in response to plain breaches of the rule of law will
allow violators and perpetrators to continue to threaten
international peace and security and make rule by
force more tempting. Therefore, in cases in which
the fundamental norms of the international system
are violated, the Security Council must act. If the
Council fails to fulfil its primary responsibility owing
to the exercise of veto powers, the General Assembly
should be able to swiftly act with its recommendatory
power under the Uniting for Peace resolution (General
Assembly resolution 377 (V)).
Secondly, we would like to bring attention to the
solemn obligation conferred to all of us by Article 25
of the United Nations Charter — to fully implement
Security Council resolutions. In that light, it is simply
appalling to witness that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, a Member State, completely
disregards and even derides its obligations under
the United Nations Charter and continues unlawful
provocations. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea launched countless ballistic missiles last year, in
clear violation of multiple Security Council resolutions.
Last week, Pyongyang even reaffirmed its reckless
and extremely dangerous nuclear ambition by openly

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

declaring, at the meeting of its Central Committee of
the Workers’ Party, that it will “exponentially” increase
its nuclear arsenal and develop another intercontinental
ballistic missile system.
It is deplorable that the Council failed to respond
properly to the plain, flagrant and repeated violations of
multiple Security Council resolutions by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, despite approximately
10 rounds of formal and informal Security Council
meetings on this issue throughout last year.
The Republic of Korea would also like to bring the
Council’s attention to ongoing evasions of the Security
Council sanctions by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and other Member States. Such routine and
daily breaches of the sanctions regime must be stopped
by the Council.
Thirdly, the Council should closely monitor
egregious human rights abuses and atrocity crimes
across the world. Impunity for such crimes is in clear
contravention of the rule of law. In that regard, my
delegation would like to recall that the Council is seized
of the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, including its human rights situation, as an agenda
item separate from the country’s non-proliferation
issues. The Council must seriously consider ways to
effectively deal with the abysmal human rights situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Lastly, in the light of the rules-based international
order, the international community should be vigilant
about challenges to peace and security in new spheres,
including cyberspace, outer space and new technology.
The rule of law must be at the heart of any discussions
on those emerging topics. The Council can and should
play a role by deliberating on unfolding and potential
threats to international peace and security in those
fields, such as cyberattacks.
Over the past seven decades, the Republic of
Korea has pursued economic and political development
within the current international order based on the rule
of law, including the United Nations Charter. That is
why the President of the Republic of Korea emphasizes
universal values, including freedom, human rights
and the rule of law and, in September, reiterated the
importance of global solidarity based on such values.
Our recently announced strategy for a free, peaceful
and prosperous Indo-Pacific region also demonstrates
our commitment to the rule of law and the peaceful
settlement of disputes in accordance with international

23-0135611/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

law. The Republic of Korea clearly opposes upsetting
the international order and is unequivocally committed
to upholding the United Nations Charter and the rule
of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to
congratulate Japan on its new membership in the
Security Council and on assuming the presidency for
the month of January. We express our appreciation for
the presence of Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan
and also thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the International Court of Justice and Professor
Akande from Oxford University for their important
contributions to today’s debate.
As we reflect on the challenges for the promotion of
the rule of law in the maintenance of international peace
and security, we are reminded that upholding the rule of
law is essential for the realization of the rights to truth,
justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence.
We are equally reminded that, more often than not, it is
the lack of accountability that breeds more violations.
As the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
the International Court of Justice has a central role in
promoting justice and accountability and upholding
faith in the rule of law among nations.
Strengthening adherence to the norms and principles
of international law requires concerted efforts to ensure
that grave violations do not go unpunished. Armenia is
committed to efforts to effectively address and combat
impunity, having recently launched the process of
ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. Likewise, Armenia supports the elaboration and
adoption of a universally accepted treaty on preventing
and punishing crimes against humanity, and we
welcome the recent progress achieved in that regard in
the Legal Committee of the General Assembly.
Time and again, Armenia has alerted the
international community to instances of gross violations
of international law in our part of the world. We have
repeatedly brought to the attention of the Council that
Azerbaijan has been engaging in the illegal practice
of the acquisition of territories by force, having duly
reported such acts of aggression under Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations. We have consistently
alerted the members of the Council that, emboldened
by the results of the use of force in the past, Azerbaijan
now seeks to normalize violence and aggression in the
12/54

12/01/2023

imposition of unilateral solutions and the conduct of
its policy of ethnic cleansing in Nagorno-Karabakh.
The latest such example is the ongoing blockade of the
Lachin corridor — the only supply route into and out of
Nagorno-Karabakh — in grave violation of the existing
obligations under the trilateral statement of 9 November
2020 and international humanitarian law. Among
numerous violations of the norms of international law,
the blockade of the corridor also challenges the order
handed down by the International Court of Justice, a
provisional measure requiring the parties to “refrain
from any action which might aggravate or extend the
dispute before the Court or make it more difficult
to resolve.”
On 20 December, the Security Council held an
emergency meeting to address the humanitarian
situation in Nagorno-Karabakh (see S/PV.9228). We
appreciate Council members’ publicly expressed
calls for the restoration of free and secure movement
along the Lachin corridor, respect for agreements
previously reached and a resolution of the differences
through peaceful means. Obviously, the failure to
adopt a unanimously agreed outcome following that
Council meeting has prompted the serial violator of all
norms of humanity and international law to brand it a
“diplomatic success for Azerbaijan” and a “New Year’s
gift from the President of Azerbaijan to his people”,
according to its official sources. Is that not an affront to
the collective conscience of this organ responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security?
For more than 30 days now the safe and unimpeded
passage of people and goods has been denied. Children
remain separated from their families, electricity and
the Internet have been cut off and food stamps have
been introduced to address the immediate needs of a
besieged population of 120,000 people.
Whatever the deceptions or misconceptions that
the leadership of Azerbaijan and their enablers may
diligently fabricate, the fact of the matter is that
there is only one side characterized by pervasive hate
speech, with public figures and Government officials
frequently inciting ethnic hatred against Armenians,
as is reflected in the latest conclusions of the United
Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination. Only one side has been recorded as
having rewarded a hate criminal and opened an ethnic
hatred park with racist mannequins on display. Only
one side has failed to return prisoners of war, in flagrant
violation of the Geneva Conventions, and continues to
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

harass and kidnap civilians. Only one side continues
to violate the ceasefire and invade the other’s territory.
There is only one side whose military commits, cheers
on and celebrates horrendous war crimes, as evermounting disturbing instances of atrocities, including
against women, continue to surface on social networks.
Armenia believes in the United Nations and in the
purposes and principles enshrined in its Charter. We
believe in the basic principles of conflict resolution
derived from international law, and we believe in the
integrity and independence of the International Court
of Justice and the International Criminal Court. We
want to believe that the Security Council will live
up to its mandate and responsibilities and that it will
rise above ideological differences and conceptual
disagreements for the benefit of justice, the rule of
law and human rights and for the sake of freedom and
peace and security. In order to prevent an imminent
humanitarian catastrophe from happening, the United
Nations should act in a decisive and timely manner to
deny the brutal dictatorship of Azerbaijan’s plans to
suffocate and ethnically cleanse the Armenian people
of Nagorno-Karabakh, whose only ambition is to live in
dignity in their homeland, free from coercion and any
form of foreign domination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Hitti (Lebanon) (spoke in French): Let me first
congratulate Japan on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. I would also like to take
this opportunity to welcome the new members of the
Council and congratulate the outgoing members.
Today’s debate is an opportunity to reaffirm that
the rule of law must prevail over the rule of force,
everywhere and at all times. It is also an opportunity
to emphasize that the rules-based international order is
a matter of ensuring sovereign equality among nations.
The Charter of the United Nations is its cornerstone
and the very reason why we are all here at Headquarters
in this Chamber.
The consolidation of international law and justice
are principles on which the rule of law rests and without
which lasting peace and security cannot be built.
Promoting the rule of law therefore cannot be contingent
on circumstances. It cannot be invoked or defended
when things are going well and suddenly set aside
when things go wrong. If we apply certain principles
on a partial basis and with selective indignation, the

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

very credibility of our multilateral structure is at
stake. Strengthening the rule of law therefore requires
respect for international norms and their consistent
implementation. The Council must ensure the full
implementation of all the resolutions it has adopted.
Justice goes hand in hand with peace. In that
regard, the International Court of Justice is an essential
component of the rule of law, as it promotes the peaceful
settlement of disputes, anchored in the Charter of the
United Nations. It is therefore appropriate to abide by
the decisions rendered by the International Court of
Justice. Recourse to the Court is never a hindrance or
a barrier to peace, but rather serves its cause, and the
Security Council should stand up to any iniquitous steps
taken because a majority of Member States decided to
turn to the judges, the law and the Court by submitting
a request for an advisory opinion.
We cannot expect lasting peace and security if
human rights, which are a pillar of the rule of law,
continue to be violated. As this year marks the seventyfifth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, it is appropriate to strongly
reaffirm its fundamental character and to ensure that
human rights guide United Nations decision-making
processes. That implies ensuring the full participation
of women and strengthening the participation of young
people and civil society, whose contributions to the
prevention and resolution of conflicts can no longer be
denied. That is the core of the social contract sought
by the Secretary-General in his report entitled Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982). Lebanon fully supports
those efforts, in which justice has a prominent place,
given that the Secretary-General proposes a new vision
of the rule of law in the report. Lebanon also supports
the activities of the United Nations to strengthen the
rule of law at the national and international levels.
My country knows how much it owes to the United
Nations, which has stood by our side for so many decades
to help us overcome crises. Lebanon has always believed
that the rule of law is meant to protect all States, large
and small. That is also why my country played a decisive
role in the drafting of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We
will continue to defend that multilateral order, which
while undoubtedly imperfect and in need of rebuilding,
is still essential if we are to face the multiplication of
existing and emerging challenges.

23-0135613/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mr. Sekeris (Greece): We would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on convening an open debate on the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance
of international peace and security and the rule of law
among nations.
Greece aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union and
would like to add some remarks in its national capacity.
Greece firmly believes that the ideal of an
international order that is based on international law
can be pursued only through unwavering adherence to
the Charter of the United Nations. Article 2, paragraph
4 of the Charter clearly states that all Member States
shall refrain from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of
any State. Moreover, the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States, as well as the report of
the Secretary General entitled Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), reaffirm the significance of the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Unfortunately, 77 years after the unanimous adoption
of the Charter of the United Nations, we are seeing an
unprecedented disregard for the founding principles of
our international system. We are witnessing a number of
crises, including the recent aggression against Ukraine.
We believe it is of utmost importance to collectively
uphold the principles enshrined in the Charter. In that
respect, the judicial settlement of all disputes through
the principal judicial body of the United Nations — the
International Court of Justice — supports the cardinal
importance of the rule of law regarding the resolution
of disputes and the maintenance of international peace
and security. Respect for the decisions of the Court,
including its orders indicating provisional measures,
is equally important. And lastly, accountability for
heinous international crimes also remains a challenge
as regards the rule of law at the international level. The
only way forward concerning dispute settlement is to
abide by the rule of law rather than the rule of force. To
that end, we must also ensure that decision-making at
the level of the United Nations becomes more efficient
and transparent.
If Greece is elected as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council for the period from 2025 to 2026,
we will contribute to the promotion of full respect for
14/54

12/01/2023

the rules and principles enshrined in the Charter and
the values underpinning them. As a country that places
respect for international law at the centre of its policies,
Greece is determined to spare no effort to promote a
Charter-compliant approach to all matters relating to
international peace and security. We always stand ready
to cooperate with all Members of the United Nations
to uphold the collective security system established by
the Charter.
Last but not least, we are deeply aware that peace
and security should prevail not only through the rule
of law, but also through sustainable development, in
particular through the achievement of Sustainable
Development Goal 16, meaning the achievement of
peaceful and inclusive societies, by providing access
to justice for all and building effective, accountable
and inclusive institutions at all levels. Hence Greece
concentrates its development efforts and allocates its
aid, including assistance through capacity-building, by
means of the transfer of know-how and expertise, with
the aim of providing developing countries with best
practices and model laws enhancing and consolidating
human rights, institutions and legislation at the
domestic level and more generally by contributing to,
among other objectives, the reduction of poverty and
inequality in the world, the consolidation of peace and
stability, the effective management of migration flows
and respect for cultural heritage. In that context, Greece
places particular emphasis on the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, as they provide an ambitious,
visionary and transformative framework for a new,
equitable and sustainable development path.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and, of course, my own
country, Denmark.
The rule of law is a vital prerequisite for justice,
peace and prosperity, and adherence to it has a significant
and positive impact on the global community. It is a
global public good and a powerful safeguard against
the primitive doctrine that might is right. But the rule of
law is under pressure. In the Secretary-General’s most
recent annual report on strengthening and coordinating
United Nations rule of law activities (A/77/213), it is
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

abundantly clear that the rule of law must be protected
on every front.
International law, including the Charter of the
United Nations, and its prohibition on the acquisition
of territory by the use of force, applies to all States and
must be respected by all States without exception. When
Russia launched its full-scale invasion of Ukraine last
year, it constituted a blatant violation of international
law. While horrified by Russia’s actions, we are
encouraged to see how a vast majority of countries,
across regions and continents, have stood by the Charter
of the United Nations and the rule of law and rejected
that violation of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial
integrity and the Charter of the United Nations in both
words and deeds. The adoption of a series of General
Assembly resolutions by an overwhelming majority,
including as late as in October 2022, calling Russia’s
attempt to annex part of Ukraine out for what it
is — illegal and in contravention of the Charter of the
United Nations — are a testimony to our strong and
collective response to Russia’s attack on Ukraine and
the international rules-based order.
To safeguard the rule of law, it is not enough to
condemn the Russian aggression. Both the Russian
Federation and those individuals responsible for
committing international crimes must be held
accountable for their brutal behaviour. The Security
Council is entrusted with the primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. And Russia’s
use of the veto and prevention of the Council in fulfilling
its mandate is unacceptable. We fully support and urge
other United Nations Members to join initiatives to limit
the use of the veto, including the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group and
the French-Mexican initiative on the suspension of veto
powers in cases of mass atrocities. We also welcome the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 76/262, on the
veto initiative, which was a step in the right direction
to create more transparency and accountability for the
use of the veto.
We are further encouraged by the multiple
accountability efforts, including the ongoing
investigations into the situation in Ukraine by the
International Criminal Court, the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine and
the current case at the International Court of Justice.
Holding Russia accountable is paramount to preventing
future breaches of international law.

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

The rule of law and accountability, including
access to justice and accountability for sexual and
gender-based violence, as mentioned by the SecretaryGeneral in his most recent report on strengthening and
coordinating United Nations rule of law activities, can
of course not be achieved without substantial work
on the part of international courts and institutions
of the global community. But that work relies on our
support, both politically and financially. During the
recent United Nations annual budget negotiations, the
Nordic countries underscored the need to uphold the
rule of law and the protection of human rights through
United Nations institutions. They are without a doubt a
prerequisite for the rules-based international order that
we are all committed to, and we need to put our money
where our mouths are.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to congratulate
Ecuador, Japan, Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland
on their elections as non-permanent members of the
Security Council. We also congratulate Japan and you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency for this month
and organizing today’s debate. We thank the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the International Court of
Justice and Professor Akande for their briefings.
Great civilizations have always been built on the
foundations of order created through laws. At the
international level, laws and rules of conduct have been
adopted to regulate the use of force, especially military
force, in inter-State relations. Yet it was the Charter
of the United Nations that, for the first time, placed
explicit constraints on the use or threat of use of force
except for self-defence or when collectively authorized
by the Security Council.
The Charter of the United Nations also set out
fundamental principles: the self-determination of
peoples, the sovereign equality and territorial integrity
of States, and non-interference in their internal affairs.
Those Charter principles are the source and foundation
for the world order that has enabled us for over seven
decades to contain and resolve conflicts and prevent
another world war. The Charter’s principles have been
further elaborated in various international agreements
and declarations and are the most important source of
international law in contemporary times.
The Security Council has a special responsibility to
implement the Charter’s purposes and principles. The

23-0135615/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

Council’s resolutions and decisions, whether adopted
under Chapter VI or Chapter VII of the Charter, are
legally binding, since Member States are obliged under
Article 25 of the Charter to implement the decisions of
the Security Council.
The Security Council has been unable to ensure
consistent and universal implementation and respect
for the central principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It has, to its credit, never endorsed or
authorized the unilateral use of force. Yet it was often
unable to actively prevent the use of force, for example,
in the Middle East in 1956, 1967 and 2003. The Security
Council should act pre-emptively to prevent conflicts
before they erupt. To that end, the Council should be
enabled to meet automatically, without a procedural
decision, on any item of the agenda.
The Council has also not been able to secure
consistent implementation of its own resolutions, such
as the resolutions relating to Palestine and Jammu and
Kashmir. In these cases, the right to self-determination,
a fundamental principle of the Charter, has been
suppressed brutally, and foreign occupation has been
allowed to persist over several decades. It is essential to
elaborate the modalities through which the principle of
self-determination can be implemented universally and
consistently in the contemporary context.
The Security Council needs to actively promote the
resolution of conflicts and disputes, not simply manage
them, much less ignore them. It should fully utilize
the several instruments for the peaceful settlement of
disputes that are available under the Charter, and the
Secretary-General should be less reticent in exercising
his authority under Article 99 of the Charter. No party
to a conflict or dispute should be able to refuse the
Secretary-General’s good offices or reject mediation
and arbitration. And the remit of judicial mechanisms,
especially the International Court of Justice, should
be fully utilized, for example by making the Court’s
jurisdiction mandatory on issues that are on the agenda
of the Security Council.
Today world peace and the international security
architecture are under grave threat. We need to address
how to promote universal and consistent respect for the
fundamental principles of the Charter and international
law. We need to find ways to empower and fully utilize
the United Nations and its organs to build a durable
structure of international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
16/54

12/01/2023

Mr. Skoog: I congratulate Japan on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and commend it for
organizing today’s important debate.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Georgia and San Marino,
align themselves with this statement.
The rule of law is a key component in the
maintenance of international peace and security. A
rules-based international order, one where norms of
international law are adhered to and those who breach
those norms are held accountable, is indeed essential
for lasting peace and security. The rule of law protects
people from the unchecked rule of the powerful, and I
would say that a vast majority of the members of the
United Nations would see the rule of international law
as a first line of defence when it comes to their security,
independence and sovereignty. The Charter of the
United Nations and its core principles are very much at
the heart of that system.
The EU and its member States therefore reaffirm
their respect for the rule of law at the international and
national levels. We support the call for a new vision for
the rule of law by the Secretary-General, as expressed
in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982). The rule of law
must be upheld at all times, in time of peace and during
times of crisis. It is indeed a main tool in the prevention
of conflict, as the Secretary-General said this morning.
No crisis can justify a departure from the rule of law.
As the coronavirus disease pandemic and now Russia’s
war of aggression on Ukraine have proved, it is during
times of crisis that we need more multilateralism, more
recourse to the United Nations and more adherence to
the rule of law. It is our belief that full respect for the
rule of law at the national level reinforces the resilience
of international rules during times of crisis. To address
the questions put forward to steer today’s debate, let me
make three points.
First, as the Secretary-General said a month ago in
the Council (see S/PV.9220), even during the darkest
periods of the Cold War collective decision-making and
continual dialogue in the Security Council maintained
a functioning, if imperfect, system of collective
security that prevented a military conflict between the
major Powers. Yet it has not prevented Russia’s cruel
and senseless war of aggression against Ukraine. That
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

aggression is a blatant violation of international law and
the rule of law at the international level, with severe
consequences far beyond Ukraine’s borders.
The permanent members of the Security Council
have been vested with special privileges that should
also mirror special responsibilities, foremost among
them that of serving as models in implementing the
Charter. How deep the disappointment resounds around
the world when that right is so flagrantly and doubly
violated, first by breaking the rules and then by misusing
the veto for self-protection and to deter the Council
from taking meaningful action, as Russia is currently
doing. The use of the veto in cases of atrocity crimes,
including for referrals to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), remains a matter of serious concern for
us. It prevents the Security Council from discharging
the important function entrusted to it by the Charter.
We need a stronger system of collective security, but we
also need a stronger system of collective accountability.
We therefore call on the permanent members of the
Council to refrain from using their right of veto in cases
of mass atrocities and to make use of the Council’s
right of referral, including in relation to the crime
of aggression.
When fundamental tenets of the Charter, such
as the principle that Member States shall refrain in
their international relations from the use or threat of
use of force, are blatantly breached, there must be
accountability. International law cannot be a spiderweb
that catches the small but misses the powerful. Those
who commit wrongdoings, no matter their might or
size, must be held to account. The ICC is central to
accountability efforts.
Secondly, peace and friendship among nations
can only be based on respect for international law.
As the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
the International Court of Justice has a key role in
that respect. The Court plays an important role in the
settlement of international disputes by peaceful means.
Through its judgments, advisory opinions and orders, it
contributes significantly to a rules-based international
order and to the maintenance of international peace.
On 16 March of last year, the Court ordered Russia to
immediately suspend its military operations in Ukraine.
Its ruling, unfortunately, remains unimplemented,
again in flagrant defiance of the rule of law.
My third point concerns disinformation, which
has increasingly become a challenge to the rule of law,

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

human rights and the safeguarding of international
peace and security across borders. Disinformation may
destabilize the rule of law and cause broader societal
harm. We are concerned about that worrying trend.
Most significantly, disinformation has the potential
to undermine the credibility of institutions that play
an essential role in upholding the rule of law and
maintaining international peace and security.
In conclusion, we need to redouble our commitment
to the rule of law as a means of redoubling our
commitment to a more peaceful and prosperous world.
We look to all the members of the Security Council to
shoulder their responsibilities, and we look forward to
working with everyone to elaborate a new vision of the
rule of law, as suggested by the Secretary-General.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
We thank Japan for convening today’s timely
open debate. We welcome His Excellency Mr. Hayashi
Yoshimasa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan,
which is an important dialogue partner of ASEAN. We
believe that under his leadership, Japan will have a very
successful month as president of the Security Council.
We thank the briefers, including Secretary-General
António Guterres, Judge Joan E. Donoghue, President
of the International Court of Justice, and Mr. Dapo
Akande for their statements on this issue.
Our world today is facing increasingly complex
and cross-cutting challenges, including challenges to
the rule of law among nations, on almost all fronts.
The need to uphold the rule of law has never been
more urgent. ASEAN member States are committed
to upholding the principles stipulated in the Charter
of the United Nations and on the basis of international
law, which is the indispensable foundation of a more
peaceful, prosperous and just world. We affirm our
commitment to the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
ASEAN has embraced and continues to promote the
rule of law in all its aspects and affirms its commitment
to living in a region of lasting peace, security
and stability, sustained economic growth, shared

23-0135617/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

prosperity, social progress and good governance, and to
promoting and protecting human rights, in conformity
with the fundamental principles and purposes of the
ASEAN Charter. ASEAN affirms the importance of
multilateralism and the significance of its partnerships
with other external partners, including regional and
international organizations such as the United Nations,
to address global concerns, pursue shared goals and
promote sustainable development and inclusive growth.
As a rules-based intergovernmental organization,
ASEAN has long been committed to stability and
security in the region. We continue to emphasize the need
for a committed multilateral approach in responding to
emerging opportunities and challenges and to actively
shape a rules-based regional architecture that is capable
of dealing with pressing common regional and global
issues. That was further reaffirmed on the occasion of
the 38th ASEAN Summit, held in Brunei Darussalam in
October 2021, when ASEAN leaders issued the ASEAN
Leaders’ Declaration on Upholding Multilateralism.
Important treaties, declarations and instruments
paved the way for our success, including ASEAN’s
founding document, the ASEAN declaration of 1967,
the ASEAN Charter, which entered into force in 2008,
the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast
Asia of 1976, the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear
Weapon-Free Zone of 1995, the ASEAN Human Rights
Declaration of 2012 and the Declaration on Conduct
of Parties in the South China Sea of 2002. We remain
committed to working towards the early conclusion of
an effective and substantive code of conduct for the
South China Sea, consistent with international law,
including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, within a mutually agreed timeline.
The importance of those treaties and instruments
was reiterated at the recently concluded 40th and 41st
ASEAN Summits, held in Phnom Penh.
ASEAN member States share a commitment
to maintaining and promoting peace, security and
stability in our region, including in maritime areas,
such as the South China Sea, as well as to ensuring
the peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance with
international law. We observe and promote in good
faith the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement
of International Disputes.
Consequently, ASEAN member States believe that
diplomacy, negotiations and peaceful means are critical
to the maintenance and promotion of international
18/54

12/01/2023

peace, security and stability. We hope that the United
Nations will continue to afford primary importance to
those important treaties and instruments in the conduct
of mutually beneficial relations among nations.
We reiterate ASEAN’s commitment to the rule
of law. We commemorate the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the declaration of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law
at the national and international levels in 2022. The
ASEAN Political-Security Community Blueprint 2025
seeks to promote a rules-based, people-oriented and
people-centred community and the rule of law at the
national and international levels. ASEAN strives to
achieve that by implementing instruments such as the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, notably
Goal 16, on peace, justice and strong institutions.
Country-driven capacity-building for Member
States, including through the delivery of technical
assistance and use of digital technologies, remains
critical for the promotion of the rule of law, as well
as for the purpose of ensuring effective, inclusive and
accountable justice institutions. ASEAN reaffirms its
commitment to good governance, accessible institutions,
transparency, accountability and anti-corruption. That
approach will further promote respect for the rule of
law at the national and international levels, which will
contribute to greater socioeconomic development,
peace, justice and prosperity for all.
Finally, the ASEAN way of consensus-building,
sustained constructive engagement, respect for the
views of all the parties concerned and the fundamental
principles of international law, including respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
non-interference in their internal affairs and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, has served ASEAN for more
than five decades, and we therefore believe that it is the
most effective way to address the common challenges
of humanity that achieves sustainable results.
I shall now deliver the following statement in my
national capacity.
As a founding member of the Organization, the
Philippines reaffirms its commitment to the Charter
of the United Nations and adherence to the rule of
law among nations. In his first address to the General
Assembly, President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. said:
“[A]mid challenging global tides, an important
ballast is the stabilization of our common vessel,
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

that is, our open, inclusive and rules-based
international order, governed by international
law and informed by the principles of equity and
justice.” (A/77/PV.5, p.3)
The Philippines has made the utmost effort to
reinforce the predictability and stability of international
law — a great equalizer among States — in addressing
challenges to peace and security. With the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, we provided
an example of how States should resolve their differences
through reason and through right. The South China Sea
arbitration case, along with the Convention, are twin
anchors of our positions and actions on the South China
Sea. That is in line with the landmark 1970 Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.
We reiterate the call for the progressive development
and codification of those principles to secure their
more effective application and their contribution to
realizing the purposes of the United Nations. We did
that, with regard to the principle that States shall settle
their international disputes by peaceful means, with the
1982 Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
International Disputes through the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization. The
International Law Commission, along with the Special
Committee, could be tasked by States to undertake
similar work on principles under challenge.
The unprecedented crises of the recent past have
indeed presented us with a breakdown, or breakthrough,
scenario. The Secretary-General has invited us to
have a new vision of the rule of law. The rule of law,
while under challenge, is an indispensable element of
our diplomatic toolkit. The rule of law applies to all
States equally. To reimagine it, we need to carry out a
stocktaking of what we have achieved — and there are
many achievements — and move forward.
In that regard, the 2012 declaration of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at
the national and international levels is a milestone. Its
essence is a people-centred rule of law at the national
and international levels, to which we subscribe. At
the centre of the efforts of the Philippines to promote
an international rules-based order are our fisherfolk,
seafarers and migrant workers. At the national level, it
is an indispensable part of our Philippine Development

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Plan, which recognizes that an efficient justice system
and the rule of law are necessary for fostering a hightrust society, consistent with the renewal of a social
contract, as envisioned in Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982).
In conclusion, we renew our thanks to the
Government of Japan, especially His Excellency
Mr. Hayashi Yoshimasa, for highlighting the rule of
law and the declaration of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly. The Summit of the Future, to be
held in 2024, is an opportunity to reaffirm that global
consensus on the rule of law as a precondition to the
future we want.
The President: As there are still 40 speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting, I wish to remind
speakers to make their statements to as short as possible.
I now give the floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Kayalar (Türkiye): We thank the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
important debate.
The Charter of the United Nations has served as
the Constitution for the functioning of the international
system for more than seven decades, authoritatively
guiding the international community in preserving
and ensuring peace, security, freedom, justice and
development. Strong and effective multilateralism,
based on the purposes and principles of the Charter, is a
prerequisite for security, stability, peace and prosperity,
as is the rule of law.
It is those fundamental notions that pre-empt
arbitrariness and destruction, promote justice and
accountability, foster dialogue and trust among nations
and facilitate the proper management of security
challenges. Indeed, the rule of law is foundational
to the United Nations, and the Security Council has
a special role to play in ensuring that it is respected.
Unfortunately, that key principle is disregarded much
too often. The current dynamics in the Council do not
allow the organ to duly assert itself in upholding the
rule of law among nations.
In discharging its responsibility, the Security
Council acts on behalf of all Member States, and it
must do so in accordance with the Charter. The use
of the veto for the sake of protecting narrow national
interests when mass atrocities are at issue strongly
contradicts the spirit of the Charter. When the veto
is used in that manner, it prevents the Council from

23-0135619/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

adequately delivering on its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
that vein, we commend the initiatives aimed at limiting
recourse to the veto in the Council.
The rule of law cannot be considered separately
from accountability. Ensuring accountability for
acts that blatantly violate international law and the
Charter is vital not only for the delivery of justice, but
also for preventing a recurrence of similar acts in the
future. That is how the international community can
demonstrate that the rule of law prevails over rule by
force. Where serious international crimes are concerned,
it is inarguable that the primary responsibility for
ensuring their effective investigation and prosecution
lies with national justice systems. However, when
national systems fail, the international community,
and particularly the Security Council, has to step up
to promote and ensure the rule of law. The Council has
indeed taken decisive steps in that regard in the past.
In instances where the Council has failed, the General
Assembly has sought out alternatives, and it should
continue to do so in line with its own responsibilities,
as the only fully representative organ of the United
Nations. Past practice under the auspices of the United
Nations and its main organs offers solid examples of
the international community’s commitment to ensuring
the rule of law and accountability, which can provide
best practices that can be replicated as appropriate
in relation to documenting and addressing serious
violations of international law.

12/01/2023

and use it most ruthlessly will win. International law
offers a fundamentally different approach, based on
the sovereign equality of States, and international law
places boundaries on arbitrary power politics. The
prohibition of the use of force enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations is paramount in that regard. It
embodies the aspiration and the promise that as a
matter of principle, countries can and will deal with
one another without the use of force or violence.
Law creates peace. It provides countries with
procedures for resolving conflicts in peaceful ways.
The rise in the number of cases before the International
Court of Justice shows that more and more countries
are making use of the opportunities for the peaceful
settlement of conflicts that international law offers.
Moreover, developments in the area of international
criminal law are a testament to the need for judicial
proceedings in the defence of international law.
Multilateralism works only if it and all of us are guided
by the rule of law among nations, not by the rule of
force. The recent rise in the rule of force brings new
urgency to the issue of reforming the Security Council
as the main guarantor of international peace and
security. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine points to
the use of the veto as one of the main challenges and
problems in that regard. The use of the veto is being
abused as an instrument to undermine the rule of law.
That is why Germany fully supports Liechtenstein’s
veto initiative and strongly advocates for restricting the
use of the veto.

Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Let me commend
Japan for convening today’s debate on the critical role
of the rule of law in maintaining peace and security
among nations.

A new vision of the rule of law, as evoked in Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982), is a critical element in our
thrust to re-energize and renew the way multilateralism
works. This is why the debate that Japan has initiated
today is also a timely contribution to the work of
focusing our minds on preparations for the Summit of
the Future. Strengthening the rule of law is an objective
that cannot be separated from the various strands
of the Our Common Agenda process. As one of the
co-facilitators of the Summit, I will therefore try to
work to tap the full potential of Our Common Agenda
in order to strengthen the rule of law internationally
and within societies across the world.

Germany believes that the rule of law among
nations lies at the core of our national interests, but more
importantly, we believe that they are in the interests
of all countries and of the international community
as a whole. In a world order based only on power and
the exercise of power, those who hold the most power

Promoting the rule of law is a priority for Germany,
and we collaborate closely with our partners to
identify and address rule-of-law needs, as we believe
that enjoying the rule of law within States will have
an immediate impact on the prevalence of the rule of
law among States. The rule of law is a cornerstone for

In conclusion, let me reiterate Türkiye’s strong
commitment to safeguarding and promoting an
equitable multilateral order, underpinned by the rule
of law and thereby ensuring international peace and
security. That has been, and will remain, the key foreign
policy priority for Türkiye.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.

20/54

23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

development and peace. Germany therefore pursues
the promotion of the rule of law and, in particular, a
people-centred approach to justice in our international
cooperation, as well as in our integrated engagement
for peace. To that end, Germany has provided combined
funding for programmes to promote the rule of law
amounting to more than €50 million last year alone.
We consider that a worthwhile investment in peace and
security at the national, regional and global levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Let me at the outset
thank Japan, for organizing this important high-level
meeting on a critical matter for our international-lawbased order, and the Secretary-General, for his powerful
remarks and for addressing the situation in Palestine.
We also would like to express our appreciation to the
President of the International Court of Justice and
Mr. Akande for their important contributions.
While humankind was elaborating the fundamental
rules at the heart of our international-law-based
order — the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Geneva Conventions — the Palestinian people were
being deprived of the very rights that those instruments
were enacted to guarantee. Seventy-five years later,
the dispossession and displacement of the Palestinian
people, and the denial of their rights, continue.
At the heart of our international law order are
two cardinal principles — the right of peoples to selfdetermination and the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of land by force. Palestine exemplifies the violation
of those two principles. Aggression, annexation and
apartheid are under way in Palestine as we speak. They
deserve the Security Council’s immediate attention and
action. Where is the rule of international law when it
comes to Palestine? All the members of the Council,
all the members of these United Nations, recognize that
international law is being violated in Palestine. Does
the role of the Council end with its diagnosis, or with
addressing the illness once it is diagnosed?
The rule of law cannot coexist with impunity.
It exists where there is accountability. Every
representative of a State who has spoken here has
stressed the importance of accountability. I therefore
ask everybody to explain what illegal actions Israel has
been held accountable for. The forced displacement of
Palestinians? The unlawful annexation of Jerusalem?

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

The building of settlements? The unlawful killing of
Palestinians, including children? The mass arbitrary
arrests of Palestinians, alive and dead? The inhumane
and illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip? The demolition
of homes? Has a single Israeli official, general, soldier
or settler been held accountable? It is no surprise, then,
that Israel continues to choose colonial occupation over
peace. It is betting that it will get away with it.
There is no rule of international law if the rules
change depending on the identity of the perpetrators and
the identity of the victims. Double standards constitute
an attack on the credibility and authority of international
law and undermine its protection everywhere. Now we
are facing an absurd situation in which there is impunity
for those who violate the law and collective punishment
for those entitled to its protection. In response to the
General Assembly’s adoption of its resolution 77/247
to request an advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice, the main judicial organ of the United
Nations, Israel has imposed far-reaching sanctions on the
Palestinian people, civil society and leadership. Before
that, Israel designated highly respected Palestinian
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) cooperating
with the International Criminal Court (ICC) as terrorist
organizations. And despite the international rejection
of that designation, it has refused to reverse it. Israel
has insulted and attacked the Council, the General
Assembly, the Human Rights Council, United Nations
independent experts and commissioners, the ICC,
the International Court of Justice and international
and Israeli human rights NGOs in responding to any
criticism of its illegal actions and crimes. Without
deterrence, one must expect the recurrence of crimes.
Where is the deterrence?
This entire international order was designed to rid
the world of aggression, colonialism, annexation and
apartheid — the very evils now in place in Palestine.
If any country wishes to be recognized as a champion
of international law and human rights, to advance the
rule of international law or to pursue justice to achieve
peace, it cannot overlook Palestine. The concept of
the exception that proves the rule does not apply in
this context. We endure the exception that challenges
the rule. If the Security Council wants the rule of
international law to prevail, ending the Palestinian
exception and Israeli exceptionalism is long overdue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.

23-0135621/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): Since it is my first time
speaking in the Security Council during Japan’s
presidency, Mr. President, allow me to congratulate
you and your team and commend you for the way you
are presiding over the Council. I can assure you, Sir,
of Rwanda’s support throughout the month, and for the
remaining time your country serves in the Council.
Rwanda commends Japan for reviving consideration
of this important topic in the Security Council. As
we debate this issue, we should not forget that the
Council should also be an instance that promotes the
rule of law as enshrined in the United Nations Charter,
which governs it. The rule of law among nations is
an important thematic area in strengthening peaceful
coexistence among nations.
The United Nations is an organization that was
born from the conviction that animosity and discord
can indeed be put to rest and that nations can rise above
their differences to build a shared future. We have
come far in 77 years, but much more remains to be
done, which requires a collective response that must be
guided by the rule of law.
Fifty-two years ago, we adopted the Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. Based on that
Declaration, we must strive to make those principles a
living reality in the life of the States because they lie at
the very heart of peace and justice. All States Members
of the United Nations have a responsibility to uphold
these principles, especially at this critical junction
where fundamental foundations of our multilateralism
are increasingly under threat.
The rule of law is rooted in the conviction that
international behaviour must be governed not by the
whims of a few powerful States but by strict adherence
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter. To preserve the centrality of the United Nations
Charter and the rules-based international order, there
must be sovereign equality of States, the peaceful
settlement of disputes, refraining from the threat or
use of force, and non-interference in internal affairs.
One lesson to be readily drawn from the disheartening
failures of the international community in recent years
is not the lack of legal principles but, instead, the lack of
political will to follow the rule of law, at both national
and international levels.
22/54

12/01/2023

In our declaration on the commemoration of the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we
committed to abiding by international law to ensure
justice and enhance the rule of law by strengthening
transparent and accountable governance as well as
independent judicial institutions. As we embark on
aspirations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled Our Common Agenda (A/76/982) and
look ahead to the Summit of the Future in 2024, Rwanda
believes that the best measure of our commitment to
the rule of law is to recommit ourselves to the abiding
values of the United Nations Charter, which includes the
promotion of fundamental human rights and addressing
the root causes and drivers of conflict among States or
within States.
My delegation welcomes the increasing trust of the
international community in the independence, fairness,
impartiality and effectiveness of the International
Court of Justice.
As a global family, we must recognize that the
future depends on our solidarity, trust and ability to
work together to achieve common goals based on
respect for one other. Rwanda is committed to being a
country characterized by the rule of law that promotes
the sovereign equality of all Member States as well as
good-neighbourliness, as espoused in the Charters of
the United Nations and of the African Union, and, in
particular, the peaceful settlement of disputes.
In pursuit of the promotion of the rule of law
through judicial processes, my delegation continues to
be alarmed by foreign interference by some developed
countries in judicial matters and court processes
of developing countries, including Rwanda. My
delegation strongly condemns this behaviour. This
foreign interference in judicial processes and the
independence of the courts has an overarching impact
on the effective promotion of the rule of law and is in
sharp contradiction to it.
There is a need to address this alarming behaviour
and act decisively to safeguard the democratic
institutions of developing countries. Rwanda believes
that respect for international law is founded on the
conviction that international behaviour must be
governed through a set of universally applicable rules
and international law that all Member States have a
responsibility to uphold.
Given our experience, promoting the rule of law
is a core value of the Rwandan Government. Rwanda
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

has laid a foundation for promoting a culture of
accountability and zero tolerance for impunity. Rwanda
strongly believes that accountability and zero tolerance
for impunity are essential precursors to ensuring the
rule of law and sustainable peace.
While we celebrate our shared commitment to
accountability, in conjunction with our pledge to
protect future generations from mass atrocities, it is our
collective obligation to acknowledge that the wounds
of the survivors of the genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda will not heal when Member States shelter
remaining fugitives instead of bringing them to justice.
It is disheartening that some Member States continue to
fail to honour their legal obligations under international
law to cooperate in bringing genocide fugitives to
justice. For a long time, Rwanda’s prosecutors have
struggled to obtain the cooperation of Member States
in apprehending fugitives, even where there were clear
leads and evidence of those individuals’ presence in
those countries. It is imperative that we continue to
seek justice for survivors of the genocide against the
Tutsi as we strive to heal our nation, and the lack of
cooperation hinders these procedures.
Finally, strengthening the rule of law involves
respect for the norms of international law and recognition
of the primary responsibility of States to protect their
populations from genocide, crimes against humanity,
ethnic cleansing and war crimes. Rwanda strongly
believes that laws are as good as their implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): I thank Japan for
convening today’s important open debate of the
Security Council. The delegation of Sierra Leone
congratulates you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and on the election
of Japan to the Council. I also thank the briefers for
their important briefings.
Sierra Leone reiterate its unwavering commitment
to the rule of law as an enabler to advance and sustain
global peace and security, promote and protect human
rights, and cooperate in order to achieve sustainable
development. In this debate we wish to underscore
four points.
First, the convening of a debate on the rule of
law among nations with a focus on promoting and
strengthening the rule of law is as relevant today as

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

it was 77 years ago when the United Nations Charter,
the Organization’s sacrosanct founding and guiding
instrument, was adopted. Examining how we uphold
the rule of law is relevant not only for maintaining
international peace and security, promoting and
protecting fundamental human rights and addressing
persistent challenges, including terrorism and violent
extremism, but also for addressing emerging challenges
like the adverse effects of climate change and climate
justice. The periodic examination of the rule of law in
all of its aspects is therefore appropriate.
Secondly, Sierra Leone places a high premium on
upholding the rule of law and has therefore prioritized
maintaining peace, human rights and accountability in
our bid for a non-permanent seat in the Security Council
for the term 2024–2025. We once again reiterate that
respect for the rule of law through accountability and
the protection and promotion of human rights builds
confidence in democratic governance and international
cooperation and helps bridge divides by ingraining
a sense of common values and shared humanity and,
at the same time, promotes the peaceful resolution
of conflicts grounded in respect for the rights and
dignity of all. We are therefore committed to join in all
efforts to reconfirm the importance of the Charter of
the United Nations in the promotion of the rule of law
among nations for peace, stability and prosperity, as
well as in supporting the mandate of the International
Criminal Court and the work of the Security Council.
Thirdly, Sierra Leone welcomes the growing use of
peaceful means to settle disputes, including the use of the
contentious and advisory jurisdictions of international
courts and tribunals, particularly the International Court
of Justice, which has been instrumental in resolving
legal disputes submitted to it by States and lending its
authoritative voice on matters of international peace
and security, the environment and human rights in
the exercise of its advisory jurisdiction. We note the
increase in the submission of contentious legal disputes
and requests for advisory opinions. We view that not
as the judicialization of political disputes, for instance,
but rather as growing trust in the international judicial
architecture to peacefully resolve legal disputes. In
our view, that is part of States being guided by the
rule of law. Advisory opinions have proven valuable
in providing legal clarity and preventing the unwanted
regress to the rule by force. We therefore urge the
strengthening of the international judicial system and

23-0135623/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

12/01/2023

bodies in the exercise of their competent contentious
and advisory jurisdictions.

as respect for the principle of the sovereign equality
of States.

Sierra Leone continues to emphasize the
fundamental importance of ensuring consistency in
the application of international law for legitimacy.
Legitimacy through pluralism in the development and
codification of international law and consistency in
its application and compliance are vital components
in promoting and strengthening the rule of law
among nations.

Through a binding international agreement,
the Charter, the Member States have agreed on the
principles of sovereign equality and of refraining
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity and political independence of any State. It is
in the interest of all States, large or small, to uphold the
rule of law. That means that we must ensure that the
principles we have agreed are respected and applied by
all. If a treaty or other international norms are violated,
the non-complying State must be held accountable and
face consequences.

Let me conclude by expressing Sierra Leone’s
commitment to engage in the deliberations on the new
vision for the rule of law as part of the 12 commitments
outlined by the Secretary-General in the Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) and in the context of the Summit of
the Future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Amorin (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First,
let me thank you, Mr. President, and the Japanese
presidency for the initiative to hold this meeting. We
underline the importance of this opportunity to express
the relevance for us of the rule of law for the realization
of the purposes of the United Nations and, especially
its Charter.
Last year posed challenges to the international
community, especially for those of us who believe
in the rule of law and that we must conduct our
international relations in accordance with international
law. The Charter of the United Nations is at the heart
of the obligations of States to coexist peacefully.
Among its purposes and principles are the maintenance
of international peace and security and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. For the benefit of all our States,
we agreed to those rules of law through our ratification
of the Charter and our commitment to be bound by
its provisions.
All States Members of the United Nations
committed to resolve conflicts peacefully by following
certain pre-established norms and rules. Actions that
contradict the United Nations Charter are unacceptable
and give rise to international responsibility. That is
especially true for the most important provisions of the
Charter, such as the obligation not to use force against
the territorial integrity and political independence
of another State — Article 2, paragraph 4 — as well
24/54

An important set of General Assembly resolutions
adopted over the past year reaffirm those principles,
in particular as they underline the need for full respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States and call for a halt to violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law by Member State
Governments. That is a reaffirmation that Member
States continue to value those principles as legally
binding and as fundamental elements of international
law to be adhered to and complied with.
Adherence to international law serves our collective
security and ensures the safety of our citizens. Many
conflicts could be avoided if States complied with their
obligations under international law. Among them is the
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes. If States
fail or are unwilling to resolve conflicts by peaceful
means, the Security Council has a responsibility to
maintain or restore international peace and security,
as enshrined in the Charter. That means applying the
means to restore the rule of law.
The abusive use of the veto in that context raises
serious concerns. That is why we support proposals to
limit the use of the veto in certain cases, such as the
Franco-Mexican initiative in cases of massive human
rights violations. Likewise, the adoption by the General
Assembly of the so-called veto initiative is a step in
that direction. The United Nations must not fail to act
when the Security Council cannot act. We saw that in
the implementation of the Uniting for Peace resolutions
since February 2022 and the adoption of a set of
resolutions that, as we mentioned, were adopted by the
vast majority of the General Assembly.
We understand, moreover, that only the International
Court of Justice, and no other institution, represents the
principle of the rule of law among Member States. We
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

therefore emphasize our support for the work of the
Court and reiterate our common duty to respect and
implement the Court’s decisions and judgments.
The international community’s efforts to ensure
the rule of law at the national and international levels
must include disarmament policies and consider the
importance of respecting human rights, protecting
the most vulnerable, upholding the right to access
impartial, fair and depoliticized justice, respecting
and supporting international tribunals and delivering
justice and preventing impunity for perpetrators of
international crimes.
Adherence to the principles of international law
implies a commitment to comply with both treaty and
customary norms. The domestic legislation of States
must therefore be compatible with those norms and
reflect the commitments made at the international
level. Moreover, States cannot seek to avoid their
international obligations by claiming that they have not
been incorporated into domestic law.
By way of example, we would like to cite the
case of our country, which since 2006 has had a law
on the books that implements the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court through cooperation with
that jurisdictional body in order to combat genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Moreover,
Uruguay was one of the first States to recognize the
compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice, even before the existence of the United Nations,
in the era of the Permanent Court of International Justice.
The challenges facing the international community
are numerous. The validity of the rule of law must be
the fundamental basis on which we build our relations
and face all of those challenges together. International
law, international treaties and the rules we have
established to govern our relations — including, most
importantly, the Charter of the United Nations itself
and its application under the concept of the rule of
law — are the best vehicle for promoting the emergence
of genuine trust among all members of the international
community. We must rely on compliance with the rule
of law as the foundation of a new spirit of trust on
which to build our relations. The rule of law is the best
guarantee for ensuring respect for the sovereignty and
equality of all States, large and small. For less powerful
States, in particular, it is the only shield we have for the
defence of our rights.

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam welcomes the
convening of this open debate and appreciates the
Security Council’s continued attention to the place
of the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement just made
by the Permanent Representative of the Philippines on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
The rule of law among nations is the bedrock
on which the modern international order rests and
constitutes the foundation of a peaceful, prosperous
and just world. International law, multilateralism and
international peace and security are therefore closely
associated. We need to rely on multilateralism to protect
the international rules-based order and adhere to the
rule of law to maintain and strengthen international
peace and security. Nevertheless, we have witnessed
with concern various challenges to the rule of law and
multilateralism that have serious implications for the
international legal rules-based order and international
peace and security.
Against that backdrop, Viet Nam has time and
again underscored the importance of respect for the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of international law. They include the principles of
respect for the independence and territorial integrity
of States; non-interference in the internal affairs of
States; refraining from the threat or use of force; the
peaceful settlement of disputes; and the fulfilment in
good faith of international obligations. All States, large
and small, bear the primary responsibility for adhering
to those principles. Our actions, both individually and
collectively, must be guided by and in accordance with
international law and the Charter.
The United Nations and its main organs, including
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice, must continue to play
a central role in promoting cooperation, dialogue
and solidarity for the sake of international peace and
security through the rule of law and multilateralism. The
Security Council must be at the forefront of ensuring
respect for the Charter of the United Nations and the
rule of law so as to find peaceful and lasting solutions
to all conflicts. Council members themselves must take
the lead by setting a good example in that regard.

23-0135625/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

Viet Nam fully commits to working closely with
Member States and other partners to promote and ensure
stronger adherence to the Charter of the United Nations
and the rule of law among nations. During Viet Nam’s
presidency of the Security Council in January 2020, the
Council adopted a presidential statement on upholding
the Charter in order to maintain international peace
and security (S/PRST/2020/1). In 2021, Viet Nam
co-founded the Group of Friends of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Members
of the Group of Friends — of which there are now nearly
120, including a number of Council members — seek
to renew our collective commitment to promoting the
understanding and implementation of UNCLOS.
At the regional level, both within ASEAN and
between ASEAN and its partners, Viet Nam has taken
an active part in various initiatives to maintain peace
and security and to promote the rule of law in the region,
particularly in the implementation of the Declaration
on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea and
the negotiation of a code of conduct in the South China
Sea in accordance with UNCLOS.
In conclusion, Viet Nam strongly believes that only
by working together to ensure respect for the rule of
law can we secure peace, prosperity and justice, thereby
achieving the purposes of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): Slovenia aligns itself with
the statements delivered on behalf of the European
Union and by the representative of Austria on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law, and would like
to add some remarks in its national capacity.
We thank Japan for convening today’s
pertinent debate, as well as the briefers for their
valuable contributions.
The rule of law is in the interests of us all. Its
purpose is to ensure that the principles we have agreed
on are respected and implemented by all. It has been
77 years since the Charter of the United Nations
was adopted. Since then, we — the international
community — have achieved so much. At the same
time, however, on so many fundamental issues, we are
too often taking steps backwards rather than forward.
With our external environment becoming more
dangerous and unpredictable, respect for international
26/54

12/01/2023

law and upholding the multilateral rules-based system
are key to maintaining peace and security and stability.
Slovenia has always called for full and
unconditional respect for international law and has
been a vocal advocate of all international courts
and tribunals. Adhering to their judgments is a key
element in ensuring the international rule of law. We
have recently seen and experienced first-hand how
the available mechanisms of international law can and
must be put into action swiftly and efficiently. It is
the Security Council’s responsibility to maintain that
level of commitment and hold more debates on the
challenges that contribute to conflict and insecurity,
including on the subject of atrocities and related issues.
We also support a hands-on approach to the creation of
investigative mechanisms. Similarly, the responsibility
to protect against mass atrocity crimes and addressing
the processes that lead to them remain priority areas for
Slovenia’s action.
Slovenia strongly supports the idea that the
Security Council should hold closed meetings with
members of the International Law Commission for
discussions on the most pressing issues of international
law. Furthermore, we believe we should pay special
attention to the implementation of the concept of
accountability, with an emphasis on the most serious
violations of international criminal law. The Security
Council can do more in that regard, especially in the
context of the referral of international crimes to the
International Criminal Court.
As we have witnessed, the use of the “Uniting
for peace” resolution of the General Assembly calls
for further reflection on the working methods of the
Security Council with regard to bridging the status quo
based on the use of the veto. In that context, Slovenia
supports the proposal to limit the use of the veto in
certain cases, such as the French-Mexican initiative on
the suspension of veto powers in cases of mass atrocities
or the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group.
Given that the implementation of international
law lies in the hands of individual States and that
enforcement mechanisms are limited, it is all the more
important to realize that the international community
can overcome its differences and achieve peace and
security everywhere only through joint efforts and an
integrated approach. That is why regional, bilateral
and multilateral cooperation is crucial. We are pleased
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

to inform the Council that, in May, Slovenia will host
a diplomatic conference to negotiate and hopefully
adopt a new convention on mutual legal assistance
and extradition between States to ensure the effective
domestic investigation and prosecution of atrocities and
further cooperation between States in that regard.
In conclusion, it is high time that world leaders and
all of us worked harder and worked together, using all
available forums to come to solutions and not deepen
disagreements. Above all, we must make sure we do not
regress to a world where might makes right. After all,
that is what Member States signed up for and continue
to stand up for today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): I congratulate
Japan on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and I thank you, Sir, for organizing this very
important and timely open debate on the rule of law.
Our appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General,
the President of the International Court of Justice and
Mr. Dapo Akande for their valuable insights.
Thailand aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Philippines on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and would like
to make the following remarks in its national capacity.
The rule of law is the bedrock of the Westphalian
system and multilateralism. It is fundamental to the
maintenance of international peace, security and
stability and to peaceful relations and cooperation among
States. It ensures justice, fairness and predictability
in inter-State relations, interactions with the private
sector and engagements involving stakeholders, and it
remains a key guarantor of the security of small States,
the survival of fragile economies and the welfare of
marginalized peoples. Amid the global challenges that
we are all facing, the rule of law assumes even greater
importance and remains both a critical framework and
an indispensable instrument for helping to address
those challenges. In that regard, Thailand would like to
highlight the following four points.
First, the maintenance of international peace,
security and stability must be guided by the rule of
law and the relevant international legal frameworks,
including the principles enshrined in our Charter of
the United Nations. Fundamental in that regard is the
sacred notion that the rule of law and legal frameworks

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

apply to all and in an equal manner — that there can be
no differentiated treatment.
Secondly, the rule of law must have as its primary
focus the bolstering of peaceful means, whether
diplomacy or dialogue, conciliation or mediation. Peace
and achieving it peacefully is what the United Nations
is all about. It is what the Council is all about.
Thirdly, the rule of law must be anchored in
inclusivity. All of us must have a say, because all of
us have a stake. That is key to generating trust and
legitimacy and ensuring acceptable, sustainable
outcomes rather than temporary respites and interludes
of non-conflict.
Fourthly, sustaining international peace and
security and stability through the rule of law requires
the collective efforts of the international community. It
is thus essential that we join hands through the platforms
and architecture provided by the United Nations to
find effective, sustainable and peaceful solutions that
address both the short and long term by dealing with
immediate concerns, such as humanitarian situations,
and by preventing problems that could flare up if we
neglect long-standing grievances or injustice.
With those four points, Thailand is determined
to work with the international community to help to
maintain international peace, security and stability,
realize sustainable development and promote human
security in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter and through respect for the rule of law.
We also stand ready to support the United Nations
to advance the rule of law — including through the
work of the Sixth Committee and the International
Law Commission, among other institutions — and we
will support legal capacity-building, because it is also
through greater awareness and universal grass-roots
support for the rule of law that we can reinforce it at
the global level.
Looking forward to our work at the United Nations,
Thailand is pleased that the Secretary-General’s report
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) also incorporates
the issue of the rule of law. We are of the view that a
new vision for the rule of law should put people at the
centre. Putting people first — at the centre — is not
new. It is at the heart of human security, the most recent
vision of which was developed by the United Nations
Development Programme last year with important
contributions from Japan. For it is through promoting
and respecting a people-centred rule of law that we

23-0135627/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

can more effectively steer towards peaceful, inclusive
and just societies where no one will be left behind and
everyone’s human security will be ensured.
In conclusion, the path ahead is to strengthen
multilateralism, international cooperation and peaceful
means while adhering to international legal obligations,
including the principles enshrined in our Charter. It
is that path, we believe, that will lead to a peaceful,
stable and enabling environment that provides the best
chance for States to prosper, communities to flourish
and people and their families to live in dignity and with
hope. In all of that, the rule of law is not only a critical
ingredient but also a powerful game changer. Let us
work to make that happen.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): Australia thanks Japan,
and in particular the Minister for Foreign Affairs, for
convening this important debate.
The rule of law lies at the heart of the international
rules-based system. It provides an essential foundation
for a peaceful and secure world in which all countries
and persons can cooperate, trade and thrive, where
nations can prosper on the basis of fairness, stability
and predictability, and where small and mediumsized countries are able to maintain their sovereign
choices, protected by rules. For more than 75 years,
the Charter of the United Nations has underpinned
international law and supported global stability, and the
International Court of Justice has played a vital role in
facilitating the peaceful settlement of disputes. Yet the
international legal order is under great strain. Russia’s
illegal and immoral invasion of Ukraine is a gross
violation of international law, including the Charter of
the United Nations.
Over the past year we have seen Russia contort
and abuse fundamental principles of international
law, including through its attempts to justify its war
of aggression against Ukraine under the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide and to legitimize the so-called referendums
in eastern and southern Ukraine with references to selfdetermination. That is why Australia has supported
accountability for Russia’s actions through established
legal processes, including the International Criminal
Court and the International Court of Justice, and why
we continue to call for Russia to comply with the
International Court of Justice’s legally binding order
28/54

12/01/2023

and immediately withdraw its military forces from
Ukraine. We reaffirm General Assembly resolution ES11/5, adopted on 14 November 2022, which recognizes
that Ukraine’s injuries require full reparation by
Russia, in accordance with the international law of
State responsibility.
In the Indo-Pacific, Australia strives to support a
region that is open, stable, prosperous and respectful of
sovereignty; where disputes are guided by international
law, not power or size, and where the agency and
leadership of regional institutions, such as the Pacific
Islands Forum and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, are respected. Australia reaffirms the universal
and unified nature of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) as the legal framework
within which all activities in the oceans and seas must
be carried out. It is the legal regime for establishing all
maritime zones, protecting our oceans and maintaining
peace and security in the maritime domain. We maintain
that any maritime disputes, including those in the South
China Sea, should be resolved peacefully in accordance
with international law, particularly UNCLOS.
As we look towards the future, Australia aspires to
shape outcomes that support our collective interest — a
world where the rules are clear, mutually negotiated and
consistently followed. Today I am pleased to announce
that Australia will be joining the Group of Friends of
the Rule of Law to reaffirm our commitment, and I
encourage other States to support that initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We congratulate Japan on
convening this debate on promoting and strengthening
the rule of law in the maintenance of international peace
and security. And we thank the Secretary-General
and all the briefers for their insightful remarks. It is a
timely debate, as we continue to witness an increasing
disregard and blatant breaches of the rule of law.
The rule of law, as we all know, is fundamental to
the maintenance of international peace and security. It
is also a critical component in our ability to achieve
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982) reminds us that the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations remain timeless, universal and an indispensable
foundation for a more peaceful, prosperous and just
world. The Charter was born out of experience of war
and conflict to be the basis for friendly relations among
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

States, the maintenance of international peace and
security, and the promotion of better standards of living
for all. Since the adoption of the Charter the world has
seen many positive advances, including decolonization,
the spread of self-determination and the promotion of
human rights, the rule of law and democracy. While
that progress is commendable, we are concerned
about the fact that some people are still living under
conditions of foreign occupation and are denied their
right to self-determination.
South Africa stresses the critical importance of
respect for the rule of law as part of the maintenance of
international peace and security and political stability.
We urge all States to abide by their international
obligations and desist from actions that violate the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
International law is a global public good and works to the
benefit of all when all States respect it. It is particularly
at times when the world is facing uncertainties that we
need to resort to the rule of law as a basis for a world
order that can be characterized by predictability in the
relations between States.
South Africa reaffirms the importance of Article
2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, which prohibits the use
or threat of use of force, and we call on all members of
our Organization to respect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of other States.
We also call for resolving conflicts through diplomacy,
dialogue and negotiations. The experience of history
shows that there are no winners in wars. We reiterate
our belief that it remains crucial for the Security
Council to pursue unity and consensus in the consistent
promotion of the rule of law as it executes its primary
mandate of the maintenance of international peace and
security. That is vital to enhancing the credibility of the
Council and improving accountability.
The rule of law has been the founding value of
the democratic system in South Africa since the end
of apartheid. Chapter 1 of our Constitution provides
that the Republic of South Africa is founded on the
supremacy of the Constitution and the rule of law. Our
adoption of the Constitution created a pathway to a
society deeply grounded in a constitutional democracy.
At the centre of our Constitution is the importance of the
independence of the judiciary. Our judiciary protects
the rule of law and safeguards the rights and freedoms
of people, as well as South Africa’s democracy.

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, we commend and support the United
Nations for its initiative to promote the rule of law at
national and international levels. Upholding the rule of
law and justice systems that are responsive to people’s
needs remains an important priority for South Africa
and should be for all Member States, as signatories to
the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s highlevel open debate on this important issue. I also thank
the briefers for their insightful briefings.
The rule of law is essential to maintaining
international peace and security, as it promotes
predictability, stability and justice in an international
legal-based order. The Charter of the United Nations
sets forth the norms and principles for Member States,
which have pledged to follow them in order to maintain
international peace, security and the rule of law. The
fundamental principles of the Charter, such as the
sovereign equality of all members of the Organization,
the prohibition of the use or threat of use of force in
international relations and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, should act as a framework for advancing the
rule of law within the United Nations.
Some Member States, in particular the United
States, consistently misuse the authority and power of
the United Nations, using it as a tool to exert pressure
on sovereign States in pursuit of their own illegal
political agendas and to further their unilateral actions.
When it comes to the decisions of the Security Council,
such illegal actions can have a detrimental impact on
international peace and security. That is especially
evident in the Middle East, where the Council has failed
to take the necessary action to address the ongoing
atrocities and human rights violations committed by
the Israeli regime in the occupied Palestine territory,
including its continued violations of United Nations
resolutions and international law. In addition, the
Council has failed to address the acts of aggression,
occupation and infringement of national sovereignty
and territorial integrity committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic. In Afghanistan, the International Criminal
Court has neglected to open an investigation into
crimes committed there by foreign forces during their
20-year presence. Meanwhile, the Security Council
has not addressed the consequences of the hasty and

23-0135629/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

12/01/2023

irresponsible withdrawal of the United States and
NATO forces from Afghanistan, which has left the
country facing severe challenges.

activities are peaceful and consistent with our rights and
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.

Unilateralism poses a serious threat to the rule of
law and the Charter of the United Nations and creates
obstacles to international cooperation and peace and
security. The ongoing illegal unilateral acts by the United
States, a permanent member of the Security Council,
against sovereign Member States such as Iran, as well
as its coercion of other Member States to participate in
those illegal actions or face repercussions, undermine
the rule of law and violate the Charter. The United
States’ withdrawal from the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and reimposition of unilateral coercive
measures, a flagrant violation of resolution 2231 (2015),
as well as its illegal action in depriving Iran of its rights
as an elected member of the Commission on the Status
of Women and its open defiance of the International
Court of Justice’s provisional order to lift sanctions
on humanitarian goods, are clear examples of how the
United States undermines the rule of law within the
United Nations system — and that is only the surface
of the issue.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.

To promote the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security, all Member States
must fulfil their obligations under international law and
the Charter, uphold their commitments to international
treaties and agreements, use diplomatic means and
dialogue to resolve conflicts and disputes peacefully
and work with other States to find solutions that uphold
and respect the rules and principles of international
peace and security. All United Nations bodies should
abide by their Charter-mandated responsibilities and
prioritize transparency and accountability in their
work, which would facilitate trust and collaboration
among the United Nations organs.
Finally, regarding the unjustified mention and
unfounded claim made in his statement today by the
Minister of State of the United Arab Emirates regarding
the three Iranian islands in the Persian Gulf, I would
like to point out that such unfounded claims, which we
categorically reject, are inconsistent with the principles
of international law, including the principles of good
neighbourliness and non-interference in the domestic
affairs of other sovereign States. Respect for those
principles is essential to the promotion of the rule of
law at the United Nations. We also reject the allegation
made by the representative of the United Kingdom
about Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme. Our nuclear
30/54

Ms. Zacarias (Portugal): I would like to thank
Japan for convening this important open debate, and
I also thank all of today’s briefers. And I want to take
this opportunity to wish Japan every success during its
tenure as President of the Security Council.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
We are strongly committed to the work of the
United Nations to respond to the multiple challenges
that we all face as an international community. In that
regard, I would also like to commend Secretary-General
António Guterres for his briefing this morning and for
his leadership in the promotion and strengthening of
the rule of law.
Respect for the rule of law is a cornerstone of
the peaceful coexistence of nations and an essential
prerequisite for relations among States, international
organizations and individuals. We must stand firm
in our belief that multilateralism must be guided
by this principle in order to ensure a better future
for all. In a globalized world, the rule of law at
the national and international levels is a necessary
condition for interaction among States and for the
existence of peaceful societies. It is also an essential
tool for promoting and upholding international peace
and security. Russia’s ongoing invasion of Ukraine
has clearly and dramatically demonstrated the need to
reaffirm our commitment to upholding the rule of law
at the international level.
The peaceful settlement of disputes is established
in the Charter of the United Nations, and international
and hybrid courts and tribunals play a vital role in
strengthening the rule of law. Portugal appeals to the
Security Council to make better use of the International
Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations, in order to settle disputes affecting
international peace and security by peaceful means.
In that vein, we call on the Security Council to take
a proactive role in ensuring compliance with the
Court’s judgments.
Adherence to rule of law is also critical to conflict
prevention and to ensuring the stabilization, recovery
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

and reconstruction of fragile and conflict-affected
environments, as well as their long-term sustainable
development. Moreover, there is a strong and mutually
reinforcing relationship between the rule of law,
accountability and human rights, which we must
preserve and uphold.
Finally, the rule of law is also key to addressing,
adapting and responding to future challenges, including
with a view to ensuring that emerging technologies and
innovations are consistent with the defence of human
dignity, the promotion of international peace and security
and the strengthening of our common institutions.
In conclusion, I reiterate our firm commitment
to a rules-based international order, with the United
Nations at its core. We hope that this debate will further
contribute to enhancing the crucial role of the United
Nations and the Security Council in the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Benelux
countries — Belgium, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
and my own country, Luxembourg. We subscribe to the
statement made on behalf of the European Union. We
thank Japan and Minister Hayashi for convening this
open debate.
At the outset of the modern age, the Dutch jurist
Grotius argued that, in order to end war and create
peace, States are required to submit to common rules,
restrain their use of force and take responsibility for
humankind as a whole. That rule of law was at the
very core of the foundation of the Benelux Union,
comprising a group of small countries, surrounded by
larger neighbours, in a region historically subject to
war. When all of us adhere to the rule of law, it is our
best guarantee for common security and prosperity and
the best conflict-prevention tool available.
However, there is a fragility to the rule of law
throughout the world. Among other situations, that
is exemplified by Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine, which started in 2014 with Russia’s illegal
annexation of Crimea, the attacks in eastern Ukraine
and the downing of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17, and which culminated in a full-scale invasion of
Ukraine, facilitated by Belarus, last year. It has not
only caused immense suffering in Ukraine. but it has

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

also made the entire world less safe, less food secure
and less prosperous.
For decades, the international community has
worked to develop legal frameworks aimed at securing
peace, justice and human rights. With political will, we
can collectively enforce those frameworks and preserve
the rule of law. Allow me to highlight three avenues
of action for all situations in which the rule of law
is breached.
First, the international community must continue
to speak out against all grave violations of the Charter
of the United Nations wherever they occur. Last year,
the General Assembly took unprecedented action. It
condemned Russia’s war of aggression, it underlined the
fact that Russia’s attempted illegal annexation of four
regions of Ukraine had no validity under international
law, and it called for Russia to pay war reparations
to Ukraine.
When it comes to the Security Council, it is
unacceptable that a permanent member exercises its
veto to defend its own acts of aggression. That is why
the Benelux countries strongly support the resolution
establishing a standing mandate for a General Assembly
debate when a Council member casts a veto.
Secondly, we need to pursue justice and
accountability and use all the legal instruments that
we have at our disposal. That includes the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the use of courts. Clear
examples are the Special Criminal Court in the Central
African Republic and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
We also fully support the work of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine and
the investigations of the International Criminal Court
into possible war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide in Ukraine. We support calls for the
establishment of an international tribunal to prosecute
the leaders responsible for the crime of aggression
against Ukraine. We call on Russia to comply with the
order of the International Court of Justice on provisional
measures, which is legally binding.
Thirdly, history taught us there would be no lasting
peace if aggression is rewarded and the rule by force
wins over the rule of law. Supporting Ukraine means

23-0135631/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

supporting the international rule of law. That is why
the Benelux countries will continue to support Ukraine
to help it to defend itself and overcome the Russian
aggression for as long as is needed. We call on the
international community to do the same.
In conclusion. a dependable, rules-based legal
order is a prerequisite for security, stability, economic
growth and, lastly, peace in Europe and in all regions
of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the call by His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan this morning to
unite for the rule of law.
Guatemala strongly believes that the Charter of the
United Nations is the mainstay of international peace
and security, representing a rules-based international
order firmly rooted in the principles of sovereign
equality and non-intervention, the prohibition of the
threat and use of force and respect for human rights.
The Charter of the United Nations and the collective
security system established under it therefore constitute
the foundation of the rule of law at the international
level. We emphasize the inherent relationship between
the rule of law at the national and international levels.
At the national level, the State of Guatemala
upholds the principles of the rule of law, democratic
values and judicial independence. All its actions must
be based on the Political Constitution of the Republic of
Guatemala and the constitutional laws, which require
it to ensure not only freedom, but also justice and the
overall development of the individual.
The rule of law is the basis for the existence of
a just and equitable society, in addition to being an
essential element of peace, security and sustainable
development. We recognize the global efforts to promote
the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 16,
which involves strengthening internal State institutions
and a renewed commitment to international bodies
entrusted with maintaining peace and administering
justice among States.
The International Court of Justice plays a
fundamental role in the maintenance of international
peace and security and the establishment of a rulesbased international order. Its very existence denotes
the principle that disputes between States should be
32/54

12/01/2023

settled on the basis of international law and diplomacy,
not by resorting to armed force. That principle is an
inalienable element of the rule of law and is of particular
importance given the illegal aggression by the Russian
Federation against Ukraine, which is contrary to the
purposes for which this Organization was established.
Guatemala places great importance on the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means. As evidence of
our trust in the international justice system, Guatemala
has therefore submitted the territorial, insular and
maritime dispute with Belize to the International Court
of Justice.
The role that the Security Council must play in
promoting and strengthening the rule of law cannot be
avoided. States Members of the United Nations have
conferred upon the Council the mandate to maintain
international peace and security, which is an attribution
of responsibility that must not be allowed to be impeded
by the irresponsible exercise of the right of veto. The
International Court of Justice itself has recognized
that the discretionary powers conferred in treaties
must be exercised in accordance with the principle
of good faith, not for the purpose of frustrating their
goal and purpose. We also acknowledge the important
work of the International Criminal Court in the fight
against impunity, the complementary role of which is to
support national justice systems when they are unable
or unwilling to prosecute the most serious crimes of
concern to the entire international community. Without
the International Criminal Court, the promise of the
rule of law at the international level would be in vain,
the protection of human rights would be lacking and the
maintenance of international peace and security would
be impossible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka congratulates
Japan on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the first month of the new year.
We also thank Foreign Minister Hayashi Yoshimasa
and you, Sir, for convening this meeting in a year of
renewed hopes and dreams — a time when we will build
back better a world structured on the social contract
that Hobbes’ Leviathan recognized as the cornerstone
of democratic political philosophy founded on the rule
of law.
As we have been hearing throughout the day, and
the cornerstone of governance. The modern concept
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

of the rule of law is fairly wide and therefore sets up
an ideal for any nation to achieve. The concept was
developed by the International Commission of Jurists
in 1959 and issued as the Declaration of Delhi, which
was later reaffirmed in Lagos in 1961. According
to that formulation, the rule of law implies that the
functions of the Government in a free society should be
so exercised as to create conditions in which the dignity
of man as an individual is upheld. Such dignity requires
not only the recognition of certain civil or political
rights, but also the creation of certain political, social,
economic, educational and cultural conditions that are
essential to the full development of his personality. I am
compelled, however, to pose the question of whether, in
this day and age, the rule of law is simply rhetoric or a
universal principle?
We know that international law is an existing
and indestructible reality and offers the only hopeful
foundation for an organized community of nations
within the framework of the rule of law. That is well
founded and true. Those who best know the deficiencies
of international law are those who also know the
diversity and permanence of its accomplishments and
its indispensability to a world that plans to live in peace.
Our recent experiences cannot fail to arouse among
the community of nations a broader or deeper interest
in the methods by which conflicts between States
may be settled without wars or aggression. We thirst
for freedom. We have twice in our lifetime disrupted
our way of living, demoralized our economies and
threatened the security of life, liberty and property on
our planet, our only home, and we are currently on the
brink of a third such occasion. The assurance of our
fundamental laws that a citizen’s life may not be taken
without due process of law is of little avail against
aggression or the necessities of war.
Is it not now clear that personal freedom — at least
of the kind and degree we have known — is inconsistent
with the necessities of total war and incompatible with
a state of militarization that requires remaining in
constant readiness for war? Awareness of the effect
of war on the fundamental laws of our nations should
make clear to the peoples of the world the imperative
and practical nature of our striving for the rule of law
among nations.
Everything we do will fail unless we devise
instruments of adjustment, adjudication and conciliation
that nations will find reasonable and acceptable so that
future Governments will always have an honourable

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

alternative to war. It has been said that the advancement
of civilization does not diminish, but that it rather
multiplies the occasions and causes of serious dispute
among States. But war is less likely to break out
among peoples whose habit is to regard peaceful ways
of settlement as honourable and customary. We must
encourage nations in time of threat and crisis to find it
possible to accept alternatives to war only if their people
consider that the peaceful alternative causes no loss of
face. Governments in emotional times are particularly
susceptible to passionate attacks in which such emotion
is appealed to — sometimes by an emotional appeal to
the notion of an impairment of sovereignty.
It has been observed that the work of the
International Court of Justice has been appreciated in
only but a few of the important cases that have been
submitted to it. But to most of the nations and their
people, such international tribunals, as we have had
heard, were inaccessible professionally, as well as
geographically, and bore little on the profession’s dayto-day work and problems. While private claims based
on alleged violations of international law or treaties
are numerous, no permanent judicial machinery has
been available for their adjudication. We still leave the
traveller, the businessman or the owner of property in a
foreign country who suffers a violation of international
law or treaty rights in the unhappy position of having
no sure or easy remedy. And the legal fraternity still
thinks of them as matters only for us diplomats.
It has been said, it seems, that much hinges on the
acceptance of the concept of the Court as an independent
body above obligation to any nation or interest. We must
appreciate that we, as a global body, cannot see how we,
or any nation of like philosophy, could submit a dispute
to a court otherwise conceived or concede any measure
of compulsory jurisdiction to it. Jurists have observed
that we can have nothing in common with the cynics
who would have us avoid disillusionment by having no
ideals and who think that, because they do not believe
in anything, they cannot be fooled. We must keep the
faith. As Lord Chief Justice Coke observed, even the
King is under God and the law; for it is the law that
makes him a king.
Let me briefly turn to our courts. We must bear
in mind that it is futile to think that we can have
international courts that will always render the
decisions we want to promote our interests. We cannot
successfully cooperate with the rest of the world in
establishing a regime of law unless and until we are

23-0135633/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

prepared to have that law sometimes operate against
what would be to our national advantage. In our internal
affairs, we have come to rely on the judicial process to
settle individual controversies and grievances and even
those between nations, not because courts always render
the right judgments, but because the consequences of
wrong or unwise decisions are not nearly as evil as the
anarchy that results from having no way to obtain any
decision on such questions.
The alternative is to take case law into our
own hands. And, in a somewhat similar spirit of
accommodation, we must look upon any international
tribunal, not as one whose decisions will always be
welcome, but always right or wise. But the worst
settlement of international disputes by adjudication or
arbitration is likely to be less disastrous to the loser and
less destructive to the world than no other settlement
than war. And we will not suffer the worst of decisions
but will benefit from the judicial process at its best if
we insist on the independence and intellectual integrity
of any international tribunal that seeks to adjudicate or
arbitrate between States.
The General Assembly is entrusted with the crucial
responsibility of promoting the steady advancement of
international law and its codification under Article 13 of
the Charter of the United Nations. The United Nations
has been successful in significantly strengthening the
rule of law on a global scale. We stress that laws are
only as effective as their implementation. In addition,
their implementation is only as good as the fairness
on which it is based. Sri Lanka therefore reiterates its
call for systems to ensure a fair and just application
of laws and principles agreed on by United Nations
Member States, including the principles enshrined
in the Charter. It is said that Governments can easily
exist without laws, but laws cannot exist without good
responsible Government. It is confidence in the men
and women who administer the judicial system that is
the true bedrock of the rule of law. It is incumbent on all
States that seek to establish and entrench the rule of law
to develop, sustain and nourish the human resources
vital to ensuring the rule of law among nations. Let us
today pledge to commit ourselves to that ultimate goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate Japan, and you personally, Mr. President,
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council
34/54

12/01/2023

for this month. We warmly commend you, Sir, for
convening today’s critical and timely debate on a
very important topic. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, the President of the International
Court of Justice and Mr. Akande for their briefings.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statements
made on behalf of the European Union and its member
States and on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Rule
of Law.
While we cannot overestimate the importance of
accountability for violations of international law and the
key role of such institutions as the International Court
of Justice and the International Criminal Court for the
strengthening of the rule of law among nations, these and
other elements were well covered in the aforementioned
statements to which we fully subscribe. In the light of
the limited time available, I will restrict myself to only
one, but, from our perspective, most alarming and most
important, point related to today’s discussion.
The rule of law as we know it today is under attack,
mostly by one Member State, which is also a permanent
member of the Security Council. More forcefully
since last February, the Russian Federation has been
promoting an alternative concept of the rule of law.
It is a concept under which an aggression is allegedly
self-defence and where the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes is implemented by a full-scale
military invasion aimed at changing internationally
recognized borders and legitimate political leadership;
a concept under which deliberate strikes against civilian
infrastructure are allegedly not violating international
humanitarian law, and any damage or suffering are
alleged to be caused by the victim-State daring to
simply defend itself or by States providing support in
exercise of its right to self-defence; a concept under
which the respect for human rights and accountability
for the violations thereof are subject to justification of
political interest; and a concept under which rulings of
the International Court of Justice can be ignored just
because they do not further imperialistic appetites.
I could continue along these lines, unfortunately,
but I trust that the main point has been made clear. This
alternative concept promoted by Russia empowers the
rule of force over the rule of law and constitutes, in our
view, the most alarming challenge to the purposes and
principles underpinning the functioning of the United
Nations and to the current international legal order. It is
therefore crucial — for the future of the United Nations
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

system anchored in the Charter, for its credibility
and for the binding force of international law — that
we all become vocal when violations occur and that
accountability therefore be triggered.

international law over the power to make war, and its
work is crucial in resolving disputes and preventing the
escalation of conflicts. This includes both its judicial
and advisory functions.

We must all resubscribe to the principles of
the United Nations Charter and international law
not only in our statements, but mostly —and most
importantly — in all our practical actions. Otherwise,
what is an existential question for Ukraine today may
easily become an existential question for any other
Member State tomorrow.

In that regard, Mexico reiterates that it would
be beneficial to authorize the Secretary-General to
request advisory opinions from the Court, which would
result in greater mediation capacity. Furthermore, the
General Assembly, despite its limitations, has great
impact as the United Nations body with universal
representation. General Assembly resolution 76/262 is
a clear example of how the relationship, transparency
and accountability between the Assembly and the
Security Council can be strengthened and improved.
We should not underestimate the impact of collective
participation in situations that threaten international
peace and security.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation wishes Japan every success
in its presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January
As we have reiterated on many occasions, respect
for international law and the rule of law is a sine qua
non for sustainable peace. This is the premise that also
guarantees equality among all States, regardless of
their size or geographic location.
Virtually all conflicts and situations on the agenda
of the Security Council have the breakdown in the rule
of law as a component. With regard to the questions
included in the concept note (S/2023/1, annex), Mexico
notes that there have been occasions where invocations
of Article 51 against non-State actors in a third State
under the so-called doctrine of unwillingness and
inability have gone beyond the provisions of that Article
and constitute an abuse of the principle of the right to
self-defence, an abuse that in turn exacerbates conflicts
by fuelling hatred and extremism.
On the other hand, we continue to witness how the
principle of the prohibition of the use of force against
the political independence and integrity of States,
reflected in Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter, is
violated. This is perhaps the greatest challenge facing
the Security Council, which is unfortunately and
recurrently paralysed by political divisions, lack of will
and abuse of the veto. We once again invite States to join
the Franco-Mexican initiative on veto restraint in cases
of mass atrocities, which already has 106 signatories.
It is essential to strengthen all the principal organs
of the United Nations in their preventive and peaceful
dispute-settlement functions. The International
Court of Justice represents the force of reason and

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): Latvia warmly welcomes
Japan’s initiative of convening today’s debate. I thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, the
President of the International Court of Justice, Judge
Joan E. Donoghue, and Mr. Akande for their insightful
briefings.
As we face new and complex threats and challenges
to international peace and security, and as we see new
levels of atrocities, brutality and suffering, all Member
States must remember that our collective response
to threats to international peace and security must
be guided by the rule of law at both the national and
international levels. The rule of law is fundamental to
ensuring international peace and security and political
stability. As we reaffirm the commitment to respecting
the rule of law, we also witness that the implementation
of international law is being challenged more than
ever before.
Latvia remains committed to strengthening the
rules-based international order because at the core of
this order is respect for the sovereignty of States and
the prohibition of the use of force. We believe that no
State can be above the law — no matter how large
or small. Yet today we are experiencing violations
of international law that aim to undermine a system,
which, ultimately, is there to protect us all.
Russia’s ongoing aggression against Ukraine is
currently the most serious breach of international law.

23-0135635/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

The redrawing of the borders using military power
represents a threat that goes beyond Ukraine. It is a
brazen assault on the international legal order and the
United Nations Charter as such. While the Security
Council essentially has all the tools necessary to
respond and maintain peace in accordance with the
United Nations Charter, it is unable to do so because
it is being hijacked by Russia and its abuse of the veto.
It is essential to do everything possible to settle
disputes between Member States by peaceful means.
In that regard, Latvia underlines the key role of the
International Court of Justice in the strengthening of
the international rule of law. Through its work, it helps
us to understand that the rule of law cannot be applied
in a vacuum, but must be interpreted in the light of the
realities of the international community in order to
remain relevant and effective. We again urge Russia to
immediately suspend its military operation in Ukraine,
as ordered by the International Court of Justice.
Latvia strongly supports the investigation launched
by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
regarding atrocity crimes. Regrettably, the International
Criminal Court is unable to exercise jurisdiction over
the crime of Russia’s aggression committed against
Ukraine. Latvia is therefore dedicated to strengthening
accountability and fighting impunity by supporting
the establishment of an ad hoc special tribunal for the
crime of aggression.
Ensuring accountability for the crime of
aggression committed against Ukraine would signal
that waging blatantly unlawful colonizing wars will
not go unpunished — not now, not ever. The response
of the international community against this brazen
aggression, this mother of all crimes, including
through prosecution, is therefore of crucial importance
for the restoration of justice and for the future of the
international legal order.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile appreciates the holding of this debate and
welcomes the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan. A full version of this statement will
be sent in writing.
The rule of law is fundamental in the international
order, especially in matters of peace and security.
Its observance is a critical element for the peaceful
36/54

12/01/2023

development of relations among peoples and the
peace and stability of nations. We need to cooperate
in order to strengthen the international legal order and
the rule of law, which are also essential for ensuring
good governance, human rights and economic and
social progress.
The rule of law, translated into respect for
international law and international treaties, in
particular, as well as the peaceful settlement of
disputes, is the essence of international coexistence.
For Chile, the promotion of, and respect for, the rule of
law implies the progressive and universal acceptance of
international law by States and the fulfilment in good
faith of international obligations.
In line with the Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
which reflects the spirit of the declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of
law at the national and international levels, we agree on
the need to put people at the centre of the rule of law. For
Chile, the rule of law at the international level has an
intrinsic link with the rule of law at the domestic level.
Chile wishes to highlight the contribution made
to the international rule of law by the Human Rights
Council, the universal and regional human rights treaty
mechanisms and the advancement of international
humanitarian law, with the establishment of international
tribunals with international criminal jurisdiction, in
particular the International Criminal Court.
The principles proclaimed by the Charter of the
United Nations must be strengthened. We are concerned
about their non-observance by some States. States are
the first that are called upon to fulfil the purposes
of maintaining international peace and security and
the principles of the Charter, especially through the
prevention of crises or breaches of the peace, threats to
peace or aggression. States have an obligation to resort
to the peaceful settlement of disputes, to respect the
principle of sovereign equality and to fulfil international
obligations in good faith. The principle of refraining
from the threat or use of force against another State
is fundamental.
There are threats that do not recognize borders,
such as climate change, pandemics, famine, organized
crime, human trafficking, terrorism and, in tragic
cases, misogyny.
Chile values the role of the International Court of
Justice as one of the cornerstones of the international
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

rule of law. Article 94, paragraph 2, of the Charter
attributes powers to the Security Council in the event
of non-compliance with the Court’s rulings, a remedy
that has not been used regularly.
In the same vein, it is also the duty of the General
Assembly and the Council to consider matters in
which they have competence, consistently applying
international law, with a view to contributing to the
promotion and consolidation of permanent institutions
that have universal impact and validity.
The United Nations and the General Assembly,
in particular, must continue to promote conditions,
means and mechanisms for respect for the rule of
law, including through the promotion of dialogue and
cooperation among States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): As this is my first time
returning to the Security Council, I wish to congratulate
Japan on its presidency and on organizing today’s
open debate.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the European Union.
Ireland is committed and dedicated to the rule of
law, which lies at the very heart of international peace
and security and of the United Nations. In 1945, in the
Charter of the United Nations, we proclaimed that “we
the peoples” were determined “to establish conditions
under which justice and respect for the obligations
arising from treaties and other sources of international
law can be maintained”.
Our Charter underlines that this Organization is
based on the sovereign equality of all States, that we
shall settle our disputes by peaceful means and that we
shall refrain from the threat or use of force. And yet the
lines set out in the Charter have been crossed repeatedly.
As we consider the many crises on the Council’s agenda,
it is clear that promoting the international rule of law
remains an urgent duty and a moral imperative.
All States are equal under international law, and
every sovereign State has the right to coexist in peace,
free from outside interference. We all understand
that rules developed through negotiation are far more
effective in the settlement of disputes than rules
imposed by the powerful. That is a central feature of
the international rule of law, because rules developed

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

through negotiation and agreement are accepted as
legitimate, and they are based on consent.
Ireland’s engagement in, and support of, a rulesbased international order founded on the rule of law
is illustrated by our active support for the institutions
that safeguard it. We are, therefore, a strong supporter
of the International Court of Justice. That Court
is strengthened when States accept its compulsory
jurisdiction, as Ireland has done.
Ireland is firmly committed to accountability and
to the role of the rule of law in building an effective
international criminal justice system. And Ireland is
firmly committed to the International Criminal Court
and its role in seeking to ensure that those responsible
for the most serious crimes of international concern
cannot do so with impunity. Ireland also firmly supports
all efforts aimed at the elaboration of a convention on
crimes against humanity.
As we reflect here today on the Security Council
and the rule of law, we cannot ignore the veto. At a
minimum, all permanent members of the Council
should commit to refraining from using the veto
when dealing with atrocity crimes. That should be an
absolute minimum.
As we gather here, Ireland encourages the Council
and all States to defend a rules-based international
order. It is a truly vital and indispensable component
if we are to effectively address the grave international
security challenges faced by our world today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Ms. Hussain (Maldives): The United Nations was
founded upon the principles of sovereign equality, equal
rights, self-determination and settling international
disputes by peaceful means, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. Since our admission
to the United Nations in 1965, the Maldives has
accepted those principles, embraced the international
order and adhered to the rule of law nationally and
internationally. The rule of law has been key to my
country’s nation-building and progress as we make
democratic gains anchored in justice and equality.
The Maldives knows that, in the face of a mightier
adversary, we cannot rely on force, but instead we must
rely on international law, the United Nations Charter
and our multilateral system to protect us from potential
threats. We know that we do not possess powerful

23-0135637/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

weapons of destruction. Instead, we rely on our
principles and the solidarity of nations that comes from
unwavering adherence to those principles. We rely on
dialogue and diplomacy, and we believe in the power
of multilateralism.
As a small State, the Maldives has always taken a
principled stand on violations of the territorial integrity
of a sovereign country, and our record in the General
Assembly reflects that fact. We reaffirm that the rule
of law should be respected by all States, irrespective
of their size or might. We have always advocated for
the rule of law to ensure that the most vulnerable are
protected and the rights of all are respected.
In 1989, the Maldives proposed and advocated for
General Assembly resolution 46/43, on the protection
and security of small States. Our position flowed from
our bedrock belief in the equality of all States and
unconditional respect for all principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, including the principles of sovereign
equality, territorial integrity and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries, as well as the peaceful
settlement of disputes, and their consistent application.
The smallest nations in the international system deserve
and must be accorded the full protection that adherence
to the rule of law internationally can afford.
We are currently living in a world marred by
multiple conflicts and humanitarian crises. The report
(S/2022/381) of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict issued on 10 May 2022
records 11,075 civilian deaths in 2021 across 12 armed
conflicts. That was before the war in Ukraine, which
has the potential for the further escalation of political
instability and unrest around the globe. In addition,
United Nations experts have underscored that 2022
was the deadliest year for Palestinians due to Israeli
violence across the occupied Palestinian territory.
The Maldives believes that the rule of law should
be applied equally across the board to all countries.
It is critical that the perpetrators of blatant violations
of international law and international humanitarian
law — regardless of the conflict in question, the side
of the conflict they fought on or whether it is an active
or post-conflict situation — be held accountable for
their actions.
Yet here at the United Nations discussions on the
most pressing security issues have been relegated to
a small group of Member States, while the authority
for absolute decision-making has been consolidated in
38/54

12/01/2023

even fewer hands. Therefore, the Maldives believes that
the reform of the Security Council is critical to make
the Council more democratic in composition, more
effective in its decision-making and more accountable
to the general membership. Last year, we co-sponsored
the veto initiative to show support for increasing the
substantial role and moral authority of the General
Assembly to ensure that there is increased transparency
in the work of the Council.
A strong commitment to upholding international
law is one of the cornerstones of the foreign policy of
the Maldives. The Maldives recognizes the invaluable
contribution of peaceful dispute settlement in upholding
the rule of law in the international order. The prospect
of the escalation of military conflicts is troubling and
will certainly bring about greater human suffering,
destruction and damage. Therefore, the Maldives has
and will continue to raise its voice to resolve conflict
through diplomatic means, to exercise extreme restraint
and caution and to take constructive steps to diffuse
tensions through dialogue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): I thank the Japanese presidency
for convening this important debate.
The rule of law among nations is an essential
condition for international peace, stability and
development. The moment rules are violated, threats to
international peace and security befall us. Nepal is a
staunch supporter of the rules-based international order.
The Charter of the United Nations provides a normative
foundation for a rules-based multilateral order grounded
on sovereign equality, territorial integrity, political
independence, non-aggression and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, where all nations — big or small,
powerful or weak, rich or poor — enjoy equal rights,
dignity and recognition. Therefore, the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations are sacrosanct and must
be respected and upheld by all nations at all times.
Disputes should be resolved peacefully, as set forth
in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
The use of force against another country, as well as
unilateral sanctions, constitutes a flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations. We acknowledge
the significance of multilateral judicial mechanisms
such as the International Court of Justice and the
International Criminal Court in promoting the rule of
law among nations.
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

By the Charter of the United Nations, the Security
Council is the main guarantor of international peace and
security and must shoulder its responsibility. However,
the polarization in the Council and the involvement of
Council members themselves in conflict have failed the
Security Council. The spectre of nuclear catastrophe
is looming. Humanitarian crises and the economic
consequences of ongoing conflict are imponderable.
Although far away from it, people from all poorer
countries are destined to pay a very high price for that
conflict with poverty, hunger and destitution. Due to
the Council’s failure to serve peace, the United Nations
system is losing its credibility and legitimacy.
It is unfortunate that powerful players in
international relations choose to play by the power of
arms, not the power of rules. As the host of the United
Nation Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Asia and the Pacific, Nepal has always advocated for
arms control and disarmament, as well as promoting
dialogue for peace and stability. As one of the largest
troop- and police-contributing countries and a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Nepal recognizes
that justice and the rule of law are the building blocks of
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and sustainable
peace. A more concerted effort is necessary to enable
Member States to achieve the rule of law and the related
goals of the 2030 Agenda for sustainable peace.
In conclusion, adherence to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations is
the legal, moral and ethical obligation of all Member
States to promote the rule of law among nations. Only
respect for the rule of law among nations can guarantee
perpetual peace, stability and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s discussion on the rule
of law among nations, with a particular focus on the
maintenance of international peace and security. I also
wish to thank the Secretary-General, the President of
the International Court of Justice and Mr. Dapo Akande
of Oxford University for their briefings at the beginning
of the debate.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union and would like to
underline the following in its national capacity.

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

My country is firmly committed to the international
rules-based order, including human rights law and the
rule of law. The rule of law is one of the fundamental
principles that must underpin international relations and
promote peace and security and prosperity throughout
the world. It is up to all of us not only to promote, but
also to strengthen the rule of law.
The tenth anniversary of the declaration of the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule
of law at the national and international levels provides
an opportune occasion to renew our dedication to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as to reflect on the importance and
challenges of the international order based on the rule
of law. We note that the declaration clearly establishes
the main principles of the rule of law and reaffirms
the rule of law as indispensable for upholding peace
and security, as well as sustainable development and
respect for human rights.
Lithuania supports the Secretary-General’s efforts
in promoting the rule of law and mainstreaming it in
United Nations activities. We also welcome the call in
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) for a new vision for
the rule of law that seeks to put people at the centre
of justice systems and ensure equal access to justice
for all.
As for reinforcing the rule of law and building
sustainable peace, accountability in the aftermath
of grave violations of international law is critical.
In the recent report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening and coordinating United Nations rule
of law activities (A/77/213), it is highlighted that
international and hybrid courts and tribunals are key
actors that strengthen the rule of law. In that regard, the
role of the International Court of Justice in promoting
the rule of law, ensuring respect for international law
and maintaining international peace is of particular
importance. Therefore, we call on all Member States
that have not yet done so to accept the jurisdiction of
the Court, to enhance its universal reach.
All Member States have an obligation to abide
by the Charter. Unfortunately, today one of the main
challenges to the rule of law among nations is the lack
of adherence to the Charter.
The Security Council is assigned the great
responsibility of taking decisions on the measures that
are needed to maintain or restore international peace
and security. The unprovoked and brutal war against

23-0135639/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

12/01/2023

Ukraine waged by the Russian Federation in blatant
violation of the Charter clearly exposed the structural
and procedural weaknesses of the Security Council.
With that war, Russia is not only disregarding its
permanent membership duties, but is also continuing
to block the Security Council as a whole from
implementing its mandate with regard to maintaining
international peace and security.

The Charter of the United Nations has been the
foundation of international law and the framework
for peaceful relations among nations for nearly eight
decades. The rule of law at the international level,
underpinned by the Charter, is largely dependent on
the determination and resolve of this Organization’s
principal organs and its Member States to uphold its
purposes and principles, as well as their actual conduct.

The General Assembly overwhelmingly established
that Russia’s war is an aggression against Ukraine, a
breach of the Charter and a violation of the peremptory
norms of international law.

It is in particular the Security Council, carrying
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, that must represent
and deliver a collective adherence to those purposes
and principles. Members States of the Security Council,
especially the five permanent members, have a shared
responsibility, entrusted by the entire membership,
to maintain international peace and security. The
Council’s failure, inability or unwillingness to fulfil
its responsibilities under the Charter, as well as the
overstepping of its authority, can undermine the rule
of law at the international level. History teaches us that
wars and destruction became inevitable when relations
among nations were guided by the rule by force or
the threat of force. That becomes far more dangerous
in a world overshadowed by the destructive power of
nuclear weapons.

Accountability is a basic principle of the rule
of law. The rules-based international order cannot
survive if there is impunity for its most blatant
violations — genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and the crime of aggression. The International
Criminal Court plays a crucial role in investigating
Russia’s atrocity crimes in Ukraine. Unfortunately, the
crime of aggression is beyond the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court in this case. Therefore,
the international community should be ready to use
the full range of international legal tools to fill that
jurisdictional loophole by establishing a special tribunal
for the crime of aggression in Ukraine.
Moreover, we have repeatedly urged Russia to
comply with the International Court of Justice’s legally
binding order of 16 March 2022 to immediately cease its
military actions, which it commenced on 24 February
2022, in the territory of Ukraine.
We are convinced that, in this particularly
challenging moment for the entire international rulesbased order, strengthening the rule of law is vital for
ensuring international peace and security and making
the world more stable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate Japan for its presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to applaud you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s open debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General, the President of the International
Court of Justice and Professor Dapo Akande for their
comprehensive briefings.
Myanmar aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
40/54

The erosion of the rule of law at the international
level affects the domestic rule of law in various ways,
especially in transitional situations in which the
principles of the rule of law are struggling to become
rooted in societies. The most obvious result of that
erosion is the sense of impunity gained by perpetrators
of serious international crimes.
In my country, Myanmar, the fascist military
leaders committed treason in February 2021 by staging
an illegal coup against the democratically elected
Government. The illegal military junta has completely
dismantled the rule of law, with desperately serious
consequences both in the country and across the region.
The Secretary-General this morning rightly pointed out
the breakdown of rule of law in Myanmar after the illegal
military coup. The junta has been waging a campaign of
violence and brutality against the people of Myanmar
by all means, including arbitrary detentions, torture to
death in custody, repeated massacres, indiscriminate
aerial bombings and wholesale torching of residential
homes and villages, the displacement of over a million
civilians and summary execution of political prisoners.
Those atrocities have been committed in such a
coordinated, widespread and systematic manner that
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

the Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar
has concluded, based on its analysis of collected
evidence, that they amount to crimes against humanity.
Moreover, it is vividly clear that the military does
not guarantee the stability of the nation; instead, it
poses a threat to regional peace and security. The fascist
military has created safe havens for transnational
organized crime. According to recent news reports,
in February and March 2022 alone, the military junta
enabled some 15 criminal zones to be built along a
40-kilometer stretch of the Thaung Yin River, also
known as the “Moei River”, in south-east Myanmar,
where the military’s affiliated militia is in control.
Such criminal zones present a real and serious threat
to global security for neighbouring countries and for
the world. Innocent people from at least 30 countries
across the globe have been trafficked into that area,
lured by false promises of work. Those people are
victims of an unjust and criminal coup in my country, a
consequence of the breakdown of the rule of law and the
failure to observe the principles of the United Nations.
I urge the international community and relevant United
Nations agencies to pay serious attention to that human
trafficking crisis and to address it in a timely and
effective manner.
In conclusion, the deteriorating situation in
Myanmar shows mounting evidence of crimes against
humanity and war crimes being committed by the
military machine. The spillover effects of the military
violence in Myanmar are now the greatest single source
of instability in the region.
The Council has, in the past, addressed
accountability for the violations of serious international
crimes, which led to long-term positive impacts on the
ground. The Council has tools at its disposal to do the
same with regard to Myanmar.
We thank the Security Council for its adoption
the first-ever resolution on the situation in Myanmar
(resolution 2669 (2022)). The Security Council now
has a unique opportunity to help to re-establish the
rule of law in Myanmar. I urge the Security Council
and Member States to implement the provisions in its
resolution and take concrete and decisive action that
will prevent further military atrocities and address the
pervasive military impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Kimani (Kenya): It is a privilege to be back
in the Chamber. I thank His Excellency Mr. Yoshimasa
Hayashi for convening today’s timely open debate
and congratulate Japan on starting its membership of
the Security Council, with the heavy responsibility
of holding the presidency for the month of January. I
also thank the Secretary-General, the President of the
International Court of Justice and Professor Akande for
giving us their perspectives earlier today.
Respecting the rule of law is essential to meeting
our obligations as members of the United Nations in
promoting peaceful coexistence and cooperation.
Without international law to constrain the conduct of
States, no matter their level of economic, military and
geopolitical power and influence, we will continue to
struggle to attain peaceful coexistence and cooperation.
I fully agree with the sentiment Mr. Hayashi shared this
morning when he said that although multilateralism
may be on its deathbed, we should not allow it to die.
And we believe that the rule of law is what will rescue
and protect it.
The Charter of the United Nations sets the
guiding principles and provisions for the maintenance
of international peace and security among States.
Unfortunately, some States are breaking international
law through unilateralism and militarism in the pursuit
of national interests while rejecting dialogue and
diplomacy. The result is armed conflicts, the threat of
use of weapons of mass destruction and threats to the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of other States. To
promote the rule of law to the benefit of international
peace and security, I would like to offer the following
four recommendations.
First, Member States must unite in defence of
the United Nations Charter by having the conviction
to hold all members, without exception, to the
same standard in faithfully adhering to all of its
provisions. In particular, we must unite to insist that
all Member States refrain from the threat or use of
force in any manner inconsistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter and commit to settling their
international disputes by peaceful means, including
through negotiations, inquiry, good offices, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration and judicial settlement.
Secondly, the review and progressive development
of international law and its codification should
be encouraged, with the aim of clearly defining
and communicating consequences for actions that

23-0135641/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

undermine the rule of law, including violations of
the Charter by Member States. There should also be
continuing efforts to clearly assign State responsibility
for emerging threats, such as climate change. That
calls for enhanced the utilization of the mandate of the
International Law Commission and the advisory role of
the International Court of Justice.
Thirdly, there is a need for more support to Member
States in the implementation of their international
obligations through enhanced technical assistance and
capacity-building. Special attention should be accorded
to countries in or emerging from conflict situations.
Fourthly and finally, the reform of Security
Council is required to make it regionally inclusive and
representative and would confer on it the necessary
legitimacy and efficacy in dealing with threats to
international peace and security. That includes Africa
occupying its rightful place in the Security Council, as
called for in the Ezulwini Consensus.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to
the letter and the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, including the rule of law among nations, as
applicable to all Member States, in all situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First,
let me commend Japan on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January and
for convening today’s open debate. We welcome this
opportunity to emphasize the importance of the rule
of law as a pillar of the international system created
through the establishment of the United Nations.
In 1970, the General Assembly adopted by
consensus the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. This document enshrined a conclusive
set of principles for the rule of law among nations. The
Declaration was a milestone in the promotion of the rule
of law and, in particular, in the universal application of
the principles enshrined in the Charter.
Adherence to the rule of law is intended to ensure
that the principles and norms to which we agree are
respected and applied in good faith by all. And that is
in the interest of all States, large and small. Yet more
than 50 years after the adoption of the Declaration,
challenges to the rule of law persist on almost every
42/54

12/01/2023

front, with conflicts spreading across the globe,
violations of international law and impunity for such
violations. Without the rule of law there are no just
societies, and there is no peace and development.
States have the primary role in the development
of international law, and the United Nations has
contributed to creating the settings in which that
normative development can take be advanced. In that
regard, we commend the work of the International
Law Commission in identifying and addressing
the international law issues most relevant to the
international community.
The peaceful settlement of disputes is a pillar of
the rule of law in the international order. As outlined
in the Charter, the International Court of Justice plays
a central role as the judicial organ for the resolution
of inter-State disputes. We emphasize our appreciation
for the work of the Court and reiterate the need for all
States to comply with their obligation to respect and
implement its judgments and other binding measures.
In addition to the International Court of Justice, the
role of other specialized courts that deal with specific
branches of international law, such as the International
Tribunal on the Law of the Sea, whose work contributes
to the consolidation of the rule of law among nations,
should also be highlighted.
But there are other methods for the settlement of
international disputes to which the Charter also refers.
In that regard, my country believes it is important to
emphasize the need for parties to conflicts to respond
in good faith to the calls for negotiations that are being
made or have been made by organs of our Organization,
including the General Assembly, in order to contribute
to the peaceful settlement of their disputes.
Among the means of peaceful settlement available
to the United Nations and its Member States, we wish to
highlight in particular the role of the good offices of the
Secretary-General that can be entrusted to him by the
Organization. The success of a good-offices mission
or any other means of peaceful settlement in fulfilling
its objective and purpose is contingent on the parties
concerned in those procedures complying in good faith
with their obligations.
In conclusion, strengthening the rule of law at the
national and international levels is the obligation of
all States and is essential for achieving sustained and
inclusive economic growth, sustainable development,
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

poverty eradication and the full realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Eritrea.
Ms. Tesfamariam (Eritrea): At the outset, let
me express my delegation’s profound appreciation
to Japan for organizing today’s open debate, which
provides Member States the opportunity to share their
perspectives on an immensely crucial theme, “The
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security: the
rule of law among nations”. I would like to congratulate
Japan for assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January, as well as the other
newly elected members of the Council — Ecuador,
Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland. I also want to
thank the briefers from this morning: the SecretaryGeneral; Judge Joan E. Donoghue, President of the
International Court of Justice; and Professor Akande
for their insightful interventions in the Council.
As enshrined in the Charter of the Organization,
pertinent United Nations declarations and principles of
international law, the rule of law essentially entails, inter
alia, respect for sovereign equality, territorial integrity,
political independence, non-interference in domestic
affairs, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
prohibition on the threat or use of force. Those cardinal
principles were agreed upon by the entire international
community — nations of all sizes and strengths, big or
small, rich or poor — in conducting their relations. As
such, they shall be equally respected by all in order to
ensure international peace and security, socioeconomic
prosperity and justice.
Contrary to those ideals, the promotion of the rule
of law has been weathered away owing to the arbitrary
unilateral policies and measures adopted by certain
Powers against those that do not conform to their
self-professed rules-based order. In utter disregard
for the United Nations Charter, such actors have been
intervening in the internal affairs of sovereign nations
and instigating chaos, imposing illegal unilateral
coercive sanctions, waging proxy wars, intensifying
geopolitical tensions, politicizing human rights and
exacerbating inequalities. Developing countries such
as mine, and the global South in general, have borne
the brunt of such ill-conceived and unfair policies and
practices. Those must be rectified, and the community
of nations should collectively endeavour to ensure a

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

secure, stable global order and a shared future based
on the rule of law in adherence to the principles of the
United Nations Charter.
To briefly share my country’s experience, guided
by a safe and cooperative regional policy, Eritrea’s
resolve with regard to the pacific settlement of disputes
and adherence to the principles of international law are
matters of public record. Even regarding those disputes
imposed upon it, Eritrea consistently sought pacific
settlements and faithfully and invariably implemented
the decisions of international arbitration. The Eritrea/
Yemen arbitration decision of 1998/1999 and the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission delimitation
and demarcation decisions of 2002 and 2007 are cases
for reference. Indeed, for the people of Eritrea, who
fought for decades to achieve and defend its sovereignty
and independence, upholding the rule of law is not a
policy choice, but rather a strategic imperative.
In conclusion, with a view to promoting and
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security, allow me to share
my delegation’s modest perspectives. The sovereign
equality and political independence of all nations of all
sizes and strengths must be uniformly upheld. Secondly,
all forms of unilateral coercive measures ought to
be immediately annulled. The existing international
security architecture and institutional set-up must be
rigorously reformed to ensure inclusive multilateral
decision-making processes that safeguard a peaceful,
prosperous and just international order.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the Security Council’s focus today on
promoting and strengthening the rule of law, which
underpins the international rules-based system and
the peace and security of all nations. We call on all
countries to reaffirm our shared commitment to that
goal and to uphold the fundamental principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
A world founded on respect for the international rule
of law is the only world where all nations can thrive and
prosper — a world founded on respect for fundamental
human rights and freedoms, the prohibition on the use
of force, compliance with international legal obligations
and respect for the decisions of international courts.

23-0135643/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

The international system faces a range of
global issues, which require concerted international
cooperation in order to be addressed. In recognition
that no country, however powerful, can solve those
challenges alone, it is vital that we can rely on the
cooperation and commitment of all States. Only an
international system where States can rely on each
other to meet their commitments, comply with their
obligations in good faith and respect the decisions of our
judicial institutions will be able to meet the challenges
facing us all.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
recommendations to advance Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), which identifies a road map to accelerate
the implementation of our existing international
agreements and commitments, underpinned by respect
for human rights and the rule of law. Member States,
including Council members, must work in genuine
partnership and in good faith to implement that vision.
Respect for the rule of law at the international level
is possible only where States commit to respecting
the rule of law domestically. Respect for fundamental
human rights and freedoms in our domestic systems
is crucial to demonstrating our commitment to
implementing the core principles underpinning the rule
of law at the international level.
Despite Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, in
blatant violation of the Charter, the General Assembly
has remained steadfast in its commitment to upholding
the international rule of law and condemning Russia’s
actions. New Zealand encourages the Security
Council to leave no stone unturned in fulfilling its
responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security, and we continue to call on permanent members
to restrain themselves from using their inherently
undemocratic vetoes.
Finally, New Zealand observes that strengthening
our international legal institutions, particularly the
International Court of Justice, remains critical to
upholding the rule of law and facilitating the peaceful
settlement of disputes. We call on all countries that have
not done so to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice. We call on all countries
to comply with the Court’s decisions, including orders
for provisional measures. The International Criminal
Court (ICC) plays a vital role in ensuring that those
individuals responsible for serious international crimes
44/54

12/01/2023

are held to account. We call on all Members to support
the work of the ICC.
Today’s debate, convened under Japan’s leadership,
for which we are very grateful, provides an opportunity
to reaffirm our collective commitment to the values,
rules and institutions that underpin the rule of law. New
Zealand is pleased to join many others in doing so.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mrs. Zin Zawawi (Malaysia): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate Japan on its presidency for
the month of January and for hosting this important
open debate. My appreciation also goes to the briefers
for their invaluable insights.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of the Philippines on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
As we are all aware, respecting and upholding the
rule of law is one of the pillars of the United Nations.
Today’s meeting serves as a timely reminder of our
common responsibility to uphold the rule of law in
international relations. At the United Nations, the
main responsibility for upholding the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security lies
with the Security Council. For small and vulnerable
countries, the Security Council is the protector and
guardian against abuses of international law in the
conduct of friendly relations and cooperation among
Member States.
Malaysia is pleased to hear the strong support
expressed in this Chamber for the vital importance of
upholding the rule of law at the national, regional and
international levels. We are also gratified by the strong
commitment to defending the Charter of the United
Nations, especially with regard to the sacrosanct
principles of independence, territorial integrity,
non-interference in domestic affairs and the pacific
settlement of disputes.
In Malaysia’s view, consistency is a prerequisite
to better promote and strengthen the rule of law.
Unfortunately, more often than not, what we see today
is the application of the rule of law only where and
as convenient, mainly to suit the agenda of a select
few countries. That unhealthy practice of double
standards must end. Otherwise, it will only embolden
the perpetrators to continue flouting and abusing
international law, international humanitarian law and
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

the Charter. If not rectified and addressed, the culture
of impunity will continue to cast a dark shadow that
threatens to hinder the success of the United Nations.
The continuation of the culture of impunity threatens
the culture of peace. It also threatens the achievement
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
in particular Sustainable Development Goal 16,
on promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for
sustainable development, providing access to justice
for all and building effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels. That will be made possible only
by ensuring the peaceful settlement of disputes, justice
and accountability for all. In that respect, the Security
Council has a special responsibility to guarantee justice
and accountability, including by ensuring respect for
and the full implementation of its own resolutions.
For more than seven decades, Israel had openly and
proudly committed actions that are in clear violation
of the Charter, international law and numerous United
Nations resolutions. It is shocking to see peace-loving
nations and human rights champions that condemned
apartheid practices in the past remain silent on the
subject of Israel. The Council must overcome its own
paralysis and address the many injustices and gross
violations committed by the occupying Power in the
occupied Palestinian territory. It is incumbent upon the
Council to fulfil its Charter-mandated responsibility
and take meaningful action that goes beyond mere
words. Equally important is the need to strengthen
existing mechanisms for combating internationally
wrongful acts through the International Court of Justice
and other international instruments. The Security
Council plays a crucial role in defending the Charter,
promoting respect for international law and advancing
the rules-based international order.
Malaysia remains committed to the maintenance
of international peace and security through the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law. Our
steadfast support of the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations is a further testament
of our commitment. Malaysia stands ready to work
constructively with the members of the Security
Council and the larger United Nations membership in
upholding the rule of law, including in the work process
of the Summit of the Future to be held in 2024.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Ms. Dakwak (Nigeria): I thank Japan for organizing
this important debate on a subject that is at the heart of
the Charter of United Nations. We thank the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the International Court of
Justice and Professor Dapo Akande for their insightful
briefings this morning.
Respect for, and the observance of, the rule of law,
as enshrined in the Charter, is a fundamental article
of both national and international jurisprudence. In
the international system, adherence to the rule of law
is necessary to guide States’ actions and hold them
accountable for their action or inaction, in accordance
with established laws and regulations. That is a crucial
element, as enshrined in the Charter. As we mark the
tenth anniversary of the declaration of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law
at the national and international levels, it is important
to take stock. The declaration recognizes that the rule
of law applies to all States equally and to international
organizations, and that respect for, and promotion of,
the rule of law and justice should guide all of their
activities and accord predictability and legitimacy
to their actions. The declaration, adopted by Heads
of States and Government, reaffirms the core values
and principles of the rule of law that there should be
no derogation from them and that they should not be
applied selectively or on a discriminatory basis.
The strengthening of the rule of law at both
the national and international levels is the shared
responsibility of States and international and
multinational entities. It is undoubtedly a necessary
condition for peaceful cooperation and coexistence
among States and is critical to addressing global
challenges in accordance with the principles of the
Charter and international law. Nigeria therefore
subscribes to the view that it is only an international
system based on the rule of law that can guarantee the
protection of the rights of both States and individuals
and the legitimate interests of all in the global arena.
Nigeria envisions the promotion of the rule of law at
the international level as a vital means of strengthening
cooperation and promoting enduring peace and security
among States.
Nigeria has consistently demonstrated strong
political will to fulfil its international obligations
with respect to the rule of law and to promote due
process through the enactment of laws that accord
with international best practices and judicial
pronouncements. We recognize the close connection

23-0135645/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

between the rule of law and democracy and the primacy
of the rule of law as a prerequisite for the promotion
and protection of democracy, good governance and
sustainable development. Nigeria anchors its foreign
policy on the promotion and achievement of global
security, as well as the protection of the dignity of all
persons, as enshrined in the Charter.
It is imperative for the rule of law to be
strengthened at the national and international levels in
order to ensure equity and fairness. The rule of law at
the international level must be based on a number of
principles of the United Nations, which were further
reaffirmed in the 2005 World Summit Outcome. That
implies that States must in good faith honour their
international obligations, including the obligation to
refrain from the threat or use of force, the obligation
to settle disputes through peaceful means and the
obligation to protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms and abide by international humanitarian law.
The principle of equality among States must remain an
important element of the promotion of the rule of law
at the international level. The international community
should therefore discourage any semblance of selective
observance or enforcement of international law.
Violations of international law and the Charter
should be an issue of great concern to all members
of the international community. In accordance with
international law, we believe that the borders of
countries are sacrosanct and that their sanctity must
always be upheld. That is a fundamental issue from
which there should be no derogation. The authority
of the Charter and the fundamental principles of
international law should be upheld. The Council should
be at the forefront of efforts to combat the violation of
international law. At the United Nations itself, every
effort should be made to ensure the equal treatment of
Member States, in accordance with the agreed rules
and regulations. Respect for the rule of law at all levels
is essential to the maintenance of international peace
and security. The aspiration for a global system that is
based on the rule of law, in which accountability and
social justice provide the foundations for a durable
peace, should be a source of inspiration for all. To that
end, addressing the global rule-of-law deficit should
be a priority for both national communities and the
international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
46/54

12/01/2023

Mr. Bakradze (Georgia): Let me congratulate
Japan on starting its membership of the Security
Council as President for the month of January. I also
thank you, Sir, for organizing this debate on such an
important and timely topic.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union, and I would like to
make the following statement in my national capacity.
We share the view of the Secretary-General,
as expressed in his report on strengthening and
coordinating United Nations rule of law activities
(A/77/213), that the rule of law is a core component
of peace, security and sustainable development.
Therefore, we believe that the need for the protection
and promotion of the rule of law unconditionally applies
to all States equally and should guide States’ activities
at both the national and international levels. We also
believe that the protection and promotion of the rule of
law can bring us closer to the realization of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Regretfully, 78 years after the foundation of the
United Nations, the main principles of international
law, including the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity, the inviolability of borders
and the non-interference in the internal affairs of
other States, continue to be flagrantly violated and
consequently threaten international peace and security,
the Charter of the United Nations, the rules-based
order and multilateralism. Given the latter, the list of
challenges facing States runs long. In that connection,
I would like to mention an example in my own country,
where the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali
are under illegal occupation by Russia. Their residents
continue to face various types of human rights violations
and discrimination.
Grave disregard for the norms and principles of
international law also continues in the context of Russia’s
military aggression against Ukraine, which Georgia
deplores in the strongest possible terms. It is deeply
alarming that the norms and principles of international
law, which we are all bound to uphold, are repeatedly
violated by a permanent member of the Security
Council, whose primary responsibility is — and should
be — to contribute to peace and security. We call on
the Russian Federation to comply with the provisional
measures order of the International Court of Justice of
16 March 2022 to immediately cease the aggression and
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

withdraw all of its troops and military equipment from
the entire territory of Ukraine.
To conclude, let me reiterate Georgia’s firm
stance that enhancing the rule of law is of the utmost
importance in order to ensure international peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alajmi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset. I congratulate you, Mr. President, on Japan’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We sincerely wish Japan every success
during its non-permanent membership in the Council.
I also thank the Secretary-General and the President
of the International Court of Justice for their briefings
this morning.
Nearly 52 years have passed since reaching
consensus on the Declaration on Principles of
International Law Concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States in Accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, and 10 years have
passed since the declaration of the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the
national and international levels, through which Heads
of State and Government reaffirmed their commitment
to the rule of law and its fundamental importance for
political dialogue and cooperation among all States,
as well as promoting and establishing the three core
pillars on which the United Nations was established,
namely, international peace and security, human rights
and development. However, facts so far have failed to
meet the very minimum of what was hoped for in those
international consensual documents.
The historic experience that took place more than
33 years ago, namely, the invasion and liberation of my
country, constituted a decisive phase that demonstrated
the benefit of international commitment to the Charter
of the United Nations, which rejects the use or threat of
use of force and promotes the rule of law through the full
and practical implementation of the relevant resolutions
adopted through the international legitimacy of the
General Assembly and the Security Council.
That indeed was a difficult and bitter experience, but
it strengthened the commitment of the State of Kuwait
to promoting the rule of law at the international level, as
demonstrated in many international forums and stances
by supporting all the principles and measures adopted

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

by the United Nations to strengthen the rule of law
during and after conflict; initiatives for judicial reform;
capacity-building and counter-corruption initiatives;
strengthening security and preventing crime; reducing
violence and armed violence; promoting transitional
justice; and drafting consensual constitutions. We have
also supported the efforts of the United Nations geared
towards enhancing access to justice by delivering
necessary support to the States that are in dire need of
it. At the national level, the State of Kuwait enjoys a
democratic constitutional system that reflects respect
for the rule of law through the principle of separation
among the three branches and the need to cooperating
among them; non-discrimination among individuals
concerning their rights and duties; and ensuring that
they enjoy freedom and equality.
Although there are bright phases experienced by
the United Nations, there is a need to reiterate that
persistent violations of international law constitute
the main reason behind weakening the political will
and undermining international resolutions with regard
to complying with the law. The Israeli occupation
of occupied Arab territories, including Palestinian
territory, for more than five decades has been a
flagrant violation of international treaties and norms.
Israeli practices such as the expansion of settlements
clearly reflect the zero-mentality of the occupation
Government. In that regard, the State of Kuwait
welcomes General Assembly resolution 77/247, which
calls on the International Court of Justice to issue an
advisory opinion on the legal consequences of persistent
violations by the occupation authorities against the
Palestinian people regarding self-determination, their
prolonged occupation of Palestinian territory since 1967,
building settlements and the annexation of territory,
including measures to change the demographic status
of the city of Al-Quads Al-Sharif.
The unprecedented violence and tensions that have
plagued the world make it less possible to achieve
peaceful settlements at the political, humanitarian,
economic and environmental levels. That has made
the current juncture historically critical, subjecting
multilateralism to a real test of either being sustainable
or facing stagnation.
The Organization has played the most prominent
role in addressing a number of growing urgent
and chronic risks through its rich historic legacy
demonstrated by accumulated experience, various tools
and multiple mechanisms that have been reflected in

23-0135647/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

12/01/2023

the Secretary-General’s report entitled Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982). That report presents an organized
assessment of the elements of breakdown as well
as elements of recovery through suggestions worth
considering, including strengthening international
cooperation as a fundamental asset that enables us to
tackle challenges and disasters at all levels — nationally,
regionally and internationally. The history of
international multilateralism has proved that lack or
regression of solidarity has had a very negative effect,
whether by urgently not addressing tensions or by
showing weakness in the implementation of resolutions
of international legitimacy. That important report also
includes a proposal that was adopted by the General
Assembly on holding the Summit of the Future in 2024
as a rare opportunity to revitalise world action to better
address various crises and increased global conflicts.

The accepted principles enshrined in the Charter
and international law include sovereign equality among
all States, non-interference in their internal affairs and
refraining from the use or threat of use of force against
the territorial integrity or the political independence of
States, as well as respecting the right of peoples to selfdetermination and resolving international disputes by
peaceful means pursuant to international law.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reiterates its
commitment to the international multilateral order and
the purposes and the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations as an agreed international covenant that
must not be subject to concessions or that its provisions
must not be undermined.

The rule of law among States is a fundamental
factor in ensuring the maintenance of international
and regional peace and security as well as achieving
sustainable development and advancing human rights.
Those are the essential purposes of the Charter that are
reaffirmed by all States Members of the United Nations.
As divisions and all kinds of threats to international
peace and security are currently on the rise, there is
a need more than ever to commit to international
legal frameworks as well as to support international
bodies that contribute to promoting the law. There is
no doubt that the United Nations system, including the
International Court of Justice, is the central international
Organization and common forum to coordinate all the
activities and views of Member States.

God Almighty said, “Fulfil the covenant; surely
the covenant shall be questioned of” (The Holy
Qur’an, XVII:34).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Ecuador, Japan,
Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland on joining the
Security Council, and to specifically congratulate
your friendly country, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council this month and on holding
this thematic open debate. We also express our
appreciation to the valuable statements and briefings
this morning by the Secretary-General, the President
of the International Court of Justice and Mr. Akande,
member of the International Law Commission.
The rule of law is one of the fundamental pillars
that underpins the foreign policy of the State of Qatar.
We have spared no effort to shore up that vital principle
as the basis for inter-State relations within the United
Nations framework. The Charter of the United Nations
constitutes the corner stone of international law, and
we therefore cannot talk about the rule of law without
stressing the importance of commitment to the purposes
of that historic document.
48/54

In the declaration on the commemoration of the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, Heads
of State and Government reaffirmed their commitment
to the provisions of international law and justice. They
also stressed that the principles of the Charter and of
international law are universal in nature and constitute
the indispensable bedrock for a more peaceful, more
equitable and more just world.

The State of Qatar has effectively sought to
advance the United Nations and has supported
the comprehensive reform of this international
Organization, where it was among the core groups that
introduced a number of draft resolutions to revitalize
the work of the General Assembly, the most recent of
which was adopted as Assembly resolution 76/262,
on convening a meeting by the General Assembly
each time a veto is exercised at the Security Council.
During previous years, the State of Qatar has spared
no effort to advance the implementation of Goal 16
of the Sustainable Development Goals, to establish
peaceful societies free of conflicts. That constitutes
the new vision of preserving the law as included in the
report of the Secretary-General entitled Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982).
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

The State of Qatar contributes to strengthening the
principle of the rule of law and countering corruption
at the regional level through the Rule of Law and
Anti-Corruption Centre, which was established in
Doha in cooperation with the United Nations.

resolve disputes; the principle of the self-determination
of peoples; respect for obligations under international
law; and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States have far greater significance than being merely
legal obligations.

In conclusion, we take this opportunity to reaffirm
the commitment of the State of Qatar, as an effective
member of the international community, to continuing
our efforts towards upholding justice and the rule of
law among all States.

I wish to point out that my country has consistently
and unconditionally respected the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States. It has amply
demonstrated in its activities at the United Nations
how dialogue and a willingness to embrace realistic
and acceptable compromises serve as a viable basis for
achieving peace and stability and economic development.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Holovka (Serbia): At the outset, I wish to
commend Japan’s initiative to hold this ministerial-level
debate on one of the crucial issues within the scope of
the topic of the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Almost eight decades following the adoption of
the constitution of the contemporary international
community, namely, the Charter of the United
Nations, its lofty goals have yet to be achieved. The
preconditions for maintaining international peace and
security are not only the absence of the use of force,
but also the creation of conditions for the maintenance
of permanent peace through respect for the rule of law
and the norms and principles of international law. All
of that is set out in the Charter and the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.
It is an undeniable fact that, 77 years since the
adoption of the Charter and 52 years since the adoption
of the Declaration, we have seen great achievements,
but also major breaches of the ideals of the muchdesired rules-based world order. Therefore, our main
challenge today is to face the situations arising out of
those breaches and to act in line with the imperative
that no condition in contravention of the Charter, as
most explicitly defined in Article 1, may be considered
legally acceptable or politically or morally justifiable.
My country, the Republic of Serbia, has had a bitter
experience in past decades and is today faced with
permanent and major breaches of the Charter of the
United Nations. Our experience clearly testifies to the
fact that the prevention of the threat or use of armed
force against the territorial integrity and political
independence of any State; the obligation to peacefully

It is for that very reason that we always advocate
and urge for respect for international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the legally binding resolution
1244 (1999), which guarantees the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia. While
constantly insisting on the role of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo and other international presences in
Kosovo and Metohija, we attach great importance to
the conduct of regular Security Council meetings on
the work of the Mission, as it is the most appropriate
way of keeping the international community informed
of the political and security situation in the province,
particularly with regard to the status of Serbs and other
non-majority communities; the state of the rule of law
and respect for human rights; the sustainable return
of internally displaced persons; and the protection of
cultural and religious heritage.
In conclusion, let me say that we consider
principled and unconditional respect for existing norms
and adherence to the rule of law to be the basis for the
central role of the Charter of the United Nations and for
more effective work of the main United Nations organs.
The Charter of the United Nations has the capacity to
remain the key instrument for resolving international
disputes and a rallying point for the international
community, thereby mitigating the perils of further
armed conflicts and the other threats and challenges
facing our civilization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia.
Mr. Vorshilov (Mongolia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important and timely open debate. I also
wish to commend the delegation of Japan for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January.

23-0135649/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

I would like to begin by reaffirming Mongolia’s
unwavering support for the rule of law and the Charter
of the United Nations. As a landlocked developing
country, the rule of law and the Charter of the United
Nations are fundamental for Mongolia and its people.
We strongly believe that they provide a solid foundation
for a strong international legal order, which is essential
for a just, peaceful and prosperous world. Therefore,
we stand firm on the purposes and principles of the
Charter. We particularly believe that the rule of law
is essential for the maintenance of international peace
and security. In that regard, Mongolia welcomes a new
vision of the rule of law that puts people at the centre, as
set out in the Secretary-General’s report Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982).
The rule of law is embedded in the Constitution
of Mongolia, which declares that democracy, justice,
freedom, equality and national unity are fundamental
principles of State activities in Mongolia. Furthermore,
Mongolia’s foreign policy concept recognizes the
universally recognized principles and norms of
international law as defined in the Charter of the
United Nations. My delegation also believes that the
implementation of Security Council resolutions is
an essential part of the rule of law. To that end, the
Government of Mongolia organized a national round
table on prioritizing items found in Mongolia’s national
action plan on resolution 1540 (2004) in December in
Ulaanbaatar. The round table contributed to setting in
motion the requisite inter-agency coordination among
the relevant entities involved in weapons of mass
destruction non-proliferation matters, with a particular
focus on strengthening Mongolia’s strategic trade
control in full alignment with the country’s national
action plan.
Furthermore, Mongolia has out in place a policy
to increase the percentage of its female peacekeepers
in United Nations peacekeeping operations to 15 per
cent, in line with resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security.
Mongolia
pursues
a
peace-loving,
open,
multi-pillar and independent foreign policy. We believe
that strengthened multilateralism is the way forward
to promote international peace and security. In that
regard, my country put forward several proposals and
initiatives, including one on a dialogue mechanism
in North-East Asia that will contribute significantly
to peace and security in the subregion. In June 2022,
Mongolia successfully hosted the seventh international
50/54

12/01/2023

conference of the Ulaanbaatar Dialogue on Northeast
Asian Security. The declaration of Mongolia’s territory
as a single-State nuclear-weapon-free zone, which
continues to contribute to achieving the objectives of
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation,
is another important initiative. Last year marked
the thirtieth anniversary of Mongolia’s nuclearweapon-free status. Given the current international
situation, our initiative is particularly pertinent today
in North-East Asia.
The Security Council has been central to
strengthening the rule of law and defending the Charter
of the United Nations. However, the Security Council
should be reformed in order to reflect the contemporary
geopolitical realities and to uphold and protect the
values and principles of the Charter. The world is
looking to the United Nations and its Member States
for that reform.
I wish to conclude by expressing Mongolia’s
determination to further contribute to promoting
and strengthening the rule of law in maintaining
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Ms. Lahmiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
delegation’s election as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council for the 2023–2024 period, as well as
on your presidency during the month of January. The
Kingdom of Morocco is convinced that Japan, with
the strength of its long diplomatic tradition and its
wisdom, will contribute positively and substantially to
the work of the Council. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, the President of the International
Court of Justice and Mr. Dapo Akande for their
respective briefings.
The spirit and the action of the United Nations is
based on its founding text — the Charter of the United
Nations, the backbone of has been and remains, first
and foremost, the maintenance of international peace
and security. It is precisely the Security Council, as the
guarantor of peace and security in the world, that bears
the primary competency in that area. In that context,
Morocco reiterates its commitment to respecting
the mandates of the Organization’s main organs
as established in the Charter. Full respect for that
separation of powers represents a sine qua non condition
for the achievement of their respective mandates.
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

Peace and security are reinforced when the
pre-eminence of the Charter of the United Nations
is respected. In that regard, Morocco reaffirms the
requirement to respect and implement the sacrosanct
principles enshrined therein, including the sovereignty
of States, their territorial integrity and national unity.
Furthermore, it goes without saying that the rule of law
goes hand in hand with respect for the primacy of the
role of the United Nations in the prevention, mediation
and peaceful and political settlement of disputes. Parties
to conflict are also bound to respect international
law, in particular international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
Morocco believes that peacekeeping operations
are a fundamental tool of the United Nations to assist,
where mandated, in strengthening the rule of law,
contributing to the establishment and maintenance of
security, opening the way for peacebuilding efforts,
protecting civilians and rebuilding communities, as
well as creating favourable conditions for lasting peace.
The rule of law is also a driver for peacebuilding and
the emergence of a lasting peace, particularly in postconflict situations.
As Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Morocco continues to work to offer the due attention,
support and advocacy at the international level to
the Central African Republic’s institutions and to
peacebuilding processes in line with the priorities
identified by and with the approval of that country,
including to strengthen the rule of law and to tackle
impunity. Thanks to the combined efforts of all
stakeholders, including the Central African authorities
and international partners, the Special Criminal Court
handed down its first ruling on 31 October 2022,
convicting three people of war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

by a will to peacefully resolve their differences by
working towards political solutions through dialogue,
by encouraging recourse to mediation, reconciliation,
conflict prevention and by adopting peaceful solutions
that are both pragmatic and achievable in line with
the resolutions of the Security Council, as the United
Nations organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating Ecuador, Japan, Malta, Mozambique and
Switzerland on assuming membership of the Security
Council and wishing them every success in discharging
their highly responsible mandate. We are also grateful
to the Japanese presidency for having organized this
important open debate.
The United Nations was established to prevent
war and human suffering by binding all its Members
through a common international legal order. As one
distinguished scholar has emphasized, the Charter of
the United Nations is not only the multilateral treaty
that created the Organization and outlined the rights
and obligations of its Member States — it is also the
constitution of the United Nations, laying down its
functions and prescribing its limitations. However,
despite their universal acceptance and binding character,
the purposes and principles of the Charter continue
to be overtly neglected, resulting in the disruption of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the
increased brutality of armed conflicts, identity-based
intolerance and growing terrorist and separatist threats.

Furthermore, Morocco supports the new vision for
the rule of law of the Secretary-General, as set out in
his report entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
aimed at strengthening the central role of the rule of
law in all of the Organization’s activities, highlighting
in particular the link between the rule of law, human
rights and development.

At the time of joining the United Nations in May
1992, Azerbaijan had already been facing an armed
aggression from neighbouring Armenia for several years,
with a notorious ethno-nationalist ideology, fabricated
historical narratives and groundless territorial claims
at its core. Contrary to Armenia’s solemn commitment
to uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular the principles relating
to the peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use
of force, it seized and has held a significant part of
Azerbaijan’s sovereign territory under occupation for
nearly 30 years.

Finally, Morocco remains convinced that, in
both their individual and collective action aimed at
addressing the multiple challenges to international
peace and security, Member States must be guided

The consequences of the aggression are
shocking — tens of thousands of people were killed; all
occupied territories were ethnically cleansed of more
than 700,000 Azerbaijanis; hundreds of cities, towns

23-0135651/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

and villages in my country were razed to the ground
and tremendous losses were inflicted on Azerbaijan’s
cultural and religious heritage and its environment.
The condemnation and binding demands contained
in resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and
884 (1993), unanimously adopted in 1993, were simply
ignored by Armenia, while mediation, led by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
failed to facilitate a negotiated settlement.
The lack of an adequate response from relevant
international institutions and double standards and
selectivity with regard to universally recognized
obligations only encouraged Armenia to continue
sticking to its guns and contributed to its sense of
permissiveness. The resumption of hostilities in
the fall of 2020 became a logical consequence of
Armenia’s decades-long impunity. Armenia’s direct
and indiscriminate attacks against populated areas
in Azerbaijan caused numerous civilian casualties
and considerable damage to civilian infrastructure.
Azerbaijan resolutely responded to protect its people
and liberate its occupied territories, acting exclusively
on its sovereign soil, in full conformity with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.
After the end of the war, domestically, Azerbaijan
prioritized the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
liberated territories and their reintegration into the
country’s economy to ensure the safe return of the
displaced population and a high standard of living. To
that end, by the decree of 7 July 2021, the President of
Azerbaijan established the Karabakh and East Zangazur
economic regions. Large-scale work continues in
those regions.
To ensure accountability for egregious violations
of international law, Azerbaijan instituted legal
proceedings within the International Court of Justice
and the European Court of Human Rights. In addition,
several individuals were prosecuted and punished for
war crimes and terrorist and mercenary activities.
At the same time, Azerbaijan initiated the process
of normalizing inter-State relations with Armenia,
based on mutual recognition and respect for each
other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
their internationally recognized borders. Despite
broad international support for that initiative and the
principles of normalization proposed by Azerbaijan,
as well as intense diplomatic efforts over the past
year, Armenia’s approaches and actions in promoting
52/54

12/01/2023

the agreed commitments have not been faithful
or straightforward.
We resolutely reject as false and misleading the
statements made by the representative of Armenia at
today’s meeting. Hackneyed fabrications and deliberate
deception are part of Armenia’s long-standing policy
of disinformation, carried out against the background
of its decades-long blatant violation of international
law. It is paradoxical that Armenia, a country that
unleashed aggression against Azerbaijan, held the
sovereign territories of my country under occupation
for almost 30 years, carried out ethnic cleansing on
a massive scale and committed other heinous crimes
during the war, now appeals to the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. However, it would be
naive to believe that Armenia suddenly realized the
imperative of respecting the norms and principles of
civilized behaviour and reconsidered its deeply rooted
stereotypes of racial hatred and superiority.
Armenia must abide by its international obligations,
completely withdraw its armed forces and illegal armed
formations from the territory of Azerbaijan, cease and
desist from territorial claims and illegal activities,
put an end to mine terrorism, shed light on the fate of
several thousand Azerbaijanis who went missing during
the conflict, redress the harm caused to Azerbaijan and
its people and concentrate on direct negotiations, with
a view to finding diplomatic solutions pertaining to
inter-State relations as soon as possible.
It is more important than ever for the entire
international community to support bilateral and
results-oriented talks between Armenia and Azerbaijan,
based on agreed principles and commitments. The
opportunity that still exists to turn the page on enmity
and establish sustainable and lasting peace must not
be missed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mrs. Maille (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Japan for convening today’s debate, as
its Prime Minister pays a visit to the Prime Minister
of Canada.
As it is the first time this year that my delegation
takes the floor in the Chamber, allow me to congratulate
the new members of the Security Council.
The fact that we are still here, late in the evening,
reflects the international community’s interest in respect
23-01356

12/01/2023

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

for the rule of law. As many speakers so eloquently said
today, the rule of law underpins the international rulesbased system, which is indispensable to international
peace and security. We all aspire to a future that is
shaped not by force but rather by peaceful relations
that benefit all our peoples. Our common vision, as
stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations, is that
respect for international law will prevent us from living
in a world where the strongest govern by force without
any regard for what would benefit everyone.
(spoke in English)
As Supreme Court of Canada Justice Rosalie
Abella recently said, we serve the law best when we do
so spontaneously, in our own way, with our own voice.
At a time when the rules-based international order is
under threat, it is more important than ever for each
of us to raise our voice. We need to speak loudly for
the rule of law, instead of rule by force, to strengthen
the bonds among all our nations in the pursuit of our
common goal of peace.
Justice remains an essential dimension of any social
contract. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
promises to promote the rule of law and provide
access to justice for all. It is in our common interests
to build a world where laws are publicly promulgated,
equally enforced and independently adjudicated via
fair, transparent, effective, non-discriminatory and
accountable justice services that are consistent with
international law and human rights obligations.
Putting people at the centre of the justice
system is a cornerstone in achieving economic and
social progress and development, while protecting
people’s rights and fundamental freedoms. Canada’s
commitment to the rule of law starts at home, but also
extends internationally.
In a global era where terrorism knows no borders,
where consequences to the environment may be
global, where some members of the Council disregard
the Charter of the United Nations — after all, Russia
seeks to destroy Ukraine’s identity as a sovereign and
independent nation — where powerful non-State or
para-State actors threaten development, Canada raises
its voice to stand by its commitment to respecting and
defending the rules that we have collectively developed
over generations to maintain international peace
and security.

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

First, Canada takes seriously its duty to fulfil in
good faith its obligations under international law, such
as the duty to settle disputes over territories through
peaceful means rather than through force or coercion.
The agreement reached between Canada and Denmark,
together with Greenland, on a long-standing maritime
and land border dispute in the Arctic, known by some
members as the Whiskey War, is a significant historic
milestone in relations between neighbours.
Secondly, Canada continues to work to promote
respect for, and protect the rights of, peoples everywhere,
as well as to advocate for accountability for the most
serious international crimes and chart a path to justice
for the victims of such atrocities. At its essence, the rule
of law also requires all persons, institutions, private
corporations, States and even non-State actors to be
accountable before the law, whether in times of peace
or conflict. As such, we remain a steadfast supporter
of international criminal justice mechanisms, such as
the International Court of Justice, the International
Criminal Court and international tribunals.
Together with the Netherlands, Canada recently
filed a joint declaration of intervention in the Ukraine v.
Russian Federation case that is before the International
Court of Justice. Canada has also stated its intention
to intervene in the Gambia v. Myanmar case, in which
both countries allege violation of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide. In addition, Canada and the Netherlands
have also invoked Syria’s responsibility for human
rights violations, holding Syria responsible for torture
under the Convention Against Torture. We also support
the various fact-finding missions and international
investigative mechanisms that are gathering reliable
evidence to support fair trials. Those processes can
contribute to the eradication of impunity.
Thirdly, Canada continues to support or pursue
efforts to protect civilians in situations of armed
conflict to better protect the people we are all meant
to serve. While we aim for peace, we have set rules
in times of war. Despite such a robust legal and policy
framework to protect civilians from the excesses of
war, civilians, particularly women and girls, continue
to bear the brunt of armed conflicts. The unwillingness
of some to respect and implement those rules, as well as
their disregard for the content and application of those
rules, has a devastating impact. Scrupulous adherence
to international humanitarian law, international

23-0135653/54

S/PV.9241 (Resumption 1)

Promotion and strengthening of the rule of law

human rights law and international refugee law is
urgently needed.
Looking towards the future as we start a new year,
and as I am one of the last speakers at this forum, let me
ask members the real question: Will the Council come
together this year to raise its voice and stand up for the
rule of law?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of North Macedonia.
Mr. Danailov Frchkoski (North Macedonia):
At the end of this long day, I will try to be as brief
as possible.
I thank the Permanent Mission of Japan for
organizing today’s meeting and for giving us an
opportunity to say a few words about an important
issue on the Security Council’s agenda.
My intervention today will touch upon the linkages
among emerging crises in international relations
and possible further development of international
law. It must be noted that the issues of conflict and
development are at the centre of the recent crisis
caused by the Russian Federation’s aggression against
Ukraine. It is of course a crisis that was initiated by
a permanent member of the Security Council against
another country and undermines the basic principles of
international law and the Charter of United Nations.
It has eroded the core of international order and
decision-making mechanisms of the United Nations
and the Security Council, threatened to undermine
the mechanisms of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and other regional organizations
and caused considerable suffering, shock and misery
in Ukraine and Europe. The 1946 Nuremberg Tribunal

54/54

12/01/2023

called the crime of aggression a supreme crime, as
it contains within itself the accumulated evil of the
whole, and its consequences are devastating. The
question now is, how might the aggression and legal
crisis be addressed as a condition for the development
of international law and, in particular, the rule of law? It
can and will be addressed as such if certain conditions
are met.
The primary condition is the decisive and
persistent will of the international community to ensure
accountability for the crime of aggression and all other
crimes, such as crimes against humanity and war crimes,
and their legal consequences. In that vein and with
regard to the recent crisis, the international community
and, the Members of the United Nations in particular,
show impressive solidarity and unity in condemning
the aggression against Ukraine, annexation of part of
Ukraine’s territory and the devastation in the country.
But critical questions remain. Will we successfully
improve international law and order to ensure justice
for Ukraine and its people and bring the perpetrators of
the war of aggression before international courts — be
it the International Criminal Court or a special tribunal
for Ukraine?
Lastly, it is important to mention that accountability
for the war of aggression and other crimes should rule
out any compromise being made at the table when
brokering a political agreement about ending the war.
Accountability is important for all of us, and it is
now a critical issue for measuring rule of law and the
credibility of international law.
I again thank the Permanent Mission of Japan for
organizing today’s successful meeting.
The meeting rose at 7.55 p.m.

23-01356
