S/PV.7359

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7359th meeting

Wednesday, 14 January 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muñoz .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chile)

Members:

Angola .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2014/694)

15-01212 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1501212*

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

In Burundi, the Peacebuilding Commission and
the country team supported the efforts of the United
Nations Office in pursuit of a more inclusive political
environment. They did this by facilitating broad
consultations with political parties and civil society.
That led to the adoption of a new electoral code and a
code of conduct for the upcoming elections.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict (S/2014/694)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil
and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/694, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict.
I wish to warmly welcome my friend the Deputy
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson,
and I now give him the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to brief
the Council on the Secretary-General’s report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2014/694).
The report reminds us that peacebuilding is at the core
of United Nations aims and ambitions. The challenges
and responses described in the report will directly
affect the future of individuals, communities and
societies and their chances of living in peace. I would
like to highlight five key features of the report.
First, peacebuilding is most effective when
political, security and development actors support
a common, comprehensive and clear strategy for
consolidating peace. We have seen examples of this in
Guinea and Burundi. In Guinea, the United Nations
country team supported an interparty agreement on
parliamentary elections that was facilitated by the
then Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa, Said Djinnit. The team held public
meetings with local political leaders and helped train
election monitors.

2/24

14/01/2015

Secondly, strong and well-functioning institutions
that are central to peacebuilding must based on effective
and inclusive political agreements. Such agreements
provide legitimacy and support for instititional
development and reform. Without inclusive agreements,
political divisions may persist and control of the State
may remain contested. Under such circumstances, let us
admit that nationally led peacebuilding strategies have
a limited potential. We have seen that in South Sudan,
where extensive investments in institution-building
were lost when weak and unstable political agreements
between different factions resulted in a tragic relapse
into conflict.
Thirdly, peacebuilding requires sustained international
political, technical and financial support. Regretfully,
we are seeing such gaps in several places, particularly
where the establishment of basic Government functions
and the provision of social services are required to
sustain peace. The Peacebuilding Fund can partially
address the financial gaps in the short term, but it
remains problematic to ensure the necessary largerscale and longer-term assistance and support. I
encourage the Peacebuilding Commission to continue
its efforts to mobilize the support of Member States for
the United Nations missions and mandates. Groups of
friends and contact groups can play an important role.
Also, compacts between post-conflict States and key
international partners can align international support
with national priorities, as they did in Sierra Leone and
Somalia.
Fourthly, regional actors and neighbouring
countries, working together with the United Nations,
can play a critical role in creating an environment
conducive to sustainable peace. The Peacebuilding
Commission can help support such efforts, as it has
done recently in the Central African Republic and
Guinea-Bissau, by convening meetings with regional
organizations, neighbouring States and international
partners. This underlines how conflicts in today’s
world are increasingly taking on a regional dimension,
which I am sure Council membes have noted in their
deliberations on many issues. That regional dimension,

15-01212

14/01/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

in my view, should be better reflected in how we in the
future deal generally with both conflict-resolution and
post-conflict peacebuilding.
Fifthly, promoting inclusion means that we must
ensure women’s equal participation in post-conflict
political and development processes. The SecretaryGeneral’s report details innovative approaches on the
part of Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kyrgyzstan and Liberia,
including an initiative in Guinea called the Women’s
Situation Room, which provided support to a network
of local women’s organizations, enabling women to play
a crucial role as election monitors. It also facilitated
inter-party trust and strengthened women’s political
participation. We need more initiatives like that, and I
should like to say that this could be very valuable this
year, as we mark the twentieth year since the holding
of the important Fourth World Conference on Women,
held in Beijing.
I would like to present the Council with some
reflections and thoughts on the important review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture that was
launched by the General Assembly and the Security
Council last month. As some here may recall — including
you, Mr. President, in your capacity as Permanent
Representative of Chile at the time — it was my privilege,
as President of the General Assembly 10 years ago, to
be part of the creation of the peacebuilding structures:
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office. Council
members may recall that this work was in response
to the troubling phenomenon at the time of frequent
relapses into conflict.
Since then, we can see that peacebuilding efforts are
more necessary than ever. In the recent past, the Central
African Republic and South Sudan have tragically
fallen back into conflict. The three Ebola-affected
countries — Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone — are
all on the Peacebuilding Commission’s agenda. In
addition to the large and tragic loss of life, the epidemic
has also had a dramatic impact on social cohesion and
State institutions. As the Peacebuilding Commission
noted in its early meetings on the epidemic, there is a
need for comprehensive support that would ensure the
resilience of state institutions and rapid recovery.
The United Nations involvement in peacebuilding
has evolved considerably since 2005, with broader
mandates and more actors working in ever more
difficult environments. Our peacekeepers and special
political missions are often in these situations called

S/PV.7359

upon to support inclusive political processes and to
build effective rule of law and security institutions,
together with United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes.
The Peacebuilding Commission was intended
to be a diverse, flexible and dynamic political forum
that would focus sustained international attention on
the challenges facing countries at risk of relapse into
violence. Although the Commission has made some
important progress, many now agree that its structure
and working methods need review, improvement and
adaptation to a rapidly changing environment. In that
regard, I should like to commend the efforts of the
Permanent Representative of Brazil, Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, who, as Chair, of the
Peacebuilding Commission, has set the direction
in a very positive way, as have the new head of the
Peacebuilding Support Office, Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco, who is present behind me, and his predecessors.
We are on the right track, and I think we need to go into
this work with an open mind.
We need a forum that can act quickly to mobilize
the collective support of Member States for the
United Nations mandates and missions. We also
need to consider the circumstances in which the
Peacebuilding Commission can be particularly useful.
A more flexible, dynamic and strategically oriented
Commission could be more relevant to a broader range
of situations in today’s world. These and other ideas
are included in the United Nations system’s input to the
review. I hope Council members will give them their
serious consideration. The United Nations system is
committed to increasing its support to and engagement
with a dynamic, flexible and focused Peacebuilding
Commission.
The Council’s review will coincide with the
Secretary-General’s review of peace operations and
the global study to assess progress in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). The work and outcomes of
these three reviews and their follow-up should be
complementary and, in my view, mutually reinforcing.
These reviews come at a time of complex threats to
peace, security and development. They provide us with
an important opportunity to sharpen and reshape our
thinking and our actions.
We owe it to the people we serve to ensure that
we are bold, ambitious and, above all, effective in
our approach to modern-day peacebuilding. I urge
Member States to be open, candid and constructive in

15-012123/24

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

their assessment of the peacebuilding challenges and
potentials. I would add that, when we look at the life
of a conflict, we have a tendency to focus on its middle
section — when it is in the CNN stage, the stage of
suffering, when urgent decisions are being taken on
peacekeeping operations. I think we all need to consider
extending that attention to the pre-stage and the poststage. In the life of a conflict, we should start to act
when we discover the first vibrations on the ground.
And then, at the end of the conflict, with ceasefires
and so forth, as with a convalescing patient we need to
know that there is post-conflict work to be done so that
we do not relapse into a vicious circle.
We need a solid commitment from all sides to fulfil
the original vision for the peacebuilding structures
and to improve the United Nations system’s support
for countries emerging from conflict. This could make
the crucial difference between peace or continuing
conflict for millions of people around the world. This is
an opportunity that the United Nations and its Member
States should not miss.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his statement and for his
kind words of friendship.
I now give the floor to Mr. Patriota.
Mr. Patriota (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I
should like to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
present our report to the Council under your presidency.
(spoke in English)
I thank the delegation of Chile, in its capacity
as President of the Security Council, for inviting
me to address the Council in my capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and for its
commitment to advancing the Council’s consideration
of post-conflict peacebuilding. I am pleased to recall,
Sir, that the first report (S/2009/304) of the SecretaryGeneral on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
was presented during your leadership of the PBC in
2009. The periodic reporting to the Security Council
and the General Assembly on peacebuilding, which
that report initiated, offers an opportunity for Member
States and United Nations operational entities to assess
the coherence and effectiveness of our efforts to prevent
the outbreak of conflict and its recurrence, as well as to
consolidate stability in post-conflict situations.
The release of the fourth report on peacebuilding
in the aftermath of conflict (S/2014/694) and its

4/24

14/01/2015

consideration by the Council today is particularly
significant, coming with the launching of the
10-year review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. To that end, the Commission is pleased
to note that, on 15 December, the Security Council and
the General Assembly decided to endorse the terms of
reference for the review and to formally initiate the
process. As indicated in the terms of reference, the
review will take the original vision and motivation
behind the establishment of the PBC, the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) and the Peacebuilding Support Office
(PBSO) as its starting point.
The exercise will critically assess the developments
since 2005 in United Nations, global and regional
peacebuilding-related approaches and practices. The
review will further identify areas of progress and
remaining gaps in international assistance to countries
emerging from conflict. The terms of reference
stipulate that the review will be grounded in specific
country studies, which will be conducted in Burundi,
the Central African Republic, Sierra Leone, South
Sudan and Timor-Leste. That will help the Security
Council and the General Assembly place the challenges,
needs and aspirations of the countries emerging from
conflict at the core of our future efforts. Adjustments
and improvements resulting from the outcome of the
review should aim at enabling the PBC, the PBF and the
PBSO to realize their full potential, and for the broader
peacebuilding architecture to become more effective
and relevant. It should also propose practical ways to
strengthen and improve the Commission’s working
relationship with the Council.
The Commission also takes note of the SecretaryGeneral’s communication of the United Nations system’s
collective input to the review. That input signals the
potential for joint ownership of the review’s outcome
by both Member States and operational entities of the
United Nations. We should aim for greater coherence
and complementarity between the United Nations
political and operational response to post-conflict
situations, as well as improving coherence in the
overall international response. That is an imperative
that, unfortunately, continues to elude our collective
efforts. The broad scope for the 2015 review points
to Member States acknowledgement that the political
and operational components of a broader United
Nations and global peacebuilding architecture must
work in synergy. Therefore, we welcome the Council’s
reiteration in the draft presidential statement prepared
for adoption today that the analysis underpinning the
15-01212

14/01/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

2015 review should also be undertaken in conjunction
and synergy with the upcoming Secretary-General’s
review of peace operations.
I strongly recommend to all a thorough reading of the
Secretary-General’s report, which I found to be written
in a particularly useful, informative and substantive
manner. The core messages presented in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict are reflected in the terms of reference of the
2015 review. For instance, both documents point to
the importance of further sharpening the tools at the
disposal of the United Nations with a view to preventing
relapse into violent conflict.
The crises in the Central African Republic, South
Sudan and Libya, as well as the risks posed by the
Ebola crisis, serve to remind us that our response must
be multifaceted, carefully sequenced and sustained
over the long term. Attention and support to nationally
owned and inclusive political and socioeconomic
development and institution-building processes should
be prioritized.
In my intervention before the Council on 19 March
2014 (see S/PV.7143), I noted the centrality of building
peace as a central objective of the United Nations
peace and security architecture. However, despite its
importance, it is still not granted the sustained attention
and commitment that is required by the international
community to meet the complex and long-term
challenges to sustainable peace. The Peacebuilding
Fund provides catalytic funding in many situations,
but that is insufficient to overcome the longer-term and
larger scale gaps in financing and capacity that put our
initial investments in peacemaking and peacekeeping
at serious risk. Meanwhile, the PBC continues to focus
its attention not only on the six countries on its agenda,
but also on cross-cutting issues such as illicit financial
flows, resource mobilization, gender, and food security.
The PBSO remains a valuable source of expertise and
support for our work, and I join the Deputy SecretaryGeneral in commending the very able work done under
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
and his team.
The recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa has
demonstrated the frailty of peacebuilding gains and
the slow pace of institutional strengthening in the
aftermath of conflict, where investment in national
and local institutions is insufficient. The Commission
requested the Secretary-General to undertake a
multifaceted assessment of the long-term implications

S/PV.7359

of the Ebola crisis on political and security institutions,
as well as on social cohesion and economic recovery, in
the three affected countries. Through that assessment,
the Commission hopes to draw the international
community’s attention to the nature of the challenges
facing countries emerging from conflict, especially
when their nascent institutions and recovering societies
and economies are confronted with unexpected
shocks. The Commission also hopes that the outcome
of the assessment will shed light on the scope of the
technical, financial and political support required for
those countries to ensure their continued progress and
resilience.
Let me share with the Council an informal
conversation I had with the Special Envoy and Head
of the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response, David Nabarro, on the situation in the three
most affected countries, which happen to be on the
agenda of the PBC, according to whom the impact of the
outbreak would have been even more devastating had it
not been for the work that the Commission undertook
in the past years, and continues to carry out. Allow me
also to remind Security Council members that a first
early-warning of the peace and security implications
of the epidemic was made through a statement issued
by the PBC in August 2014, thereby illustrating the
preventive role played by the Commission.
The drawdown of Security Council-mandated
missions represents a milestone that brings to light
the challenges of long-term peace consolidation
in countries emerging from conflict. An adequate
transition from emergency to development remains
essential but, to a great extent, is still an ideal fraught
with challenges. The change in the nature of the
United Nations presence and mandate on the ground
in Burundi and Sierra Leone, and soon in Liberia,
calls for calibrated yet sustained attention to ongoing
political and socioeconomic challenges associated with
nascent national institutions, governance practices
and development. On that topic, I strongly recommend
the useful report recently issued by the PBC Working
Group on Lessons Learned under the very competent
guidance of the Permanent Representative of Japan,
which can be found on the Commission’s website.
Security Council mandates have increasingly
emphasized the necessity of providing appropriate
support to the Governments of countries emerging
from conflict in order to establish sustainable
peace. Early investment in peacebuilding activities,

15-012125/24

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

including security sector and justice reform as well as
socioeconomic development, is a necessary complement
to political and security-focused mandates. As the
Secretary-General’s report makes clear, however, there
continues to be serious gaps in the implementation
of those aspects of Security Council-mandated
missions. Greater financial and technical support for
peacebuilding in collaboration with international
financial institutions and regional and subregional
organizations is necessary for the fulfilment of those
ambitions.
Securing predictable and sustainable financing
continues to be a major challenge for countries emerging
from conflict, limiting the provision of basic services,
economic opportunities and the rebuilding of State
institutions. At the same time, such countries are most
affected by illicit financial flows and by unbalanced
contractual arrangements for the exploitation of their
natural wealth. The Commission made that particular
challenge a priority in 2014. There are obvious gaps in
international mechanisms to ensure timely, targeted and
sustained support for countries emerging from conflict
in the area of domestic resource mobilization, including
curbing illicit financial flows and negotiating fair and
balanced natural resources contracts. The Commission
will continue to support regional and national efforts
aimed at catalysing greater international commitment
to address that challenge. Let me call attention to the
forthcoming report under the authority of the Highlevel Panel chaired by former President of South Africa
Thabo Mbeki, which will be of special interest in that
regard.
Finally, the Commission wishes to underscore
the importance that we must continue to attach to
the contribution of women to building and sustaining
peace. While they endure the tragic consequences of
violent conflicts, women are also strategic agents for
transformation and emancipation in post-conflict
societies. In that regard, the Commission is of the
view that women’s empowerment greatly contributes
to enhancing inclusivity and cohesion in post-conflict
situations.
Our collective understanding of post-conflict
peacebuilding has continued to evolve over the past
few years. Perhaps many of us, Member States and
operational entities, tend to define peacebuilding in
terms of certain mandated tasks or programmatic
activities, but experience generated through years
of engagement with countries at different stages

6/24

14/01/2015

of their post-conflict struggle confirms otherwise.
Peacebuilding is indeed the political framework
within which many of the mandates and activities
must be conceived, sequenced and implemented. It
rests on a delicate balance between State-centric and
people-centred approaches to rebuilding institutions,
strengthening social cohesion and regenerating a sense
of an inclusive and nationally owned vision of the
country’s future. As noted by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, peacebuilding is at the core of the United
Nations ambitions in countries affected by conflict.
The main conclusions from the Secretary-General’s
report before us today offer us a unique opportunity to
renew our commitment to the peoples in the countries
emerging from conflict who struggle to chart a new
course towards a better future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Patriota for the important information he
has given us.
Following consultations among the members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf:
“The Security Council recalls its resolutions
and the statements of its President on post-conflict
peacebuilding, in particular S/PRST/2009/23,
S/PRST/2010/20, S/PRST/2011/2, S/PRST/2011/4
and S/PRST/2012/29, and reaffirms the critical
importance of peacebuilding as the foundation for
sustainable peace and development in the aftermath
of conflict.
“The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the Secretary-General’s report
on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2014/694) and the country-specific evidence of
impacts and lessons learned it contains.
“The Security Council recognizes that
peacebuilding is an important element of the
United Nations efforts in countries emerging from
conflict, and reaffirms that sustainable peace and
security requires an integrated sustained approach
based on coherence among political, security and
developmental approaches, which are essential for
effectively improving respect for human rights,
advancing gender equality, strengthening the rule
of law and advancing economic development in
countries emerging from conflict, recognizing
the specific needs and situation of the country
concerned.

15-01212

14/01/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

S/PV.7359

“The Security Council underlines that the
primary responsibility for successful peacebuilding
lies with national Governments and relevant
local actors, including civil society, in countries
emerging from conflict.

peacebuilding capacity of the United Nations
system, inter alia, by strengthening the performance
and impact of the peacebuilding architecture with
a view to realizing its full potential in line with the
agreed terms of reference.

“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of inclusivity in advancing national
peacebuilding processes and objectives in order to
ensure that the needs of all segments of society are
taken into account.

“The Security Council underlines the need
for the review of the peacebuilding architecture
to be undertaken in conjunction and synergy with
the upcoming Secretary General’s review of peace
operations.

“The Security Council reaffirms that national
ownership and leadership are key to establishing
sustainable peace and reaffirms also the primary
responsibility of national authorities in identifying
their priorities and strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding.

“The Security Council recognizes the
continuing need to increase women’s participation
and the consideration of gender-related issues
in all discussions pertinent to the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict, the maintenance of
peace and security, and post-conflict peacebuilding.

“The Security Council underscores that
peacebuilding, in particular institution-building,
the extension of State authority and the
re-establishment of core public administration
functions, requires sustained international and
national attention and financial and technical
support in order to effectively build and sustain
peace in countries emerging from conflict. The
Security Council recognizes that the gaps in the
provision of rapid and sustained financial support
continue to hamper peacebuilding efforts. The
Security Council welcomes the role played by the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund in filling these
gaps and urges Member States to contribute to the
Fund and other relevant multi-donor trust funds
that support countries emerging from conflict in
order to replenish them.

“The Security Council recalls its resolution
1645 (2005) and acknowledges the important
role of the Peacebuilding Commission in the
peacebuilding architecture and stresses its
willingness to strengthen its links with the
Peacebuilding Commission by, inter alia, making
greater use of its advisory role. The Council calls
upon the Commission to make further efforts in
promoting improved coherence and alignment of
partners’ policies around national peacebuilding
strategies and priorities, and ensuring regional
and international support and effective responses
through engagement and establishing partnerships
with
international
financial
institutions,
neighbouring countries and regional and
subregional organizations. The Security Council
underscores the importance of the regional aspect
of peacebuilding and the need for engaging and
collaborating with regional actors in policy-related
and country-specific issues in the advice provided
by the Peacebuilding Commission.

“The Security Council recognizes the recent
successes in collective peacebuilding efforts of
the United Nations and the wider international
community and also acknowledges the setbacks
and the challenges that the United Nations system,
including the Council and the wider international
community, have faced in preventing or reducing
the risks of relapse into conflict. The Security
Council expresses its determination to continue
to take into consideration the underlying causes of
relapse into conflict.
“The Security Council looks forward to the
outcome of the 2015 review of the peacebuilding
architecture and to the consideration of its
recommendations in order to improve the

“The Security Council notes that the
Peacebuilding Commission’s advisory role to the
Council is particularly appreciated in view of its
contribution to the implementation of the Council’s
mandates on the ground in countries on its agenda.
“The Security Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to brief the Council by December 2015
and to submit a report to the Council no later
than December 2016 on further United Nations
peacebuilding efforts in the aftermath of conflict,
including progress towards increasing the

15-012127/24

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

participation of women in peacebuilding, taking
into consideration the views of the Peacebuilding
Commission.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/2.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile.
At the outset, I thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson — who has been a great friend of
mine for quite some time now, since the Peacebuilding
Commission was established — for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in
the aftermath of conflict (S/2014/694). I also thank
the Permanent Representative of Brazil, Ambassador
Antonio Patriota, in his capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, who led the preparatory
process for the review of the peacebuilding architecture
that will be carried out this year.
When the first report (S/2009/304) was submitted
in 2009, as Ambassador Patriota rightly pointed out,
I was Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Since the Commission’s establishment in 2005, as can
be seen from the reports, we have learned to manage
conflicts better and made progress developing criteria
and arrangements to make the work of the United
Nations system more efficient. Cases such as that of
Sierra Leone, which is categorized as a post-conflict
country, show that through the coordinated work
of national, political, economic and social players,
supported by the United Nations system and regional
and subregional bodies, the foundations for lasting
peace and development can be laid.
Despite those efforts, conflict still arises, sometimes
with alarming frequency, intensity and diversity of
players, because its causes — in particular, in our view,
exclusion and inequality — not only endure, but have
intensified in many communities. Therefore the role of
the Commission is as important today as it was a decade
ago. Its core mission is to ensure that conflict-affected
countries achieve lasting peace and do relapse into a
spiral of violence and confrontation. We appreciate its
work done and acknowledge its political nature, which
requires leadership, the multidimensional support of
the international community, and a favourable regional
environment.
National ownership, we believe, is crucial
for the acceptance and viability of post-conflict
processes and the commitment of national players
8/24

14/01/2015

to its successful outcome in the long-term. That task
requires sustained financial, technical and political
support. The commitment of the World Bank and
other regional and subregional financial institutions
should be enhanced and coordinated, as should the
actions of participating States. That support should be
viewed not as complementary to the national economy,
but as a contribution to the peacebuilding process.
Accordingly, my country, Chile, contributes annually
to the Peacebuilding Fund; in 2014, we contributed the
modest sum of $300,000 to the fight against Ebola, an
epidemic that has affected post-conflict countries in
political transition.
It is noteworthy that the report recognizes the
essential role played by women in peacebuilding
processes, especially since it is girls and women who
are primarily affected by armed conflicts. In that
connection, women should be able to participate on an
equal footing in all matters related to those processes.
Some very positive results have been achieved, and
more could be done if a larger share of the Fund’s
resources were devoted to projects designed to promote
the empowerment of women and gender equality.
In addition, we believe that the review of the
peacebuilding architecture to be conducted this year
will provide an opportunity to build on the experience
gained, and to considerably improve the capacity of
the United Nations system to support those processes
and make progress in conflict prevention. We are
also convinced of the need for synergy between that
review and those of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions undertaken by
the Secretary-General; the Council’s 2015 high-level
assessment of progress made in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000); and the global study on the
implementation of the said resolution.
Experience shows that it is vital to strengthen
institution-building processes based on political
systems that enjoy civic legitimacy, giving priority to
the essential functions of public administration. The
establishment of security and rule of law institutions,
whose mission is to protect civil society, can promote
the implementation of peace agreements, national
reconciliation processes and transparent and verifiable
elections. In that context, the Secretary-General’s
Rights Up Front initiative is an important tool for
evaluating the way in which peacebuilding processes
protect and respect international standards of human
rights and humanitarian law.

15-01212

14/01/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The identification of the factors that gave rise
to confrontation is essential to peacebuilding. It is
necessary to understand what happened and why
in order to restore institutional order, legitimized
by inclusive political agreements, and to ensure its
viability. Without such analysis, it is difficult to predict
the outbreak of a conflict or, once it has begun, to
devise and implement long- and medium-term actions
that address the root causes and ensure that there is
no recurrence. Exclusion in all its forms, poverty,
marginality and the lack of education and opportunities
are fertile ground for outbreaks of violence. If
peacebuilding actions acknowledge that reality and are
undertaken in that broader context, the efforts of States
and the United Nations system will achieve their goals
of peace and development.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the other members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Eliasson and Ambassador Patriota for their
briefings. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on progress in United Nations peacebuilding
efforts in the aftermath of conflict (S/2014/694). The
report indicates that, while progress has been made in
United Nations peacebuilding efforts, challenges still
remain. I would like to briefly touch on three aspects of
the report: the participation of women in peacebuilding,
the need for an integrated approach to peacebuilding
among United Nations entities, and developing lessons
on good practices in peacebuilding.
With regard to the participation of women in
peacebuilding, Nigeria shares the view of the SecretaryGeneral that the promotion of inclusive politics requires
that attention be paid to the concerns of women in all
stages of peacemaking and peacebuilding. We welcome
the priority that the Secretary-General accords to the
advancement of women’s participation in post-conflict
political and development processes. It is significant
that over the past five years more women have been
appointed as mediators and envoys by the SecretaryGeneral. Since women are disproportionately affected
by conflicts, it is appropriate that women mediators,
who can relate better to them, be involved in the
search for peace. Increased United Nations support to
women’s civil society organizations involved in postconflict political participation and the progress made
in the funding of gender-responsive peacebuilding

S/PV.7359

programmes are key indicators of the United Nations
efforts in enhancing women’s participation in
peacebuilding. We commend the use of a gender
marker to track the allocation of funds to women’s
empowerment and gender-equality. We encourage the
Peacebuilding Fund to intensify its efforts at reaching
the 15-per cent target for the allocation of funds to
projects having as their main objective the promotion
of women’s empowerment and gender equality.
Nigeria recognizes the difficulty of adopting an
integrated approach to peacebuilding among United
Nations entities having different mandates. We
therefore see merit in having one set of objectives
and a single vision to guide the actors on the ground
towards the consolidation of peace. That calls for closer
coordination and integration between the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representatives, Special Envoys
and Special Advisers on the one hand, and the United
Nations country teams on the other. Nigeria commends
the Peacebuilding Fund for its efforts in promoting this
integrated approach.
Concerning the development of lessons on good
practices in peacebuilding, we note that there are
challenges in obtaining comprehensive information
on the impact of programmes. That in turn has made
it difficult to quantify the impact of peacebuilding.
Nigeria believes that it is important, and indeed crucial,
for the United Nations to be able to assess the impact
of peacebuilding in order to identify gaps that need to
be filled. We therefore encourage the Organization to
take measures that would help it improve its capacity
to evaluate the impact of peacebuilding programmes.
Nigeria recognizes the importance of the ongoing
reforms by the Peacebuilding Commission. The 2015
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
should help us to identify areas of progress and gaps
in international assistance to countries emerging from
conflict. Nigeria welcomes the emphasis placed by the
Commission on forging greater regional coherence as
a critical factor in helping countries sustain peace and
avoid a relapse into conflict. We share the Commission’s
view on the importance of the regional dimension of
peacebuilding. That calls for closer engagement and
collaboration with regional actors. We believe that
this regional dimension deserves attention in the 2015
review process.
Finally, Nigeria would like to reaffirm its strong
support for the Peacebuilding Commission. The role
of the Commission in the peacebuilding architecture

15-012129/24

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

remains crucial. Its efforts at attaining peace and
inclusive development in the aftermath of conflict are
yielding results. We call on Member States and other
stakeholders to strengthen their engagement with the
Commission with a view toward improving its capacity
to build peace and promote development in countries
coming out of conflict.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson for his briefing, as well as Ambassador
Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I would also like to thank the Chilean presidency of the
Security Council for taking the initiative to convene
this important and welcome debate on a complex issue
to which we have not found a satisfactory response
despite the collective efforts we have made since 2005.
Ten years after the establishment of the
peacebuilding architecture, clear progress has been
made, on the one hand, towards better understanding of
the specific challenges facing post-conflict countries,
and on the other, towards better coordination of various
international efforts, particularly those of the United
Nations entities in the countries concerned. The report
of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict (S/2014/694), which is the basis
for our discussion, cites numerous examples in which
the peacebuilding architecture has actually improved
situations.
Yet, progress can still be made in our collective
efforts. The capacities to mobilize long-term resources
and to coordinate different donors in support of
strategies defined together with the host States remain
a challenge for which we still need to find a satisfactory
solution. In the case of countries emerging from conflict
that relapse into critical situations, we see these as
failures that challenge us to do better.
In this regard, France supports the review of the
peacebuilding architecture to be carried out in 2015. The
review will be held together with the strategic review
of peacekeeping operations. That these two events will
be conducted concurrently is particularly appropriate.
In short, with the help of these two reviews, all
modalities of United Nations intervention in countries
in crisis or emerging from crisis will be critically
considered throughout the entire lifecycle of a conflict,
as the Deputy Secretary-General said earlier — from
conflict prevention to post-conflict stabilization, via
the peacekeeping and transition-management phases.

10/24

14/01/2015

These beneficial exercises are welcome. In this context,
I would like to draw particular attention to three crucial
ideas.
First, there is a need to be firmly anchored in
the field and local conditions in order to provide an
appropriate response. We see it as very positive that
the method for reviewing peacebuilding uses countryspecific case studies. Similarly, France believes that
it is in the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission that the real work can be
accomplished, with the determined commitment of
ambassadors in the configurations that they chair
and in operational meetings on specific and concrete
issues that will enable follow-up of projects. While
organizational considerations are important, they must
not distract us from the heart of the matter — the work
to be done on the countries on the agenda.
Second is the issue of articulation among the
various missions and how they are sequenced. This
issue is at the heart and intersection of the two reviews
in progress. It is crucial. France thanks Japan for its
report on the lessons learned in the transitions between
missions. Our thinking and efforts in this area need to
be continued. This reflection on the sequencing and
prioritization of international action applies not only
to the succession of different missions, but also within
missions in the implementation of their mandates.
This is what France has done with its partners within
the framework of the phased approach mandated
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
Third and last is the issue of coherence of
international actions and the need to ensure a longterm commitment in support of national processes.
Institutional reconstruction, restoring functioning
State structures throughout the territory, national
reconciliation, transitional justice, and economic
recovery and development are challenges that take
years or even decades to address. Managing these
emergencies is one thing, but meeting these long-term
challenges is another, and our progress in these areas
has been immense. In this regard, the involvement of
regional and subregional organizations in peacebuilding
is a major challenge.
In conclusion, France fully supportsAmbassador
Patriota’s earlier comments advocating women’s roles
as a factor for social stability and cohesion that needs
to be a critical pillar of the brainstorming under way.

15-01212

14/01/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome you, Sir, to the presidency of the
Security Council and thank the delegation of Chile for
organizing this meeting on the subject of peacebuilding
in the aftermath of conflict. We would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing
and Ambassador Patriota of Brazil for his effective
leadership of the Peacebuilding Commission in 2014.
The primary aims of States engulfed in the hot
phase of conflict is to strengthen national reconciliation
and to restore safe and favourable living conditions
for the entire population of the country. That is
absolutely necessary in order to avoid a relapse into
armed conflict. It is particularly important in that
such countries frequently have limited human and
institutional resources to address the entire range of
problems in the areas of security, law and order, social
and economic development and other pressing issues.
At the same time, we believe that it is counterproductive
to overemphasize, in the recovery context, gender and
human rights issues that have no direct bearing on the
root causes of the crisis situation.
Given the scope of the peacebuilding tasks,
of particular importance is the assistance of the
international community in building the national
capacities of post-conflict States. Moreover, while
it is critical and frequently fundamental to provide
outside peacebuilding assistance to national efforts,
it is imperative to uphold such fundamental principles
as the consent of the recipient States and respect for
national sovereignty and political independence.
Governments must determine their own priorities when
carrying out reform, coordinate them and bear primary
responsibility for the outcome.
As experience shows, in order to achieve and truly
sustain long-term results, we must take into account
the country-specific context and the root causes of
the emergence of a crisis situation. Otherwise, relapse
into conflict is practically unavoidable, as we saw, for
example, in the Central African Republic and the South
Sudan. It is no secret that in those instances priorities
were imposed from the outside for the activities of the
entities involved, with insufficient justification. There
was a diffuse and irrational use of limited funds and
resources, as well as an encroachment upon the remit
of other players.
The United Nations clearly has a particular role
to play in coordinating international efforts in post-

S/PV.7359

conflict recovery. To date, however, as the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/694) rightly points out, the
activities of the entire team of peacebuilders — including
the Secretariat, the programmes and funds, the Member
States, regional organizations and international
financial institutions — are fragmented. There is
inefficient division of labour, and there are gaps in the
mechanisms of financing. Many early peacekeeping
issues are also currently included in the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In carrying
out their primary task of facilitating peace processes,
United Nations peacekeepers also play a critical role
in creating favourable conditions for providing broader
peacebuilding assistance. However, peacebuilding is
a long road that goes far beyond the framework of a
time-bound peacekeeping operation.
We see the Peacebuilding Fund as an important
mechanism of emergency funding that contributes to
the involvement of long-term mechanisms in assistance
to recovery and development. My country backs up its
position with a $2 million annual contribution to its
budget.
Our global Organization is entering a very important
anniversary year. A slew of review processes have
been initiated with a view to objectively examining
various areas of the activity of the United Nations,
and peacebuilding is no exception. We believe that the
upcoming review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, as approved by Member States, will
focus on affirming the Commission, with its unique
intergovernmental nature, as its central element, and
on proposing concrete, achievable recommendations
for improving that architecture, with strict regard for
the prerogatives of the principal organs of the United
Nations, as enshrined in its Charter.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela is honoured to see a Latin American
country presiding over the Security Council.
Building peace in countries emerging from
armed conflict is one of the fundamental tasks of the
United Nations system and deserves our full attention.
Venezuela would like to thank Ambassador Antonio
Patriota for his briefing, and we acknowledge the
important work the Peacebuilding Commission is
doing. We would also like to take this opportunity to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
statement.

15-0121211/24

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Venezuela acknowledges the United Nations
system’s peacebuilding efforts, including its recent
successes in countries such as Sierra Leone. At the
same time, however, we are aware of the current
setbacks and challenges in other countries, such as
the Central African Republic, which has reminded
us that dealing with the underlying reasons for the
emergence of conflicts and countries’ relapse into
them continues to be a significant challenge to the
system. My country supports the decision to evaluate
the performance of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. In that regard, we reaffirm the importance
of keeping the centrality of the principles of national
sovereignty and self-determination constantly in mind.
We also recognize the need for improving women’s
participation in peacebuilding activities and taking into
account their ability to contribute, among other things,
to expanding access and support for women at the local
level, facilitating the submission of complaints, and
enhancing women’s empowerment in affected areas.
Venezuela has contributed significantly to
peacebuilding efforts in Haiti since the earthquake that
devastated our sister nation in 2010. Besides forgiving
a debt of more than $395 million, we contributed more
than $3 billion in aid to Haiti’s recovery between 2010
and 2014, while always respecting Haiti’s own primary
role in peacebuilding and the Haitian Government’s
fundamental authority in defining the purposes and
objectives of the peacebuilding process. Our efforts
have focused on strengthening the institutional capacity
of the State in the areas of development, inclusiveness
and human rights.
Peacebuilding can succeed when the underlying
causes of conflicts are properly addressed. Sustainable
development and putting an end to every sort of
exclusion and discrimination are essential conditions
for a peaceful and prosperous society.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela awaits
the report on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture with anticipation, and we
trust that the process will produce concrete initiatives
aimed at dealing with the reasons for the emergence
of conflicts and countries’ relapse into them, including
poverty, inequality, the legacy of colonialism, foreign
interference, economic dependence, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and the asymmetries of
power that govern contract negotiations for extracting
such resources.

12/24

14/01/2015

In conclusion, Mr. President, Venezuela would like
to take this opportunity to affirm its full support to you
during your presidency and to wish you every success.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to warmly thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson and Mr. Antonio Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for their thorough
briefings. I would also like to welcome Mr. Heraldo
Muñoz, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile, and to
thank him for presiding over this important meeting on
post-conflict peacebuilding.
This is a particularly important year for the role
of the United Nations in peacebuilding. There will
be full reviews of peacekeeping operations and
the peacebuilding architecture, which leads us to
emphasize that these two complementary processes are
indeed inseparable when it comes to ending violence
and enabling countries emerging from conflict to
find a path to lasting peace. Peacebuilding requires
comprehensive efforts that include both international
and regional support, as well as the cooperation of the
Governments and institutions of the countries emerging
from conflict. That cooperation is necessary not only
to enable the work to get done, but above all because
the countries themselves are essential partners in
peacebuilding. Those countries must therefore provide
the necessary tools and contributions, to the degree
they are able, to help the United Nations entities comply
with their mandates and implement their programmes.
Peace consolidation, which can also be described
as a period of reconstruction and rebuilding, is by
its nature a civilian-oriented operation employing a
relatively small staff, which enables such missions to
be more easily accepted by societies emerging from
conflict. They therefore assume the different role of
understanding the specific features and nature of those
societies and tackling many different areas, which
distinguishes them from peacekeeping operations. In
practice, they help to strengthen political processes
and economic activity, improve infrastructure and
human rights situations, and develop plans for
services designed to improve living conditions. It is
therefore essential to take into account the concerns
and aspirations of countries in conflict situations, as
well the regional environment, particularly since some
countries are dealing with issues that are a threat to
their neighbours, too.

15-01212

14/01/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The review of the peacebuilding architecture should
take into consideration the principles of flexibility and
adaptability, in view of countries’ different needs,
the challenges facing them and their policies, and the
speed with which they can be implemented in different
countries, particularly when it comes to transferring
power to the local authorities. We support the United
Nations peacebuilding mandate and the strengthening
of its three principal entities, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Peacebuilding Support Office. We greatly appreciate
their efforts to strengthen the role of the United Nations
in countries emerging from conflict.
The review of the peacebuilding architecture will
provide a comprehensive analysis and evaluation of
actions already undertaken and should help to address
the gaps that in the past have had a negative effect on
the work of the United Nations in this field. We should
also review the factors that may influence the United
Nations peacebuilding work and the obstacles it may
encounter, including limited funding and a lack of
political will and genuine cooperation on the part of the
countries concerned. The latter shows how important it
is to maintain a positive partnership between countries
and the relevant entities of the United Nations.
It should also be borne in mind that States
emerging from conflict can be affected by instability
in neighbouring countries as well. We therefore hope
that the review will result in the creation of a road map
that will promote the conditions necessary for effective
intervention on the part of United Nations peacebuilding,
so as to respond to the needs and demands of the
countries dealing with such situations. Sustainable
mechanisms to promote sustainable development are
crucial in this area. We urge donor countries to pursue
their efforts in financing peacebuilding and to find an
effective and optimal way to manage these funds.
Women’s participation is critical and constructive,
and we attach great importance to it. Women
can contribute in many ways to strengthening
peacebuilding, and we therefore support initiatives
aimed at strengthening the role of women and providing
them with appropriate training.
Jordan believes that the United Nations vision and
work on post-conflict situations should involve experts
in various areas, acting in accordance with their United
Nations mandates, in order to ensure cooperation and
partnerships with national authorities and regional

S/PV.7359

bodies, help restore the stability of the countries
concerned and prevent their relapse into conflict.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
to welcome you to the Council, Mr. President, and to
congratulate Chile on its accession to the presidency
of the Council. I thank you for having organized
this meeting on post-conflict peacebuilding. I
also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
and Ambassador Antonio Patriota, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
The success of peacebuilding in post-conflict States
requires, inter alia, three elements that we believe are
essential. These are the identification of priorities, the
strengthening of institutions, and the broad support of
the international community.
In terms of peacebuilding priorities, the countries
involved must set their own priorities in accordance
with the principles of national ownership. Furthermore,
the establishment of open political mechanisms should
be part of any peacebuilding strategy. We welcome the
example of Tunisia, where the broad participation of
political parties and civil society has led the political
process to the adoption of a new Constitution and to the
holding of free, transparent elections. Furthermore, the
participation of women and young people in political
and development processes is critical to post-conflict
recovery. In that regard, we firmly recommend the
strengthening of investments in activities that support
the economic empowerment of women and young
people.
With respect to institution-building, we note that
this is a long-term effort involving robust interaction
at various levels. In that regard, we believe that the
emphasis should be on restoring State authority and
the essential functions of the Government and on
providing basic public services to the people. From
this perspective, we welcome the capacity-building
efforts in South Sudan, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and
elsewhere, as well as the support of partners. In South
Sudan, the initiative to build the capacities of the
public civil service, launched by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, has been possible due to the
involvement of civil service training personnel from
neighbouring States.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the simplification of birth records
and the issuance of identification documents has
improved access to services and electoral participation,
and strengthened social cohesion. We believe that this

15-0121213/24

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

example deserves to be replicated in other countries,
particularly in the Central African Republic. Indeed,
public trust needs to be restored in law enforcement
in those countries, and social cohesion must be
strengthened in order to speed up the return of refugees
and displaced persons.
In Liberia, the justice and security centres are a
crucial element in the Government’s strategy to extend
justice and security services beyond the capital. We
welcome the support of the United Nations and the
major financing provided by the Peacebuilding Fund
for these initiatives. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the restoration of State authority through the
redeployment of State functions in areas previously
controlled by armed groups remains essential to the
stability of the country. It should be emphasized
that the sound management of natural resources and
transparency are major factors in terms of minimizing
the conflict and restoring trust.
With respect to the support of the international
community, we recall that peacebuilding depends to
a great extent on multifaceted support, particularly
political, financial and technical. In this respect,
Chad welcomes the role of the Peacebuilding Fund
in supporting peace processes, promoting the prompt
implementation of peace agreements, and investing in
the rapid strengthening of institutions. We therefore
call on the international financial institutions and
multilateral and bilateral partners to continue to
support the recovery of countries in post-conflict
situations. We hope that the necessary resources will
be mobilized in order to create conditions conducive
to lasting peace in post-conflict countries. At the same
time, we remain concerned about the many pending
challenges, including transnational organized crime,
drug and arms trafficking, and epidemics, such as the
Ebola virus, which continue to have a very negative
impact on the capacities of the institutions of a number
of countries, particularly in West Africa.
In conclusion, we hope that the adoption of the
new peacebuilding architecture this year will help
us establish better adapted mechanisms in this area
in order to better contribute to the recovery of postconflict countries and to preventing their disastrous
relapse into violence.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to welcome you,
Mr. President, to New York and thank you for presiding
over this meeting. Your presence today indicates clearly
the importance Chile places on this important subject.
14/24

14/01/2015

I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission for their
respective briefings. I wish to welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict (S/2014/694), which provides a comprehensive
overview of progress in United Nations peacebuilding
efforts in the aftermath of conflict, including the issue
of women in peacebuilding.
Malaysia has always placed importance on
the Peacebuilding Commission’s capacity as an
intergovernmental advisory body to provide strategies
and approaches on peacebuilding within the United
Nations system. We firmly believe that the Commission
plays a significant role, in particular in providing a
common platform for international actors working
in support of sustainable peace and development in
countries emerging from conflict. We support the
United Nations continuing efforts to pool all available
and relevant resources with a view to assisting countries
in post-conflict peacebuilding, recovery, reconstruction
and sustainable development.
My delegation also wishes to underscore the three
key priority directions for the engagement of the United
Nations system in peacebuilding, as highlighted by the
Secretary-General: inclusivity, institution-building
and sustained international support, and mutual
accountability. We believe that these key priorities
are interlinked and serve as fundamental principles in
assisting countries emerging from conflict.
Malaysia is encouraged by the progress made in
a number of countries to consolidate peace following
conflict despite far-reaching challenges. However, it is
distressing and unfortunate that we continue to witness
instances of situations relapsing into conflict across
various regions today. Against the backdrop of such
developments, we believe that there remains room for
further improvement in United Nations peacebuilding
efforts. We fully share the Secretary-General’s view
on the need for the United Nations to work in a more
integrated and coherent manner in assisting countries
emerging from conflict. In this regard, Malaysia wishes
to make the following comments.
Malaysia continues to believe that the Security
Council has benefited from its increased interaction
with the Peacebuilding Commission, in particular
in the light of the linkages between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. In our view, the integration and
coherence of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
remain crucial for achieving durable peace and security
15-01212

14/01/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

S/PV.7359

and for preventing relapses into conflict. Resolution
2086 (2013) highlighted and reaffirmed this important
interlinkage in the context of multidimensional
peacekeeping missions and expressed the Council’s
continued willingness to make use of the advisory,
advocacy and resource-mobilization roles of the
Peacebuilding Commission in peacebuilding activities.

Malaysia believes that regional engagement
and commitment are imperative for stable and
sustainable peace. There is a need to ensure that the
perspectives, interests and concerns of regional actors
and neighbouring countries are factored into a broader
political strategy in support of countries emerging from
conflict.

Malaysia has been a consistent advocate of
deepening the relationship between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council. Given its unique
composition, the Peacebuilding Commission is well
placed to advise the Security Council on many issues,
in particular the root causes of conflict, including
the socioeconomic causes, and the possible risk of
relapse into conflict. Malaysia sees the merit of more
frequent formal and informal interaction between the
two bodies. In our view, the advice and assessments by
the Chairs of country-specific configuration should be
considered in a meaningful way by the Council. In this
regard, Malaysia reiterates its position that there should
be greater connectivity and interaction between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council
so as to enhance further work in the development of
practical peacebuilding policies.

As for the case of the Ebola outbreak, the
Peacebuilding Commission has been instrumental in
maintaining the focus of the international community
on the Ebola crisis and in coordinating efforts among
all partners, including regional and subregional
organizations.

My delegation reaffirms that efforts to support
post-conflict countries must be premised on the
principle of national ownership. Through national
ownership, any policy of post-conflict reconstruction,
institution-building and the formulation of an economic
development programme will reflect the needs of local
stakeholders and ensure inclusivity and legitimacy.
In addition, the role of women in conflict prevention
should be further mainstreamed. In Malaysia’s view,
engaging women in peacebuilding, settlement and
post-conflict decision-making processes is vital to
ensuring sustainable recovery and long-term peace. In
this regard, more effort is needed to take forward to
Secretary-General’s seven-point action plan on genderresponsive peacekeeping, particularly on genderresponsive civilian capacity, women’s representation
in post-conflict governance and conflict resolution.
We welcome the fact that there are other players in
the peacebuilding field, such as the World Bank and
the African Development Bank. The Commission’s
efforts to strengthen partnerships with international
financial institutions on the basis of complementarity
between their respective roles in support of national
peacebuilding strategies should be further continued.

Malaysia welcomes the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission in the area of resource mobilization. We
are of the view that resource mobilization should
not end at fundraising alone, but should broaden the
base and securing the buy-in of traditional and new
bilateral and multilateral donors to engage in support
of peacebuilding processes in the countries concerned.
In Malaysia’s view, efforts should also be made to
develop the revenue-generation capacity of those
countries. We believe that this would be an important
step in strengthening the governance of countries and
preventing relapses into conflict. This would also
entail greater responsibility and legitimacy for the
Government and call on support from Member States
in providing training to enhance administration and
governance.
My delegation well welcomes the adoption earlier
of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/2 as the
outcome of this briefing. Malaysia wishes to express
its deep gratitude to the Peacebuilding Commission
for the progress achieved in countries such as Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Burundi. We are fully supportive of
the aims and objectives underlying the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the excellent
work that the Commission has undertaken to date.
In conclusion, Malaysia looks forward to the
outcome of the 2015 review of the peacebuilding
architecture with a view to further improving the United
Nations’ peacebuilding efforts. We believe that the
review will be in a position to acknowledge the potential
of the Peacebuilding Commission as an advisory body
and as a support to countries emerging from conflict.
To this end, Malaysia is committed to working together
with all partners to support and promote peace efforts
in countries emerging from conflict.

15-0121215/24

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, for their comprehensive
briefings. My delegation commends the Chilean
presidency of the Security Council for this initiative
and welcomes the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/2 earlier today.
This exchange of views on post-conflict
peacebuilding is very timely as we embark on the review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We
have seen some successes in recent years, as in the cases
of Timor-Leste or the conclusion of peace operations in
Sierra Leone in March 2014. Such successes, however,
remain the exception rather than the rule. Repetitive
cycles of violence threaten a reversal of peace and
development efforts in various parts of the world. The
youngest State Member of the United Nations, South
Sudan, has seen its progress unravel due to the eruption
of violence over a year ago. In the Central African
Republic, the current fragile signals of improvement
should be carefully watched and actively supported to
prevent yet another repetition of the cycle of violence
and coups.
The dramatic fragility of the situations in Yemen,
Somalia and elsewhere demands the improved coherence
and synergy of efforts on the part of the various actors
on the ground. Even where success has been clear, as
in Sierra Leone, unexpected developments, such as the
unprecedented Ebola outbreak, threaten to undermine
peacebuilding gains. Ebola’s overall impact on
peacebuilding and development in that country, Guinea
and Liberia, as well as its broader regional implications,
are yet to be seen.
The United Nations can and should do better in
many areas, including by ensuring across-the-board
delivery as one, developing effective transition and exit
strategies, continuous analysis, stronger synergies and
coherence, as well as constant adjustment of responses.
We welcome the upcoming review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, which we see as an
opportunity to come up with concrete recommendations
on its functioning, resources and modes of engagement.
We fully agree with the Deputy Secretary-General on
the importance of establishing positive synergies with
the review of United Nations peacekeeping operations
undertaken by the Secretary-General, and the highlevel review to assess progress in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and

16/24

14/01/2015

security. We believe that, while distinct in nature and
scope, those reviews cannot be conducted in isolation
and that their outcomes should be mutually supportive
and reinforcing.
National institution-building is key for successful
transitions from conflict to a lasting peace.
Strengthening the resilience of States, building
legitimate, accountable and effective institutions, and
consolidating the rule of law is a long-term endeavour,
which requires national leadership and ownership and
sustained international attention and support alike.
Inter alia, it calls for holistic approaches and the
identification of specific destabilizing factors, such
as a lack of accountability, corruption or unaddressed
grievances and disputes, including those regarding
property, land ownership and access to vital resources.
Furthermore, the illicit flow and accumulation
of weapons can quickly wipe out years of
institution-building, as political actors would be tempted
to achieve their objectives through violence and force.
If a peaceful dialogue is to be sustained, the United
Nations must ensure the cohesiveness of its efforts,
including through disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and assistance in security
sector reform that not only create a safer and more
conducive environment for institution-building, but
also offer incentives to former combatants to become a
part of the peaceful solution.
At the same time, as former combatants are
reintegrated, it is essential that they be properly vetted
and retrained and that their former victims do not feel
threatened by their new roles in the community. If that
is not ensured, their reintegration will undercut trust in
the institutions and in justice itself, with the inevitable
negative consequences for building a lasting peace.
Inclusivity is another crucial aspect of sustainable
peacebuilding. In particular, women can and must
play an active role both in conflict resolution and
in the peacebuilding efforts that follow. Peace and
development cannot be sustained if half of the
population is left out because of gender. When
peacebuilding efforts are based on inclusive societal
consultations, where credible, viable mechanisms
for effective and broad public participation exist, and
no group or segment of the society feels excluded or
marginalized, that generates legitimacy and trust in the
state and its institutions.

15-01212

14/01/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Conversely, the absence of such inclusivity
threatens peace and reconciliation processes and the
stability of the State itself. We may recall, for example,
that the Council urged the Governments of Mali and
Iraq repeatedly to ensure inclusivity and address the
lingering grievances among the various groups of
society. The consequences of such failure stand as a
stark warning to all States transitioning out of conflict.
Furthermore, the success of transition from conflict
to sustained development demands that the issues of
justice and accountability be most seriously addressed.
Failure to ensure justice and put an end to impunity
can sabotage post-conflict peacebuilding efforts and
eventually rekindle the conflict itself.
Lithuania highly values the contribution of the
PBC, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding
Support Office in building durable peace in a number
of countries coming out of conflict. We encourage a
further strengthening of the links between the PBC
and the Security Council aimed at ensuring a seamless
transition from peacekeeping to sustainable and durable
development and peace. In that respect, periodic
stocktaking briefings and interactive exchanges can be
very useful in the work of both bodies. We believe that
the PBC can also have a useful role when the Council
is considering mandate renewals and in transitions of
United Nations missions.
Furthermore, the PBC should draw the Council’s
attention to emerging threats in the countries on its
agenda. The PBC should also remain actively engaged in
support of the political dialogue and other preparatory
processes, in the light of the upcoming elections in
countries on its agenda. We would welcome a more
proactive dialogue of the PBC with relevant regional
and subregional organizations. Partnerships between
the PBC and the international financial institutions and
private sector entities are also important. We believe
that work in that direction should be further pursued
in order to mobilize resources, identify financing gaps,
ensure coherent responses and avoid duplications.
Peacebuilding is a long and painstaking
multi-stakeholder process. The upcoming review
of the peacebuilding architecture provides us with
an opportunity to revisit our approaches, identify
continuing and emerging challenges and broader
systemic gaps in order to adjust our collective responses
and realize the full peacebuilding potential of the
United Nations.

S/PV.7359

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the mission of Chile for organizing this debate
and Minister for Foreign Affairs Heraldo Muñoz
for presiding over this meeting. I also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and Ambassador
Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their briefings.
The reasons for which the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) was established a few years ago
remain as regrettably relevant as they ever were.
Important progress has been made, but significant
challenges remain. With respect to the progress made,
I can state with satisfaction that there are very positive
signs in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and
Burundi. With respect to the challenges, those can be
seen in South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
Of course we await the review exercise that should
enhance the efficiency of the PBC and will be based on
the experiences and lessons learned over a short period
of years. We trust that the basic outcome will, precisely,
avoid relapses into conflict. Of course, the process will
be a long one extending over years and decades, because
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, unfortunately, are
tasks that we will always have to deal with.
There are many areas of convergence between the
ideas that have been shared around this table, so I will
just briefly review them and the text of my statement
will be available on my mission’s website.
In terms of post-conflict situations, there are
four major ideas that I would like to highlight. First,
it is important that political dialogue processes be
inclusive and that all political movements be involved
in them. Secondly, the State should be endowed with
institutions that are perceived — and I would highlight
this — as legitimate, effective and responsible. Thirdly,
it is important for national actors to enjoy ownership.
Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, there is a need
to promote reconciliation, coherence and coordination
among national, international and, most importantly,
regional actors.
Now, as I said earlier, the PBC has a unique role
in achieving three objectives: securing predictable
technical, financial and political support in the short
and medium terms; reconciling the positions of the
various national, regional and international players
involved; and thirdly — and I would like to underscore
this — maintaining international actors’ focus on the
peace processes in post-conflict countries. I would

15-0121217/24

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

like to mention Africa, in particular the growing
responsibilities being shouldered by African actors,
including regional and subregional entities in Africa.
I think it is important that they continue to focus, as
required, on the terrible impact of Ebola.
I would conclude by saying that Spain has been a
member of the PBC since the beginning. I would recall
that Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson has also
been there from the beginning. We have been there
almost continuously, working on peacebuilding with
the PBC. Now that the United Nations is undertaking
a triple review process — namely of peacekeeping
operations, the PBC and resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security — it is crucial that
those three processes begin interacting now so that we
can avoid overlaps and together achieve the ultimate
objective that we all want, which is to maintain and
enhance the effectiveness of the Organization in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I welcome you,
Mr. President, back to New York and thank you for
convening this important discussion today. I also thank
Ambassador Patriota, not only for his briefing today,
but also for his chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We value that very much.
Finally, I thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his briefing. We particularly appreciate the fact
that the Secretary-General’s report not only includes
some very useful and illustrative examples of countryspecific situations in which particular peacebuilding
mechanisms have worked, but also gives us examples
of where they have not. That, I think, is the real value
as a report such as this.
This briefing and the presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/2 we have just adopted come at the
start of a very important year for peacebuilding as
the 2015 comprehensive review gets under way. It is
central to the work of the Council that we achieve the
best possible peacebuilding architecture. The Deputy
Secretary-General spoke of that as being core to our
operation, so New Zealand encourages the expert panel
to be ambitious in its work and in its recommendations.
We would also encourage the panel to be mindful of,
and where possible to coordinate its activities with, the
high-level review of United Nations peace operations,
which is proceeding contemporaneously.
A robust assessment of lessons learned from
countries on the PBC agenda will be important in

18/24

14/01/2015

ensuring that the Panel’s findings are underpinned by
real-world examples, not least those built on proven
linkages among development, human rights and peace
and security. It is our view and feeling that it is much
more difficult to dispute proven facts, on which the
Panel will rely, than it is to argue unproven theory.
Facts work; theories are just theories.
New Zealand comes to the Council to promote
practical approaches and practical solutions, so
we attach very real importance to the review. We
particularly welcome the case-study model that has
been endorsed by the Council, and overall we shall be
looking for a process that, in due time, sees the Council
and the General Assembly adopting recommendations
that make a practical difference by better equipping
United Nations peacebuilding to prevent relapses into
violent conflict.
As the review team begins its work, and drawing
on New Zealand’s experience — not least through
participation in United Nations missions in TimorLeste and others in our region and beyond — I want to
offer six very brief thoughts.
First, we echo the Secretary-General’s call for United
Nations peacebuilding work to be more integrated and
coherent. It is essential that peacebuilding be carefully
integrated into broader post-conflict efforts, so we
have been very pleased with recent efforts to improve
the integration of mandated peacebuilding tasks into
the earliest possible phases of mission planning and
deployment. Coordination among peacebuilding
actors is also important. A thorough assessment of
the comparative advantage of all actors in specific
situations — including those that are not part of the
United Nations system — is key to avoiding duplication
and to ensuring that the most capable entity is given the
job and can then get on with the job.
Secondly, New Zealand supports the SecretaryGeneral’s observation concerning the crucial role
played by regional actors and neighbouring States.
In the Pacific, the involvement since 2003 of all 15
members of the Pacific Islands Forum in the Regional
Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands exemplifies the
success of strong regional peacebuilding partnerships.
Thirdly, we would urge the Panel to focus its
attention on progress made in strengthening the United
Nations own capacity for rapid identification and
deployment of relevant peacebuilding expertise, not

15-01212

14/01/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

least by drawing on recommendations from the civilian
capacity review.
Fourthly, careful planning of peacekeeping
transitions is essential for building on early
peacebuilding gains. The reconfiguration of the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste preceding the
withdrawal of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste in 2012 provided valuable lessons in that
regard, so we are pleased to see Timor-Leste included
as one of the Panel’s case studies.
Fifthly, it is time for us to address how we can
tangibly strengthen the interaction between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission. The PBC’s work
is so intimately linked with ours that more frequent,
in-depth interaction is in the best interests of both
entities. We would, for example, see value in the Council
making much better use of the first-hand knowledge,
expertise and analysis of PBC country-configuration
Chairs, including their more consistent inclusion in
relevant Council consultations.
Finally, New Zealand encourages the review team to
draw on the peacebuilding work of the Group of Seven
Plus, led by Timor-Leste, reflecting insights drawn
from decades of peacebuilding practice, and from the
unique perspective of the recipients of peacebuilding
assistance.
Successful peacebuilding helps lay the foundations
for sustainable peace. Again, I echo the Deputy
Secretary-General’s comment that it is core to the
work of the Council. The Council has a major stake
in ensuring that the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture is capable of delivering the results the
international community demands and, above all, the
very positive results and the very positive outcomes
that are so deserved by communities emerging from
violent conflict.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate and for
coming to New York to chair it personally. I also want to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General and Ambassador
Antonio Patriota for their important and insightful
comments this morning.
The United Kingdom welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report on peacebuilding (S/2014/694) and his
update on progress made on the key themes of inclusivity,
institution-building and mutual accountability. In
particular, we fully support the report’s emphasis on
the vital role of women in all peacebuilding efforts.

S/PV.7359

In August last year, the Council had the opportunity
to visit Somalia and South Sudan. We saw firsthand the contrasting peacebuilding fortunes of those
two countries. In Somalia, we witnessed a country
slowly getting back on its feet; in South Sudan, we
saw a country tearing itself apart. The experiences
of South Sudan and Somalia allow us to draw some
important lessons on the effectiveness of United
Nations peacebuilding. There is no doubt that the
United Nations has significantly improved its support
to countries emerging from conflict over the past 20
years. Countries like Côte D’Ivoire and Timor-Leste are
rightly celebrated as success stories. However, we must
also acknowledge that there have been too many tragic
examples of countries relapsing into violence, with the
Central African Republic being the most prominent
recent example.
The United Kingdom believes that there are three
overarching lessons that we can draw from recent
United Nations peacebuilding experiences.
First, the context in which the United Nations is
trying to deliver peacebuilding support is changing.
Although peacebuilding was first conceptualized as
a post-conflict endeavour, we are now increasingly
asking the United Nations to support political processes
and build institutions in the midst of ongoing violence
and conflict. Almost 90 per cent of United Nations
personnel in special political missions are working in
peace operations in countries that are still experiencing
high-intensity conflict.
There are also several new drivers of conflict. Civil
wars are becoming internationalized, with regional
actors fuelling and sometimes actively participating
in intra-State conflicts. The growth of transnational
organized crime and illicit trafficking as a lucrative
funding stream for armed groups acts as a disincentive
to reaching durable political settlements. The increasing
number of violent extremist groups making maximalist
demands, and that view United Nations personnel as
legitimate targets, makes it harder to bring conflicts to
an end. When wars even appear to end, often they do so
without a clear resolution or with violence persisting.
These contexts are likely to become the new normal
for peacebuilding. We therefore need to develop a more
sophisticated approach to core peacebuilding tasks
in countries affected by conflict. To achieve that, the
United Nations must improve its capacity to undertake
rigorous and objective analysis of the conflict drivers in
each context, and to use that improved understanding

15-0121219/24

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

to present the Council with sequenced, prioritized and
tailored recommendations to deal with the root causes
of violence.
Secondly, we must remember the primacy of
politics in peacebuilding. Too often the international
community takes a technical approach to supporting
countries in conflict, such as building police stations
or improving budgetary processes. While those may
be critical tasks, peacebuilding activities will fail if
they become detached from a broader political strategy.
The United Nations must ensure that its good offices
mandates are used to create the political space required
for key peacebuilding interventions to gain traction.
Missions must seek to align security development and
political activities into a single, coherent, integrated
strategy. And although the principle of national
ownership should, of course, sit at the heart of all
peacebuilding strategies, we need to be realistic about
the limits of national ownership in situations of State
collapse where political legitimacy remains contested.
Thirdly, peacebuilding requires sustained political
attention and financial support. The Ebola crisis in West
Africa has demonstrated the fragility of peacebuilding
gains. But even without an external shock like Ebola,
there are no shortcuts to building durable national
institutions. The World Bank estimates that making
meaningful improvements to institutions takes between
10 and 17 years at the very minimum. International
efforts to build institutions will inevitably extend
beyond the lifetime of a peace operation. Effective,
well-planned transitions are therefore essential. We
must ensure that a missions drawdown does not result
in a huge drop in donor financing. The United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund is an important mechanism to
achieve this, and that is why the United Kingdom
continues to be the Peacebuilding Fund’s largest donor,
providing $70 million since 2011, and we encourage
others to contribute generously to this important
peacebuilding tool.
As many colleagues have pointed out, 2015 will
be an important year for peacebuilding. The United
Kingdom hopes that both the review of the peacebuilding
architecture and the Secretary-General’s review of peace
operations will provide innovative recommendations
to improve the way in which we support countries
recovering from conflict. In particular, we need bold and
meaningful reform of the Peacebuilding Commission
if it is to adapt to the changing context and remain
relevant in the future. We also hope that these reviews

20/24

14/01/2015

will emphasize the importance of conflict prevention
as a core peacebuilding task. As the Deputy SecretaryGeneral so eloquently said this morning, too often the
Security Council focuses solely on the intensive care
phase of the conflict spectrum. We need much more
attention to be focused both on conflict prevention and
on post-conflict peacebuilding, which we one might
call the “convalescence” treatment of the problem.
We live in an age where we have immediate access
to information about potential risks of instability
in countries around the world. The challenge for the
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the whole
United Nations system is to act early, because early
action can prevent enormous human suffering, fear and
displacement, and it is far more cost-effective than the
high human and financial costs of peacebuilding after
conflict has take root.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Chile for taking the initiative to convene today’s
meeting on peacebuilding.
I welcome Minister for Foreign Affairs Muñoz
to New York to preside over today’s meeting. I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and
Ambassador Patriota for their briefings.
Peacebuilding is an important and integral part of
the international community’s effort to help countries
with their post-conflict rebuilding. In recent years,
the United Nations has devoted greater attention to
and increased its input in peacebuilding, and has
made outstanding achievements in countries such
as Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and Haiti, which have
won the recognition of the countries involved and the
international community at large.
The Peacebuilding Commission has earnestly
implemented relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, successfully held its first annual
meeting, started preparing for the 2015 comprehensive
review of the peacebuilding architecture, and focused
the attention of the international community on the
impact of Ebola on peacebuilding. China commends
the Peacebuilding Commission for its work and
Ambassador Patriota for the leadership role he played
as Chair of the Commission.
At the same time, we should not lose sight of the
fact that United Nations peacebuilding is still in an
exploratory stage and has room for improvement and
is faced with many difficulties and challenges. China
believes that for the next phase of peacebuilding work
15-01212

14/01/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

the United Nations should focus on the following four
areas of work.
First, with regard to respect for the leadership
role of the countries involved, United Nations
peacebuilding operations should follow the nationally
owned, nationally led and nationally driven principle.
The timing of peacebuilding should be decided in light
of local situations. The programme of work should be
tailored to the specific needs of the countries involved
and formulated with a priority focus on backing the
relevant efforts of the countries involved and should
assist them in strengthening institutional and capacitybuilding so as to address the root causes of the conflicts.
The national initiative and dynamism of the countries
involved should be brought into play. Efforts should
be made to avoid simply copying the peacebuilding
models of other countries.
Secondly, with regard to promoting synergies
among the countries involved and other relevant parties,
peacebuilding is a project involving system engineering
and requires the broad participation of national
Governments and other players. The United Nations
should help national Governments to play the central
role in deciding their own peacebuilding priorities and,
at the same time, encourage the countries involved to
strengthen their communication and coordination with
other relevant parties so as to take into account the
opinions of all parties and synergize their efforts.
Thirdly, with regard to strengthening integrated
management in an effort to rationally allocate
resources and enhance efficiency, Member States,
regional organizations and specialized agencies all
play an important role in peacebuilding. The United
Nations should clearly illustrate the Peacebuilding
Commission’s role in integrated management and
facilitate the relevant parties’ coordination so that
they will bring forth their respective advantages and
complement each other. In planning peacebuilding
operations, efforts should be made to budget carefully
and allocate human and material resources rationally
with a focus on efficiency and to avoid lopsided
expansion.
Fourthly, taking into account both short-term results
and long- and medium-term goals, peacebuilding is a
long, complex and arduous task, and its ultimate goal is
to help countries involved enhance their self-preserving
capacity and achieve self-sufficiency and sustainable
stability and development. At the same time, various
tools can be used in a flexible manner to introduce

S/PV.7359

quick-impact projects without a huge investment so
that the people in a country involved can enjoy the
peacebuilding dividend sooner. When the people’s
hearts and minds have been won, they can support
and consolidate our achievements. In that regard, the
Peacebuilding Fund should play a bigger role.
This year, the United Nations will undergo a
comprehensive review of its peacebuilding architecture
that will help it fully take stock of its experiences and
draw lessons from its past work in order to further
improve its peacebuilding work in an effort to better
realize the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. China recognizes the progress already achieved
in preparing for the review. China expects that relevant
parties will, on the basis of prior consensus, earnestly
carry out their respective responsibilities, conduct a
review according to the set time frame and effectively
implement the results of the review in the actual work
of the United Nations.
China will actively participate in the above-mentioned
process and play a constructive role in enhancing the
work of peacebuilding.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I welcome you,
Mr. President, back to New York and back to a debate
on a theme that you addressed with distinction when
you were Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
I would also like thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his very insightful briefing this morning.
He made a very important contribution when he was
President of the General Assembly, in 2005, when the
Peacebuilding Commission was established. It is good
to see him back at the Councl as we debate the problem
of how to make peacebuilding meet our needs. We have
not yet accomplished that task, as said by a number of
participants this morning.
The issue that brings us here together is fundamental
to ensuring long-lasting sustainable peace in countries
emerging from conflict. In the past years the United
Nations peacebuilding system has deployed important
resources to support countries to move forward from war
to peace and to development. While some experience has
been successful, as mentioned, in other cases the efforts
by national States, the United Nations and international
partners were not able to avert a relapse into conflict.
As we welcome the review of the peacebuilding
architecture after 10 years of the existence of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we expect that the review
will enable us to have a better understanding of the
challenges and insufficiencies. Above all, we hope that

15-0121221/24

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

it will provide us with recommendations to improve the
system, thereby rendering it more effective and better
able to serve goals for which it was established. Based
on our experiences as a post-conflict country, Angola
would like to share with the Council some views and
some flag some aspects that we consider essential in
order to ensure a successful peacebuilding process.
In political terms, taking into account the principle
of national ownership, peacebuilding requires
trust and good faith by the main stakeholders who
are working towards the achievement of genuine
national reconstruction. In Angola the peace and
reconstruction process required, in the first instance,
the extension of State authority to the whole country,
institution-building, respect for human rights and
the rule of law. Social and political inclusion is a
fundamental feature of any peacebuilding process. The
efforts deployed by the Angolan authorities to reach
out to former adversaries and to integrate them into
society, State institutions and economic life in general
was a determining factor for the success of peace,
reconstruction and nation-building.
Furthermore, the full participation of political
actors, women, youth, civil society and media in the
national debate led to the adoption of constitutional
and legal mechanisms associated with peacebuilding.
In social and economic terms, peacebuilding required
the rebuilding of infrastructure destroyed by war,
especially to provide basic services to the population
such as roads, bridges, railroads, airports, ports,
schools and hospitals. The success of the disarmament,
demobilization and social reintegration process of more
than 100,000 military personnel was a pivotal element
in the consolidation of peace, which established the
foundation for a sound social and economic recovery.
The prevalence of conflicts in general entails a
regional dimension. In the case of Angola it was the
struggle to end apartheid and colonialism in Southern
Africa and the external interference that fuelled the
conflict. As such, regional and subregional institutions
should be an integral part of the solution of conflicts
and of peacebuilding efforts. It is therefore essential
that the subregional dimension of peacebuilding be
properly addressed and that comprehensive solutions
be sought at the same time. The review of the
peacebuilding architecture offers a unique opportunity
to arrive at a clear definition of the partnership that
should be established between the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the United Nations Security

22/24

14/01/2015

Council as the organ with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, the debate that was initiated some time ago
did not advance sufficiently — a shortcoming that we
hope the present review will also address.
In that connection, we hereby agree with the
suggestion made by Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
during our debate this morning on the need for synergies
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The joint
review of both peacekeeping operations, initiated by
the Secretary-General, and peacebuilding, now under
way, offers a very good opportunity to address the
critical problem of the allocation of resources, as both
peacekeeping and peacebuilding have to be seen as
complementary.
I would like to conclude by expressing our full
support for the presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/2)
adopted this morning. I think it is a good start for the
review we will undertake to ensure peacebuilding
definitively rests on foundations that are crucial for us
as an organ to play our essential role of keeping the
world at peace.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking the Deputy Secretary-General and
Ambassador Patriota for their leadership on this issue
and for their briefings this morning. I also thank you,
Mr. President — Foreign Minister Muñoz — for your
presence here today, I also thank Chile for convening
this important discussion.
Preventing a relapse into conflict was the primary
objective for the establishment of the peacebuilding
architecture in 2005. A decade later, it remains an
urgent undertaking. Others have said this: we know that
war is not like the weather. It does not just happen and
it is not inevitable. It can be stopped. But we also know
that countries that have experienced conflict once have
a heightened risk for relapsing into conflict again and
again. We have seen the devastating consequences of
that deadly cycle of conflict, from South Sudan to the
Central African Republic.
But while war and conflict should never be deemed
inevitable, too often, too many adopt a cynical passivity
in the face of signs of emerging tension or indicators
of potential conflict — a passivity that assumes the
futility of efforts to prevent potential conflict from
metastasizing into actual conflict, and a cynicism
that assumes, essentially, that certain places are just
destined to fight it out. The peacebuilding architecture

15-01212

14/01/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

is a living challenge to that dangerous cynicism
and deadly passivity. It is a challenge to us to turn
expressions of concern into coordinated actions that
ensure that countries recovering from conflict do not
relapse back into it, and it is a commitment to the belief
that our past can indeed be put behind us and our shared
future built together and in peace. We know that when
the international community mobilizes in concert with
national authorities, together we can change behaviour
and assumptions and put a stop to things that some may
have written off as inevitable.
Peace is built through hard work, As the SecretaryGeneral notes in his report (S/2014/694), we have made
significant gains in places and countries as diverse
as Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea and Tunisia in our efforts to
consolidate peace. In Sierra Leone, the integrated work
of successive United Nations missions and a country
team, as well as the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission, has been critical to breaking the cycle of
violence, providing space for a country and a people
hungry for peace to turn their focus from war to
prosperity, from conflict to electoral contests, from
isolation to sustainable development. Sierra Leone has
held three peaceful, credible elections since the end of
the civil war in 2002, and new institutions, supported
by the international community, are finding their place
in society and contributing to the important work of
building a Government that is responsive to its citizens.
Support from the United Nations has been critical
to that transition. For instance, United Nations support
for institutions such as the All Political Parties Women’s
Association, with a target of 30 per cent female
participation in all political parties, has increased
women’s participation in Sierra Leone’s elections,
thereby building public trust in the election process.
And we know that women’s full and equal participation,
whether in forging peace agreements, electing leaders
or leading post-conflict reconstruction, is absolutely
critical to sustainable peace and stability. We cannot
build peace for half of a society and expect that peace to
be meaningful or lasting. That is why the work of entities
such as the United Nations Peace Fund for Nepal, which
has designated 30 per cent of its funding for projects
that address the needs of women and girls — including
in the areas of land reform, conflict prevention, the rule
of law and the reintegration of child soldiers — is so
important. A project on land issues ensured extensive
participation by women in consultations on landuse planning, a domain from which women had
traditionally been excluded. Developments in Nepal

S/PV.7359

demonstrate that appreciable progress can be made
with targeted funding, leadership and capacities for
gender-responsive programming.
In Guinea, as the Deputy Secretary-General noted,
the creation of a women’s situation room for support to a
network of local women’s organizations during the 2013
parliamentary elections not only increased women’s
participation in the elections, it enabled them to take
an active part as election monitors and helped build
confidence in the entire electoral system. The creation
of community-led early-childhood development centres
in Côte d’Ivoire enhanced social cohesion by bringing
together women of diverse backgrounds focused on the
well-being of children. Kyrgyz women, with training
from UN-Women and the United Nations Development
Programme, have formed women’s peace committees
and become important actors in monitoring tensions
and Government response within their communities,
again building social cohesion, as well as trust, between
local populations and authorities in regions affected by
conflict.
The full and equal inclusion of women and girls
is not merely just; it is essential to building the peace
of which we speak. Yet the participation of women in
peacebuilding still receives too little attention and is
too often underfunded and thought of as an effort to
be inclusive rather than a recognition that women’s full
participation is a precondition for lasting peace. We
must change that mindset and, in the process, change
minds. We must build our peacebuilding efforts to
ensure that they are inclusive, because in doing so we
will make them more effective.
The recent outbreak of Ebola presented a new
kind of threat to international peace and security that
has indeed demanded an unprecedented response. We
commend the critical efforts of the United Nations to
mobilize human, financial and technical resources
to deliver an integrated response in the post-conflict
countries of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The
Peacebuilding Commission can play an important
role in bringing together key partners to coordinate
assistance efforts and maximize the impact of the
international community on the ground.
Unfortunately, international efforts have been
less successful in producing results aimed at ending
the enduring and daily threats to international peace
and security in places like South Sudan. Despite a
hard-won independence, South Sudan has erupted
into deadly and devastating conflict, exacerbating

15-0121223/24

S/PV.7359

Post-conflict peacebuilding

ethnic tensions, eroding hope and provoking a dire
and man-made humanitarian crisis. Despite one of
the most comprehensive United Nations peacekeeping
mandates ever adopted by the Council, historic levels
of international support and almost infinite goodwill
on the part of international partners, political leaders
in South Sudan have prioritized political power and
conflict over peace and stability. Their actions have
exacerbated tensions, brought about tens of thousands
of deaths and displaced nearly 2 million innocent
people, and are bringing that young nation, the newest
Member State of the United Nations, to the threshold of
State failure. We cannot give up and we cannot allow
the parties in South Sudan to abandon their people’s
aspirations and right to live in peace and prosperity. In
standing with the people of South Sudan, we must be
unified in our demand that the violence end and those
responsible for the carnage be held to account.
Until recently, successive conflicts in the Central
African Republic received too little attention from
the international community. A lack of vision on
national reform, limited political will on the part of
the international community and successive weak
United Nations presences with little capacity to help
develop State institutions further destabilized the
country’s weak governance structure and undermined
social cohesion. Our action last year in authorizing an
integrated peacekeeping mission to protect civilians,
facilitate humanitarian access and support the State as it
seeks to re-establish governance was necessary to stop
the ensuing bloodshed. Bolstered by the contribution
of troops from Member States from several regional
organizations, and by humanitarian donations from
around the globe, those collective actions represent the
most comprehensive level of international engagement
in the Central African Republic to date.
We must reflect on those lessons as we undertake
the five-year review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We have learned that peacebuilding
requires sustained — not sporadic — and coordinated
commitment on the part of national, regional and
international actors. It requires inclusivity, meaning

24/24

14/01/2015

that women and girls are at the forefront and at the
table, not an afterthought or excluded. It means that
the international community holds political actors
accountable to the agreements they undertake and
the agreed frameworks to which they subscribe. And
it means that addressing human rights abusers, hate
and discrimination head-on is the path to sustainable
peace, not a diversion or an obstacle. We hope that the
peacebuilding architecture review’s advisory group of
experts will heed those lessons and develop concrete
recommendations to enhance the Peacebuilding
Commission’s relevance and real-world impact
by focusing on achieving results through its core
competencies of coordination, resource mobilization
and advocacy.
As others have noted, 2015 will also see the
Secretary-General’s high-level review of United
Nations peace operations, as well as the global Tenyear Impact Study on Implementation of Security
Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on Women, Peace and
Security in Peacekeeping. We must challenge ourselves
not to hive off our thinking about these issues in
silos. Peacekeepers are essential to establishing stable
foundations for peace and development, and they are
increasingly and appropriately being called on to
protect civilians in dire need. Protecting civilians is not
only an essential element in creating space for peace,
it is vital to the credibility of the United Nations in
the eyes of local populations and around the world. As
such, it is essential for United Nations peacekeepers to
carry out their protection of civilian mandates robustly
and in a way that gives people confidence that we mean
what we say. In that vein, let us mean what we say when
we sit at this table and recommit ourselves to the work
of the peacebuilding architecture. Let us translate our
commitment to the inclusion of women into the actual
inclusion of women, and let us translate our hope for
peace into the hard work of building it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

15-01212
