174

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

12. Decides to consider this item at its thirty-seventh
session as a matter of high priority in the light of any
recommendations which the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
the Commission on Human Rights, the Economic and
Social Council and the Special Committee against
Apartheid may wish to submit to it.

63rd plenary meeting
14 November 1980

35/33.

Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its determination to achieve the total
eradication of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Recal/ing once again that, in its resolution 3057
(XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and in the Programme
for the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination annexed thereto, and in other
relevant resolutions, it called upon ali peoples, Governments and institutions to continue their efforts to eliminate racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Bearing in mind the Declaration and the Programme
of Action adopted by the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, 10

Recal/ing that, in the programme of activities to be
undertaken during the second half of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, contained in the annex to its resolution 34/24 of 15 November 1979, it called upon ali States, United Nations
organs and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to intensify their efforts to achieve the
speediest attainment of the objectives of the Decade,
aimed at the complete and final elimination of ali forms
of racism and racial discrimination,
Seriously concerned at the situation prevailing in
South Africa and throughout southern A frica as a result
of the policies and actions of the apartheid régime, particularly its efforts to perpetuate and strengthen racist
domination of the country, its policy of "bantustanization", its brutal repression of opponents of apartheid
and its renewed acts of aggression against neighbouring
States,

Reaffirming that the policies and actions of the apartheid régime constitute a threat to international peace
and security,

Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity,

Recognizing the gra vity of the situation of women and
children under the yoke of apartheid and racial discrimination,
Reaffirming that any collaboration with the racist
régime in South Africa constitutes a hostile act against
the oppressed people of South Africa as well as tlagrant
disregard for the United Nations and the international
community,
Noting with satisfaction the favourable outcome ofthe
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe to regain their sovereignty and national independence.

'º Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, Geneva. 14-25 August 1978 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. JI.

Recalling the importance of the attainment of the objectives of the Decade,
Convinced that a second world conference to be convened during the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination will make a useful and constructive contribution to the attainment of those objectives,
1. Proclaims that the elimination of ali forms of
racism and of discrimination based on race and the
attainment of the objectives of the Programme for. the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and of the programme of activities to be undertaken during the second half of the Decade, contained in the annex to its resolution 34 /24, are matters
of high priority for the international community and,
accordingly, for the United Nations;
2. Strongly condemns the policies of apartheid,
racism and racial discrimination practised in southern
Africa, ali occupied Arab territories and elsewhere, including the denial of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and independence;
3. Vigorously condemns the repeated acts of aggression committed by South Africa against neighbouring
States, particularly the recent attacks on Zambia;
4. Reaffirms once again its strong support for the
national liberation struggle against racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism and foreign domination and for the achievement of self-determination by
ali available means, including armed struggle:
5. Welcomes the resounding victory of the people of
Zimbabwe and the formation of the Government of the
Patriotic Front, a prerequisite for the creation of the independent, sovereign State of Zimbabwe;
6. Congratulates the national liberation movements,
the anti-apartheid and anti-racist movements and other
non-governmental organizations for their co-operation
in international efforts to attain the objectives of the
Decade:
7. Invites ali Member States, United Nations organs, specialized agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to strengthen and enlarge the scope of their activities in support of the objectives of the Programme for the Decade;

8. Calls once again upon all Governments which
have not yet done so to take legislative, administrative
and other measures in respect of their nationals and the
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own enterprises in southern Africa in order to put an end to
such enterprises forthwith:
9. Calls upon ali Sta tes to adopt, as a matter of high
priority, measures declaring punishable by law any dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred
and outlawing organizations based on racial hatred and
prejudice, including neo-Nazi and Fascist organizations as well as private clubs and institutions which are
based on racial criteria or which spread ideas of racial
discrimination and apartheid;
1O. Appeals once again to ali Sta tes to continue to
co-operate with the Secretary-General by submitting
their reports to him, as provided for in paragraph 18 (e)
of the Programme for the Decade;
11. Appea/s once again to all the mass media and
educational and cultural institutions to co-operate fully
in implementing the Programme for the Decade;
12. Congratulates the Special Committee against
Apartheid on its efforts to carry out its task;

VI.

13. Approves the Declaratíon of the lnternational
Seminar on an Oíl Embargo against South A frica, 11 held
at Amsterdam from 14 to 16 March 1980 under the auspices of the Special Committee against Apartheid;
14. Invites the organizations of the Unite? Na_tic:ms
system to intensify their efforts to keep pubhc opm_1on
constantly alert to the scourges of ali forms of rac1sm
and racial discrimination and of apartheid by means of
the publications of the Centre agai_nst Apartheid of the
Secretariat and other relevant bod1es;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submít the
various studies which the General Assembly requested
to be undertaken in its resolutions 33 /99 of 16 December 1978 and 34/24 of 15 November 1979, when completed, to the General Assembly a_t its future sessions _for
consideration under the item ent1tled "lmplementatton
of the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Díscrimination";
16. Invites ali States, international bodies and nongovernmental organízations to intensify the campaigns
aimed at securing the release of ali political prisoners
held by the racist régimes beca~se of their ~our~ge~rns
efforts to combat apartheid, rac1sm and racial d1scnmination and at defending the right of theír peoples to
self-determination and independence;
17. Expresses its satisfaction to the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrímination, the Special
Committee against Apartheid, the United Nations
Council for Namibia, the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Ríghts of the Palestinian People and
the Commíssion on Human Rights, through its Ad Hoc
Working Group of Experts on Southern A frica, for their
contribution to the ímplementatíon of the Programme
for the Decade;
18. Decides to hold in 1983, asan important event of
the Decade a Second World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, which, whíle reviewing and assessing the activitíes undertaken duríng
th~ Decade, should have as its main purpo_se the formulat1on of ways and means and of spectfic measures
aimed at ensuring the full and universal implementation of United Nations resolutions and decisions on
racism, racial discrimination and apartheid;
19. Invites the Economic and Social Council to
begin the preparatory work for the Con~er~nce at its
first regular session of 1981 and to subm1t Jts sugg~stions on the subject to the General Assembly at 1ts
thirty-sixth session;
20. Decides to consider at its thirty-sixth session, as
a matter of high priority, the ítem entitled "Impl~mentation of the Programme for the Decade for Act1on to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".

63rd plenary meeting
14 November /980

35/34.

175

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third C'ommittee

Further assistance to national organizations for
the elimination of racial discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant prov1s1ons of its resolutions
3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 34/24 of
11
A/35/160-S/13869, annex. For the printed text. see O/fiáal
Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fijih Year. S11pplement for
Apri/, May and June l<J80.

15 N ovember 1979 concerning the implementation of
the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Conscious of the need to mobilize public opinion
through the media, the education sys!em_, ~ongovernmental organiza_tion~ a_nd_ o~her mst1tut1ons
against ali forms of racial d1scnmmat1on,
A ware of the importance of Governments enacting
appropriate legislation and taking other ~uita_ble. m~asures to prohibit and bring to an end racial d1scnmmation,
Recalling its resolution 34/49 of 23 ~ovember 1979
on national institutions for the promot10n and protection of human rights,
Recognizing that nat!onal non-governme~tal organizations concerned w1th ~ace ª!"Id commumty relations can play a valuable role m the 1mprovement of race
and community relations,
Calls upon ali Governments to take such steps as are
necessary to enable duly constituted national ~ongovernmental organizations, such. as ra~e-relat1ons
organizations or institutes, commumty-rel~ttons org~nizations or institutes and ali other such nat1onal bod1es,
organizations or institutes established for the elimi!lation of díscrimínation on grounds of race and for the 1mprovement of relations between races and com_munities,
to function effectively in pursuit of harmomous relations hetween races and communities.

63rd plenary meeting
14 November 1980

35/35.

Importance of the universal realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November
1970, 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 3070
(XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, 3246 (XXIX) of29 November 1974, 3382 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, 33/24
of29 November 1978 and 34/44 of23 November 1979,
and Security Council resolutions 418 (1977) of 4 November 1977 and 437 (1978) of 10 October 1978,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 2465 (XXlll) of 20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII) of
12 December 1973 and 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December
1974 concerning the use and recruitment of mercenaries
against national liberation movements and sovereign
Sta tes,
Recalling further its relevant resolutions on the question of Palestine, in particular resolutions 3236 (XXIX)
and 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and 34/65 of
29 November and 12 December 1979,
Recalling resolution CM/Res. 788 (XXXV) on
Namibia adopted by the Council of Mínisters of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-fifth ordinary
session, held at Freetown from 18 to 28 June 1980, 12
Taking note of the Political Declaration adopted by
the I irst Conference of Heads of State and Govern'· SL"c A; 35/463 and (\irr. 1. annex l.
