UNITED
NATIONS

Security

Council
Distr.
GENERAL

LETTER DATED 13 OCTOBER 1998
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT

S/1998/947
14 October

1998

ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
OF THE SECURITY
COUNCIL

I have the honour
to transmit
to you herewith
October
1998 from the High Representative
for
Agreement
on Bosnia
and Herzegovina
(see annex).

a letter
Implementation

dated

I should
be grateful
members
of the Security

letter

10

98-30497

(E)

if you
Council.

would

bring

161098

I111111
111111111111111111111111111111
Ill1Ill1

this

the

Peace

the

attention

of

(Siqned)

Kofi

to

of

A.

the

ANNAN

/ ..

S/1998/947
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter
dated
10 October
1998 from the Hicfh Representative
for Implementation
of the Peace Asreement
on Bosnia
and
Uerzeqovina
addressed
to the Secretary-General
I have the honour
to transmit
herewith
my report
on the implementation
the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia
and Herzegovina,
which covers
the activities
Office
during
the months
of July to the end of September
1998.
the

I further
report
to

have the honour
to
the Security
Council

inform
you that
it is
on 26 October
1998.

my intention

(Sinned)

of
of my

to present

Carlos
WESTENDORN
High Representat*ve

/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page 3

Amendix
REPORT OF THE HIGH REPRESENTATIVE
FOR IMPLEMENTATION
AGREEMENT TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
OF THE UNITED
JULY-SEPTEMBER

OF THE PEACE
NATIONS

1998

I .Pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1031 of 15 December 1995, which requested the
Secretary General to submit reports from the High Representative in accordance with Annex 10
of the Peace Agreement and the Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation Conference of
8-9 December 1995, I herewith present the eleventh report to the Council.
2. The Report covers the activities of the O@ce of the High Representative and developments in
the areas listed below during the period from the beginning of July I998 to the end of September
1998.
SUMMARY
3. Elections dominate: The period between July and September has been dominated by the general
elections in BiH on 12/13 September, and their aftermath. The results of the elections are discussed
in more detail below. But in general they represented, with one notable exception, further evidence
of steady, incremental progress towards a more moderate and pluralistic political environment in
BiH. The elections took place peacefully and once again drew a high turnout of around 70%,
although this was somewhat lower than in previous elections. At the State level, for the first time
since Dayton there is the possibility of a more constructive Presidency, with the replacement of the
obstructionist
Serb incumbent with a more moderate figure. The Council of Ministers and the
national ministries are expected to be controlled by representatives of pro-Dayton parties. The old
nationalist, mono-ethnic parties have lost ground across the board; and opposition parties have
advanced and gained a number of key footholds in the BiH House of Representatives and have
gained ground in the Entity parliaments. In the Federation House of Representatives, for example,
the SDA has lost its overall majority; and in the RS National Assembly the SDS failed to re-gain
the overall majority it lost in the election in 1997. The SLOGA coalition has signed an agreement
pledging to remain in a post-election alliance and will hold the majority in the RS National
Assembly if SLOGA continues to cooperate with its Federation-based partners. Negotiations
on
the formation of a new RS Government, which may be lengthy, began on 2 October. For the first
time, the HDZ and the new NH1 won seats in the RSNA. And RS based parties won representation
in some Cantonal assemblies and the Federation Parliament.
4. Despite the encouraging results in the Assembly elections and for the Serb member of the BiH,
State-level Presidency, the election for the RS Presidency brought the replacement of Mrs Plavsic
with the leader of the Bosnian branch of the Radical Party, Nikola Poplasen. Mr Poplasen has a
record as a hard-liner. As President of the RS, he nominates the Prime Minister of the RS
Government, who in turn nominates the other ministers. These appointments, however, must be
approved by majority vote in the RS National Assembly, where the SLOGA - Federation
partnership dominates.
/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page 4

5. I have made clear, as have other representatives of the international community, what we shall
expect of the newly elected leaders. We shall judge their performance not only by words but above
all by actions, which we shall monitor closely. All leaders will be expected to act in accordance
with constitutional principles and the Peace Agreement, and to work for a strengthened and united
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Action that undermines, or threatens to undermine, the considerable
progress made in the last year will not be tolerated. Those who work with the international
community, and who comply with Dayton, will be rewarded. The international community will not
hesitate to withdraw support from those who obstruct implementation.
And I shall not hesitate to
use my Bonn powers to take action against leaders who violate Dayton.
6. Recent progress: In spite of the inevitable focus on the elections, further progress has been
achieved during the reporting period, building on the substantial progress made in the first half of
1998. This includes:
the introduction and acceptance of the Konvertible Marka throughout the country;
the passage of a number of key laws, including the Law on Customs, and my imposition of the
Framework Law on Privatisation, following the failure of the BiH House of Peoples to pass it;
further media restructuring designed to remove public broadcasting from political control,
including the establishment of the Independent Media Commission (IMC), which started work on I
August; continued restructuring of RTV BiH; and firm action to tackle biased coverage by HRT
during the election campaign;
some further minority returns which, although limited in number, have been in key areas such as
Prijedor, Gradiska, and Kotor Varos;
the signature by representatives of the Council of Ministers and SFOR of an MOU increasing the
scope of civilian operations within Sarajevo airport.
l

7. Article
109 report: In addition, as requested in Article 109 of the declaration of the
Luxembourg
Ministerial
meeting of the PIC Steering Board in June, I have prepared a
comprehensive report on the state of peace implementation.
This report, which was delivered in
mid-September
to Steering Board Foreign Ministers, as well as to the Secretary General of the
United Nations, comprised:

- a paper setting out a strategy for the medium to long term, designed to forge a sustainable
peace in BiH;
- a comprehensive report on the state of peace implementation, sector by sector, outlining
progress to date, key obstacles, and the way ahead;and
- a detailed series of benchmarks for measuring progress in each area.
8. The strategy is based on five key pillars:

- democracy;
- rule of law;

- institutions;
- values and rights;
~__
- economic reconstruction.

/ ...

S/1998/947

English
Page 5

9. I make clear in the report that work in these areas must proceed in parallel if a self-sus~~g
peace is to be created. Failure to achieve progress in any one area jeopardises the whole enterprise.
I also make clear that success will depend on unity of effort of the international agencies on the
ground in BiH, and careful co-ordination between them. It also continues to depend on the presence
of a substantial international military presence, both to guarantee a stable and peaceful overall
political environment, and to support civilian implementation
efforts as much as possible. I am
working closely with SFOR to find ways to maximise that support and target it better.
10. Priorities
for the coming
year, my priorities will be to:

months:

In the immediate

period between now and the end of the

- accelerate and reinforce the central institutions;
- press forward with minority returns and the resolution of questions of property law;
- continue police restructuring and proceed with the establishment of a State Border Police;
- continue to press forward with media reform so that broadcasting networks are rationalised
outside control terminated.

and

11. I shall also bring forward proposals on judicial reform in BiH, including enhanced support for
the police, as well as working on new electoral arrangements as indicated above.
12. Kosovo: As I indicated in my last report, the situation in Kosovo, which has deteriorated
considerably in recent months, may have an impact on peace implementation
in BiH. There are, for
example, already some 10,000 refugees from Kosovo in BiH, stretching already thin resources. We
will need to keep the potential impact of Kosovo on BiH under close review in the coming months.
COORDINATION

OF CIVILIAN

IMPLEMENTATION

13. Peace Implementation
Council: The Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council
(PIC) has continued to meet on a regular basis at the level of Political Directors of respective
I have also continued to convene regular meetings of the Board at
Foreign Ministries.
ambassadorial
level in Sarajevo. On 22 July, the Steering Board met in Brussels, where it
discussed political developments, return of refugees and questions of property legislation, the
relationship between Croatia and BiH and the issue of border police. The meeting held in Sarajevo
on 8 September dealt with refugee return, media issues, Luxembourg
follow-up
and the
preparations for the elections of 12-13 September.
14, A frill meeting of the Foreign Ministers
Madrid in 15-16 December 1998.

of the Peace Implementation

Council will be held in

15. External co-ordination:
I have maintained my regular consultations with governments and
organisations involved in peace implementation.
I briefed the Security Council on 27 July and also
met with the UN Secretary General. I have had tirther meetings with the Secretary General of
NATO. The Contact Group met on 1 October in London to review the situation in BiH after the
elections.

/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page 6

16. In theatre, I have continued to chair regular meetings of Principals of the key implementation
agencies - UNMIBH, UN IPTF, OSCE, UNHCR as well as the Commander, SFOR. The InterAgency Planning Group, chaired by my Chief of Staff, continues to meet on weekly basis and is
helping to tighten up on inter-agency coordination.
17. The Economic Task Force has continued to meet. So too the Reconstruction and Return
Task Force (RRTF), which has now opened an office in Prijedor. An equivalent structure to the
RRTF - the Return Facilitation Group - has been established in Croatia, jointly chaired by
UNHCR and OSCE. My Deputy with responsibility for return issuesattends its meetings.
INSTITUTIONAL

MATTERS

18. Common Institutions: The Presidency, the Council ofMinisters and the Parliamentary
Assembly have continued to meet fairly regularly. But lack of political cooperation and poor
administrative structures still hamper their work. My Office continues to work closely with these
institutions, plus the Standing Commission on Military Matters (SCMM), to improve their
efficiency. From October, they are all due to convene at the renovated Marijin Dvor building; the
wasteful rotation of plenary sessionsbetween the National Museum in Sarajevo and at the ElectroTechnical Faculty in Lukavica will finally stop. The common institutions will, at last, be housed
under one roof.

.

19. The Presidency held few working sessionsbetween July and September, but met frequently
with high-ranking international delegations. Working sessionsfocused primarily on routine issues
such as appointment of Ambassadors, agrement of Ambassadors to Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
ratification of international agreements. The Council ofMinisters held several “extraordinary
“sessions. The Council adopted draft legislation covering telecommunications and customs. The
draft Immigration and Refugee Law was submitted to the Council on 10 July. Although it has not
yet been adopted, the Council did, at the urging of the UNHCR and my Office, adopt an
Instruction on the Temporary Admission of Kosovo Rejdgees on 24 September .
20. The need for reform of the structure of the Council of Ministers and its Ministries is largely
accepted by all Parties. My Office is preparing recommendations to be discussed as soon as the new
legislative bodies meet.

21. The Parliamentary Assembly met on 2 and 3 July, 22 July, and 1 and 2 September. It adopted
the Law on the Seal of the Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Law on Customs Policy and numerous
international agreements. It failed however, to adopt the Framework Law on the Privatisation of
Banks and Enterprises and the Law on Telecommunications. I therefore decided to impose both
laws on an interim basis. On 24 August, the Parliamentary Assembly formed a Secretariat at the
former Parliament building, which will draw up plans to provide full parliamentary services.
22. Since my last report, the Standing Committee on Military Matters (SCMM) has held its 8ti and
9”’ sessions. Significant progress has been made on a number of issues, such as cross IEBL
helicopter flights. The Secretariat of the SCMM is now more or less self sufficient. Recent
discussions have focused on possible reforms to enable it to work more efficiently.
/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page
7
.

23. The Constitutional
Court is preparing its next session, due on 14-15 October, 1998, which will
include a public hearing on the conformity of the Constitutions of the Entities with the Constitution
of BiH. Since August 1998, monthly payments have been made to the Court as part of its 1998
State budget.
24. Legislative affairs: A draft Law on Citizenship of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been finalised and is to be adopted. A similar procedure will be used for drafting the equivalent
law for the RS.
25. In the Federation the Criminal Code and Code on Criminal Procedure have been enacted. They
will come into effect in the coming weeks. Training in the provisions of these Codes for judges and
lawyers began in early September 1998.
26. In Republika Srpska, the drafting of similar Codes is nearly finished. I expect these to be
submitted to the Republika Srpska National Assembly by the end of the year.
27. BiH Anthem:
Scores of entries have been received for the public competition for a National
Anthem of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The deadline for entries to be submitted expired on 15 August
1998. The Independent Commission for Common Symbols, which I formed, is now reviewing the
entries and will select three entries which will be submitted to the Parliamentary
Assembly. The
Parliamentary
Assembly will then be asked to choose one of th? three to be the national anthem.
28. The Port of Place:
In September, the Republic of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
initialed an “Agreement on the free transit through the territory of Croatia to and from the Port
of Place and through the Territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina at Neum “. My Office and the US
played a key role in assisting the parties to reach this agreement. The port of Place, which is
located entirely on Croatian territory, is the sole access to the sea for BiH. 70% of cargo which
passed through the port prior to the disintegration
of the former Yugoslavia came from BiH.
The Neum corridor separates two
Access to this port is essential for BiH economic development.
parts of Croatia, and without full and unimpeded access through this corridor the Croatian city of
Dubrovnik, one of Croatia’s major tourist areas, would be cut off from the rest of the country.
29. The agreement was initialed in Zagreb on 10 September by Hrvoje SarLc, Chief of Staff to
President Tudjman; and Nenad Porgas, Economy Minister of the Government of Croatia. It was
initialed for the OHR by my Principal Deputy, Ambassador Klein, and for the US by Special
Envoy Ambassador Richard Sklar, both of whom acted as mediators during the negotiations. The
agreement was initialed for the Bosnian side on 9 September by President Izetbegovic, Dr Silajdzic
(Co-Chair of the Council of Ministers) and Minister Kurtovic, Foreign Trade Minister. Formal
signature, and publication
of the details of the agreement, are matters for the parties and are
expected to take place soon.
30. Special Relations
between Croatia and the Federation:
The Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia are negotiating an “Agreement on Special Relations
(between the Republic of Croatia and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina) “, as stipulated
in the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. My Office has been closely involved in trying to
help broker an agreement between the two sides. Sticking points remain, but I am hopeful of
progress in the near future.
/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page 8

31. Succession issues for the Former Yugoslavia: Arrangements are being made for a fiuther
negotiating session to be held in the secondhalf of October in Brussels. This will be preceded by a
tour of Capitals by the Special Negotiator for SuccessionIssues, Sir Arthur Watts.
32. Brcko: The Deputy High Representative and Supervisor of Brcko continued to promote
implementation of the Supplemental Award. Over 1200 Bosniac refugee and displaced families
have been returned to their homes of origin in Brcko. The returns process has slowed due to
difficulties with displaced persons occupying properties in potential return areas. An additional
1000 Bosniac families have been approved for return but are not yet ready to come back. More
than 1000 Bosnian Croat families have been approved for return, but Bosnian Croats have yet to
return in significant numbers. Slight progress has been made regarding the return of Bosnian Serb
displaced persons to the Federation.
33. Members of the multi-ethnic administration are complying with the provisions of the Brcko
Municipal Statute, and Bosnian Serb parties have begun to demonstrate the will to consider
compromise on selectedissues in dispute. Encouraged by OHR, the Mayor and his Deputies
(Bosniac and Croat) are considering a restructuring of the Executive Board to increase the Board’s
effectiveness. Despite personnel constraints, Brcko’s multi-ethnic police have demonstrated
operational effectiveness and have cooperated with IPTF initiatives such as community policing.
The multi-ethnic judiciary operates normally, and a process of cooperation with the Federation
judiciary has begun.
34. The government, multi-ethnic police, and political parties cooperated with my Office and the
OSCE in the preelection period. For the first time since the establishment of Supervision, parties
representing diverse (Serb and Bosniac) views held rallies in Brcko town proper. The polling
process proceeded smoothly and peacefully.
35. International donor pledges have increased moderately. IC-facilitated credits have been
disbursed, primarily to private companies, while a micro-credit facility is issuing loans to
individuals. These credits have generated hundreds of jobs, but Brcko’s economy, lacking
investments, remains basically stagnant and lacks substantial employment opportunities. Brcko
remains in critical need of investment and employment opportunities to support the multi-ethnic
administration, encourage returnees, and deter the potential for social unrest.
36. Freedom of movement has continued to improve. There has been an increase in vehicular
traffic in the Area of Supervision, particularly over the bridge to Croatia. Brcko’s railway station
was officially opened in August.
37. Federation issues: Federation issuescontinue to be the focus of attention of my office.
Considerable efforts have been exerted to meet the conclusions of the Federation Forum of 16
April 1998
38. During the election campaign, my Office supported sanctions imposed by the OSCE on the
HDZ for intimidation of other Croat parties, including by the HVO. Efforts to undermine the
achievements in Central Bosnia , including attempt by HDZ bard-liners to break up the joint police
force in Central Bosnia, were stymied. Progress was aho made in moving the Bosniac intelligence
service AID from the police station at Travnik and Bugojno. The Joint Municipal Committee for
Prozor/Rama-Bugojno, established on 19 June with the assistanceof my Office, has continued to
meet and is proving useful.
I

S/1998/947

English
Page 9

39. Small-scale but significant returns of Bosniacs to Croat municipalities of Vitez and ProzorRama have continued. So too have returns of Bosniacs to the heartland of Herzegovina (Capljina,
Stolac), although these have been marred recently by violence. The first breakthroughs of Serb
returns to Mostar and the Neretva Valley were achieved over the summer. There was a setback in
Rastani, however, in the Mostar West municipality, when a small group of Serbs attempting to
return on 26 September were met with resistance by Bosnian Croats, who set up illegal roadblocks
overnight.
40. Despite the successesin minority returns in Central Bosnia and Herzegovina, significant
breakthroughs are still needed, The prevention of Serb returns to Rastani (near Mostar) in
September/October, together with recent violence surrounding the return of Bosniacs to Tasovcici
(in which one Bosniac DP was killed and three wounded), underlines the need for firm action by
Croat leaders to make clear that violent behaviour and intimidation will not be tolerated. During
returns on 1 October, a crowd of Croat displaced persons blocked the road and a road block was
erected on the M 17 route into Tasovcici. The Multinational Specialised Unit (MSU) was deployed
and in its first active involvement in crowd control cleared the road and restored freedom of
movement.
41. It is worth noting that the most successful returns have been achieved in the,Jajce, Bugojno and
in the rest of the Vrbas valley, and have been characterised by exceptionally close cooperation
between my Office, the local SFOR units, and other international agencies involved. The successof
these returns may offer useful lessonsfor planning returns elsewhere.
42. The arrival of my resident Resident Envoy in Drvar has made a considerable difference in
improving co-ordination on the ground there. It is a model which I hope will be replicated by the
deployment of Special Envoys elsewhere (see section on Municipalities
below). Returns have
continued to Drvar over the summer, and freedom of movement has significantly improved.
43. Dissolution of parallel structures of the former Croat Republic of Herzeg-Bosna and Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina remains a matter of great importance. Dismantling these parallel
institutions, especially separate payments and pension systems,and cutting off Croatia’s financial
support
to parallel institutions of Herzeg-Bosnia are the main short term targets of my of&e. We
will maintain a clear link between economic assistanceand co-operation, and we be keeping a close
watch on the record of newly-elected officials. Mr. Jelavic, the new Croat member of the
Presidency, has promised repeatedly that he will not tolerate HDZ officials who pbstruct the
implementation of Dayton; we will expect him to honour that pledge.
44. Rep&l&
Srpska issues: Regrkttably, progress on peace implementation in Republika Srpska
slowed between July and September. In the preelection period, the SLOGA parties in the RS
National Assembly and the Government of Prime Minister Dodik were reluctant t0 propose
legislation on politically sensitive subjects, such as Property and Amnesty legislation, or to
implement the Privatization maw. Cooperation on multi-ethnic police and the border police has
been negligible.
Movement on evictions to enable reinstatements, which had briefly improved, was
stopped on instruction from the Ministry of the Interior. There was also a significant contravention
b the Rules of &. Road (the arrest of a Bosnian Croat by the RS police in September). But the
Government did make serious efforts to convert its revenue and income from Yugoslav dinars into
BiH Convertible marks (KM). The process of issuing passports has begun.
/ . . .

S/1998/947
English
Page 10

45. In the wake of the elections, my Office will insist on rapid progress in the following key areas:
property law, returns, policing, judiciary, media; and privatisation.
46. For an assessmentof the results of the elections in the ES, seethe section on Elections below.
47. Municipalities: Article 74 of the declaration issued by the Luxembourg meeting of the
Steering Board in June requested the establishment of a municipal peace implementation evaluation
system, and promised staff and funding to implement these recommendations. My Office - working
with the OSCE, UNHCR, ECMM and other agencies- will soon complete preliminary surveys of
29 municipalities. We will then review those surveys in order to decide in which municipalities it
would be useful to place Special Envoys to promote returns and accelerate peace implementation in
general. This initiative will require funding and the assignment of experienced, mature envoys, both
of which depend on donors.
DEMOCRACY
48. The recent elections: 12-13 September 1998: These general elections in BiH were the most
peaceful and democratic in the country’s history. The turnout rate - at around 70% - was high.
Technically some of the most complex elections in the world, they passed off relatively smoothly
under the supervision of the OSCE. Naturally, as always, we will want to see what further lessons
can be learned from experience when preparing for fiture setsof elections. There were problems
with a number of voters’ lists, but these affected less than 5% of polling stations. The police
conducted themselves with professionalism. Observers from a wide range of political parties were
present on both sides of the IEBL. The local election commissions, in general, carried out their
tasks with dedication.
49. The results - with one notable exception - showed further evidence of a steady trend towards
greater moderation and pluralism in BiH politics. The share of the vote won by extreme nationalist
parties fell in both Entities. The monopoly of the three most important ethnically- based parties is
weakening. And the voice of an independent, increasingly self-confident opposition in both Entities
is growing.
50. For the first time since the signing of the GFAP, the nationalist parties no longer have an
absolute majority in the various parliamentary bodies of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Moderate
parties, supportive of the Dayton process,now have the possibility of controlling the legislative
branches at all levels of government in both Entities, and at the national level. For the first time, the
Presidency may have a pro-Dayton consensus.The Council of Ministers and the national ministries
will probably be run by parties more committed to Dayton.
5 1. Time will tell whether these more hopeful prospects deliver results. But for now at least the
prospects are in some respectsbrighter than before the elections.
52. Elections: key points: The following points are worth highlighting:

/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page 11

In all races, compared to 1996, the nationalist parties have lost ground, in absolute and relative
terms.
The SDP, for example, counted their seats in single digits in the 1996 elections. Following these
elections, they will be in double figures.
On average in the Federation, the SDP took about 20% of the vote, performing best in Sarajevo
Canton.
Newly established parties such as the New Croat Initiative (NHI) managed to offer an alternative
choice to the voter. The NHI, for example, will obtain a seat in all three parliamentary bodies at the
State and Entity level - in the BiH House of Representatives, in the Federation House of
Representatives, and in the RS National Assembly. It has established itself as a viable alternative
to the HDZ and will offer competition to the HDZ in future elections.
The new Presidency will consist of Alija Izetbegovic, Ante Jelavic and Zivko Radisic. This line-up
offers a better prospect for cooperation, both with each other, and with the international
community, than the previous tripartite body.
The runner-up for the member of the Presidency was the SDP candidate Gradimer Gojer, who
proved to be a serious contender in the race. The Presidency results are a further sign the process
of building a state is evolving, and that new political leaders are expected to be responsible and
responsive to the needs of voters.
In the Federation, RS based parties took part in the elections, unlike in 1996. These parties won
seats in the Federation House of Representatives. In 1996, only six parties and coalitions were
represented in the Federation House of Representatives; now 18 parties or coalitions of parties will
be represented. In 1996, the SDA held 78 seats - an absolute majority. Now they will hold only 68
seats. Although they remain the largest party, they have lost their overall majority.
In the RS National Assembly, the SLOGA coalition, together with the different Federation parties,
holds the majority of the seats. The SDS, which held an absolute majority of 45 seats in 1996, no
longer does so. More parties are represented in the RSNA than in 1996 or 1997. The Party of
Independent Social Democrats, for example, has tripled its number of seats. The decline in the
nationalist parties’ share of the seats which began in the 1997 elections continued this time. For the
first time both the NHI and the HDZ will have representatives in the RS National Assembly.
These positive trends at the State and Entity levels were mirrored at the cantonal level. In all races,
the SDA-led coalition and the HDZ lost ground. In Una Sana Canton, and in Canton 10, RS based
parties will be represented in the Cantonal Assemblies. This - together with the fact that Croat
based parties will be represented in the RSNA - sends a strong signal that returns are not out of the
question.
l

53. The exception to this generally encouraging trend was the election of a candidate with a hardline record to the post of President of the Republika Srpska. We have made clear that we will judge
Mr Pop&en by his actions in the coming months.
54. Electoral law reform: Following the elections, I have now turned my attention to the drafting
of an election law. My Office, in co-operation with the OSCE and the Council of Europe, is
working on a draft election law which will regulate the conduct of the Presidency elections and the

/ ...

.

S/1998/947
English
Page 12

elections for the Parliamentary Assembly of BiH and establish the parameters for the Entity
elections. On 1 August, in co-operation with the OSCE, I appointed a commission of seven
independent national experts to review the draft. I plan to have initial proposals ready for
consultation with the Steering Board in November.
55. Media reform: Over this reporting period the objectives of my media strategy have been
largely achieved. Implementation of the strategy has helped to loosen the political grip on public
broadcasting, promote independent media, lay the ground for a legal framework for the media and
to focus attention on pressing issuesholding back the peace process. As a result, voters had access
to a wider range of viewpoints than in previous elections and the media environment was
significantly more benign.
56. SRT/IITV BIH: Following our ongoing intervention with SRT in Republika Srpska, our
attention this summer focused on the reform of Radio Television Bosnia and Herzegovina (RTV
BiH) in the Federation. Subsequent to the Memorandum of Understanding on the restructuring of
RTV BiH, endorsed in June by members of the Presidency, I appointed on 8 July an international
adviser at RTV BiH to assist with the restructuring of the television network, in particular to
improve its current affairs programming. An interim Board of Governors, which includes the
adviser, was ratified by me following nominations made by the Presidency. The multi-ethnic Board
appointed a new General Manager in August and has begun preparing a proposal for a Federation
TV which seeksto enfranchise the Croat community. The Board is also drafting a proposal for a
public broadcasting corporation covering the whole of BiH. The Board has reported to me that the
financial condition of the network is extremely difficult following the withdrawal of nontransparent financial support.
5% Independent Media Commission: Subsequent to its formal establishment in early June of this
year, the Independent Media Commission (IMC) is now fully functioning. On 1 August the IMC
Broadcasting Code of Practice for radio and television in BiH came into force. All broadcasters are
now required to adhere to this code which is drawn from other European models and is in
accordance with the BiH constitution. An appellate body, the IMC Council, which is composed of
national and international members, convened for the first time in September.
58. The IMC’s first decision addressedthe role and activities of Croatian state television, Hrvatska
’ Televizija (HRT), re-broadcasting‘ in BiH. The history of this problem predates the Peace
Agreement when the Bosnian Croat HDZ leadership extended the reach of the Zagreb-based HRT
network in the territory of BiH by using sites seized by Croat military forces. HRT became the
focus of international concern prior to the recent elections due to its clear favouritism towards the
BiH HDZ. Despite a series of international protests delivered to the Croatian government and
HRT, the network failed to offer equitable access to other political parties and candidates as
required by electoral regulations. Finally, the OSCE’s Election Appeals Sub-commission ruled that
HRT violated the electoral media rules and removed BiH-HDZ candidates from the party list.
59. The IMC ruled on 15 September that the legal status of Erotel, which rebroadcasts HRT in
BiH, was uncertain and concluded that the use of frequencies by Erotel required IMC regulation.
The IMC assumed sole custody of transmission sites and facilities and frequencies associated with
these sites until such time as RTV BiH and Erotel reach an agreement acceptable to the IMC, or
until another order by IMC on the issue is delivered. The IMC also warned Erotel that it had
violated the IMC Broadcasting Code of Practice on several occasions and required Erotel to
conform in the future fully with the Code. Constructive and unprecedented discussions between
/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page 13

RTV BiH and Erotel have begun under IMC auspices.
60. O&V: The Open Broadcast Network (OBN) and the Free Election Radio Network (FERN)
remain the only genuine cross-entity television and radio networks which do not attempt to promote
or cater to one particular ethnic community.
The formation of the OBN International
Trust,
expansion of the network through new affiliates, acquisition
of strong programming
and
recruitment of a more professional news and current affairs team has had a dramatic effect on
audience penetration and the reputation of the OBN over the last few months. Election coverage by
OBN and Radio FERN was wide ranging, offering more time than other networks for all political
parties and candidates.

61. Public Service Informattin

Campaign: Our Public Service Information Campaign (PSIC),
launched to help ensure that issues rather than dogma were explored fully during the election
campaign, was aired on all major networks as well as numerous smaller local stations. Two
separate independent polls conducted to gauge viewer responses throughout BiH showed positive
responses to the campaign. Overall, over half of those questioned believed that the reports
I believe such a campaign to be a vital part of a long-term
conveyed “important
information”.
strategy for reconciliation. We are therefore seeking funding for next year’s budget line to include
production of more public service reports.
RETURNS
62. The right to return: return of refugees and displaced persons: Returns have been slower
than hoped for so far in 1998. The UNHCR had set a target figure of 50,000 minority returns for
the first six months of the year. The actual figure is closer to 15,000, but there have been some
encouraging movements during the summer.
63. As outlined in the RRTF Action Plan, the primary obstacles to return remain a lack of political
will on the part of the authorities, the absence of a sense of personal security for minority
returnees, housing shortages, a general lack of employment opportunities, and legal and
administrative problems.
64. Croatia’s adoption of a new return programme on 26 June 1998 marked a further step towards
the realisation of regional return. While failing to address all the issues raised at the Banja Luka
Conference, the Croatian return programme is promising and may yield significant returns if
structures have been established in Croatia and some
implemented in good faith. Implementation
results are already visible. The RRTF continues to maintain close ties with key actors in Croatia
with a view to assisting in the implementation
of the Return Programme and promoting crossborder return.
65. Implementation
of the Sarajevo Declaration is still inadequate, although there have been some
improvements. The authorities still refuse to address systematic problems in the housing allocation
system, adopting a burdensome and opaque approach instead of dealing with individual cases one
by one. I will review the situation at the end of this quarter and reconsider further conditionality
for international assistance.
66. Cross Inter-Entity Boundary Line (IEBL) returns continue at an encouraging pace. Bosnian
Serbs are returning to places like, Bosanski Petrovac, Glamoc, Sarajevo, and Central Bosnia.
Bosniac and Croat returns are taking place into the north-western part of the Rep&l&a Srpb in

/ ...
1

S/1998/947
English
Page 14
the hundreds - to places like Prijedor, Bosanska Gradiska, and Kotor Varos. This momentum is
expected to continue for the next l-2 months, as housing reconstruction programmes are completed
and more accommodation becomes available. The European Commission’s
1998 programme in
support of return is a key factor in generating new housing space and supporting infrastructure,
67. Our priority now is to remove the obstacles preventing significant minority return to eastern
Republika Srpska. I intend that the necessary property legislation be put in place quickly and that
pressure be brought’to bear on the new RS government. Judiciary reform, police restructuring, job
creation, equal access to documentation, and return of elected councillors are required as well to
achieve significant minority return.
HUMAN

RIGHTS

68. Human rights violations:
The number of incidents of destruction of property and violence
directed at minority residents and returnees has continued to increase during this reporting period,
particularly
in Stolac, Klanac and Travnik.
In July, a second police officer was murdered in
Travnik by an explosive device which resulted in a temporary withdrawal of Bosnian Croat police
officers from Travnik station. My Office is also extremely concerned by continued allegations of
abuse in police custody in both Entities, including physical abuse to force confessions, abuse
during arrest, harassment and ill-treatment during detention. A particularly disturbing incident has
resulted in the decertification of the Republika Srpska Chief of Uniformed Police in connection
with seven individuals allegedly held in hidden detention and physically mistreated for nine days in
Pale.
69. My Office is also extremely concerned by the continued failure of the authorities to ensure
that the decisions and recommendations of Human Rights Chamber, the Human Rights
Ombudsperson and the Commission for Real Property Claims (CRPC) are implemented.
The
Republika Srpska authorities have still failed to appoint an agent to the Annex 6 Institutions.
While three individuals have been designated at the state level to act as agents, their appointment
must be ratified by the Council of Ministers as an urgent priority.
70. Funding of human rights institutions:
Securing adequate and stable fimding for the Annex 6
and 7 Institutions is essential if these institutions are to deal effectively with growing caseloads.
The stable and reliable finding from voluntary contributions have enabled important institutional
developments and should be continued next year. My Office is also working with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina government to ensure that it respects its tinding commitments
for the Institutions’
1998 budgets.
71. Property law: In light of the deliberate obstruction of implementation
of the property and
housing laws in the Federation, I have imposed an extension of the deadline for filing claims for a
firther six months. My Office will continue monitoring the claims process and, where necessary,
intervene tirther to ensure that the property rights of refugees and displaced persons are protected.
The deadline of 31 August set at Luxembourg for the Republika Srpska to adopt property
consistent with the Peace Agreement was not met by the government. Following the elections, it is
my highest priority to ensure that the necessary property law is put in place in the Republika
Srpska.
72. Education:

With the assistance of UNESCO,

the Council of Europe, and the World Bank, my
/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page 15

Of&e is continuing its work on the implementation of the Textbook Review Project agreed
between the Ministers of Education in May on the removal of offensive materials from textbooks in
use in primary and secondary schools. The Ministers have agreed to implement the
recommendations made by the expert teams for the removal of offensive materials as well as the
recommendations of an Independent Commission, to be established by my Office, in cases where
the expert teams are unable to reach an agreement.
My Office continues its efforts to support initiatives underway to
reform the legal framework applicable to associations and foundations, and to support the
establishment of an environment conducive to the development of civil society. The working
version of a new draft Law on Associations and Foundations distributed in June for public
discussion has been revised, based upon input received from many local non-governmental
organisations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This version will be reviewed together with the
Ministries of Justice to produce a final draft acceptable and supported by both the NGO
community and relevant state structures.

73. Civil

society

building:

74. Missing Persons and Exhumations:
The Joint Exhumation Process continues. The three
parties continue to work well together. So far this year, over 1000 bodies have been exhumed,
almost twice as many as in the previous two years combined. Resources remain a problem,
however.
RULE

OF LAW

75. Judicial and Legal Reform: My Office is proceeding in its work with UNMIBH, the
Council of Europe and OSCE in the area of reform of the criminal justice system. Developments
in this area have been encouraging, particularly with the adoption of the Criminal Code and
Criminal Procedure Code by the Federation Parliament in late July. These codes, essential for
effective protection of the rights and freedoms set forth in the European Convention on Human
Rights, are expected to enter into force shortly. The Expert Team to reform the Criminal Law of
the Republika Srpska, has submitted its drafts of the codes to the Government, and international
experts have assessedthe drafts as to their compliance with the Convention and other international
standards. The final plenary sessionof Republika Srpska and international experts is expected to
take place in November.

76. I remain concerned with the lack of independence and impartiality of the judiciary in both
Entities. Adoption of legislation to provide for review of judicial appointments by an independent
commission, and establishment of basic standards for an independent judiciary, is essential to
ensuring that the appointment process is transparent and not subject to political influence. These
laws must be ready for consideration by the Federation and Republika Srpska Parliaments in the
early post-election period.
77. The UN Security Council endorsement of the establishment of a judicial monitoring and
assessmentproject within UNMIBH is strongly welcomed by my Office The information obtained
through systematic court monitoring will play an essential role in informing other reform efforts
which my Office coordinates, including the development of legislation regarding judges and
prosecutors, and training of legal professionals.
78. Cooperation

with ICTY

and Rules of the Road:

In June, SFOR troops detained a Bosnian
/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page
16

Serb under sealed indictment in Foca. Following the arrest, however, both the UN IPTF and
OWE Field Offices were destroyed by crowds protesting the action. Two Bosnian Serbs arrested
by SFOR troops in July were released by the Tribunal immediately upon receiving confirmation
that the arrests were made as a result of mistaken identity. Another Bosnian Serb was detained by
SFOR troops in late September.
79. A serious violation of the Rules of the Road by Republika Srpska authorities occurred during
the reporting period with the arrest of a Bosnian Croat before the individual’s file was sent to the
ICTY Office of the Prosecutor for review. Despite repeated interventions by my Office, as well as
the subsequent decision of the ICTY Deputy Prosecutor that the evidence submitted by the
Republika Srpska authorities in this case was insufficient, the individual remained in detention for
one month in Foca prison. Republika Srpska authorities released the individual only following a
decision by the Election Appeals Sub-Commission that he must be released as the arrest was in
violation of the Rules and Regulations of the Provisional Election Commission.
of Movement:
The implementation of the Uniform Licence Plate System and the
Common Vehicle Registration Document is 99 % complete. From 30 September, all vehicles have
been obliged by law to carry the new plates to travel within BiH. The introduction of the uniform
plates has led to a dramatic increase in freedom of movement. Cross IEBL traffic doubled between
April and July alone.

80. Freedom

The Federation Ministry of Interior was finally inaugurated during the
reporting period, although deployment of minority officers remains to be finalised. Due to the preelection climate, further progress was stalled. UNMIBH and my Office intend to reinforce our joint
efforts to achieve minority police restructuring and deployment. The next three months must see
serious efforts by the authorities in both Entities to comply with the deadlines set in the
Luxembourg PIC Document on policing matters.

81. Police restructuring:

82. The draft State Border Police Law remains under discussion by an inter-agency working group
including UNMIBH, SFOR, CAFAO and my Office. They are working together on a
comprehensive plan for the establishment of a State Border Police, before submitting the Law to
the Council of Ministers. This be will one of my main priorities in the coming months.
corruption:
The Anti-Fraud Unit of my Office continues to assist authorities in
identifying illegal activities and in coordinating international efforts in the areas of government
transparency, corruption and organised economic crime. The work of the Anti-Fraud Unit is based
on two pillars: the development and implementation of a global and long-term strategy against
corruption and assistancein the investigation and prosecution of current casesof corruption. These
two pillars are complementary. While a global strategy is necessaryto prepare the country for a
better future, immediate action against corruption must be undertaken to show the Bosnian
population, in particular the young generation, that generalized corruption is a left- over of the
communist society which must be eradicated. Establishing a comprehensive anti-corruption
strategy necessarily involves most aspectsof economic reform as well as legal/judicial reform,
institutional reform and education/public awareness.
83. Combating

84. In the field of customs, EC CAFAO continues its work to improve the efficiency of the
administrations in both Entities, and to encourage them to work jointly against smuggling.
/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page
17

ECONOMIC

REFORM

AND RECONSTRUCTION

85. Reform of Public Utilities and Implementation
of Annex 9: Regular passenger rail service
was extended from Sarajevo through Mostar to Capljina. The border crossing agreement for rail
traffic between Croatia and Bill was adopted by the Bill Council of Ministers and has been sent to
Croatia for review and consideration. The agreement would allow the resumption of commercial
rail traffic between Croatia and BiH. The Joint Railway Corporation has progressed slowly; some
legal problems still have to be resolved. My Office and the chairman of the Commission on Public
Corporations (CPC) are actively pursuing this matter, but they can not substitute for the various
competent authorities. Regulations for inter-entity rail traffic are still to be issued by the Ministry
of Civil Affairs and Communications.
86. The CPC met on 6 July 1998, in the presence of the ministers of energy of both the Federation
and the RS, to discuss the possible creation of a Public Corporation for electric power
transmission. The ultimate goal is to be ready for an efficient and safe power transmission when
the grid in BiH is again fully operational and ready to synchronise with and other systems.
87. The instruction on the regulation of inter-Entity bus traffic was signed by the Ministry of Civil
Affairs and Communications
and has been published in the BiH Official Gazette. The instruction
on international bus traffic has been prepared and is due to be published soon. These instructions
provide guidelines for bus companies and Entity transport/traffic
ministries
in preparing,
submitting and reviewing applications for inter-Entity and international bus routes.
88. On 11 September, I decided to put the State Telecommunications
Law temporarily in force,
until the BiH Parliamentary Assembly will adopt it in the same form. The Law was adopted by the
Council of Ministers, but the Parliamentary Assembly adjourned its consideration of the Law until
after the elections while the Law was urgently needed. Part of the decision was also to recognise
the existence of the 3 operators at present providing services through the fixed public switched
network. The Law establishes the Telecommunications
Regulatory Agency. The EBRD will
continue to provide assistance in this area.
89. Macro economic reform and transition:
In the period under review, the Economic Task
Force (ETF), continued to meet regularly under my chairmanship. It is still an essential tool for coordinating economic reform policies and international reconstruction assistance. The ETF
Secretariat, operated by my Office in co-operation with IMG, informs and guides the general donor
community through monthly publication of an economic newsletter and donor meetings.
90. On 28 July, the Central Bank of BiH (CBBH) put the 20, 50, and 100 Konvertibile
Marka
(KM) notes in circulation. The lower denominations were already introduced on 22 June. The
currency is pegged to the DM in a rate of 1: 1. The old Bosnian Dinar is no longer a legal currency.
I passed a decision on 28 September 1998 to impose the design for the coins. Overall, the
introduction can be considered as a success, but in some areas the use of the currency remains
limited. My Office continues to monitor the acceptance of the KM as the legal tender of BiH and
supports the CBBH in promoting the country-wide use of the currency.
91. Considerable progress is made on the implementation
of the 1998 State budget. Both Entities
have transferred funds to the bank account of the Common Institutions in the CBBH. Beneficiaries
of the budgets of the Common Institutions have received their first payments through the official
payment channels. My Office, together with the technical assistance of the US Treasury and other
/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page 18

organisations, will continue to make sure that the State budget is implemented according to the
Law.

92. The process of liquidating the NBBH, the former Central Bank, is ongoing. To initiate the
liquidation process, the liquidator ordered a freeze of NBBH assetson 16 July, but the Federation
Government ordered that the freeze be ignored, which it has been to date. Some successhas been
achieved in certain areas of the liquidation process, including clarification of ownership of the
NBBH building and paying off the claims of several thousand non-governmental depositors at face
value. Much work remains to be accomplished, in particular determining how the gap between
NBBH liabilities and assetswill be covered.
93. Negotiations between the BiH delegation and the Paris Club of sovereign creditors, held on 23
and 24 July have not led to an agreement. An agreement with the creditors is essential for future
access to international capital markets for BiH. A next round of negotiations should start in
October 1998. The IMF will not be able to complete the first review under the stand-by
arrangement without liquidation of the NBBH and achieving a successful debt-reduction
negotiation with the Paris Club.
94. On 3 September, the Federation House of Peoples approved the Federation External Debt Law.
Passage of this key law is an important step in building confidence among foreign creditors to
extend loans to BiH. The law ensuresthat the Federation’s share of repaying debts incurred by the
State of BiH to foreign creditors is an unconditional liability and will be satisfied from general
Federation budgetary revenues. To complete the legal framework for repayment of external debt
obligations of BiH, it is now necessary for the RS to pass a law similar to the one in the
Federation.
95. At its sessions of 1 and 2 September, the B&I Parliamentary Assembly adopted the Law on
Customs Policy of BiH. The Law will come into force only on 1 January 1999. The Law is based
on the European Customs Code. With the adoption of this Law and the Customs Tariff Law that
has been in force since March of this year, the new customs legal framework is finalised. Full
implementation of both Laws is a prerequisite for a unified BiH customs territory. CAFAO, funded
by the EC, continues to assist the customs administrations in improving its efficiency and
implementing the new legislation.
96. On 11 August, the Ministers of Trade and Finance of the RS and the Federation signed an
agreement in which they committed themselves to remove obstacles to internal trade. This is
another step forward in attaining freedom of movement of persons, goods, services, and capital in
BiH. Even though implementation of the agreement has proven difficult, the Ministries of both
Entities have recognised that from a legal point of view they cannot ignore the presence of the other
Entity and that they will both benefit economically from mutual co-operation.
97. On its sessionof 20 August, the Council of Ministers established the BiH Agency for Statistics
(BHAS), responsible for producing national statistics on economic and social indicators. The
statistics will be based on data submitted by Entity statistical institutes. Establishment of the
BHAS and improvement of Entities’ institutes will be facilitated by the release of considerable
financial assistanceup to around KM 10 million from the EC, Italy, Switzerland, and Sweden.
98. The OHRdrafted Framework Law on Privatisation of Enterprises and Banks, already adopted
by the Council of Ministers, did pass the BiH House of Representatives in July but was

/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page 19

subsequently rejected by the House of Peoples due to Serb opposition. On 23 July 1998 the Law
entered into force upon my decision, on an interim basis, until the House of Peoples adopts this law
in due form, without amendmentsand no conditions attached. In order to help the process of
privatisation proceed smoothly, I have establishedthe Privatisation Monitoring Commission, which
will be operational from November 1998.
and financial help: In the last three months, up to 1 September, a
considerable amount of donor funded projects have been carried out. In this period, reconstruction
projects worth a total of approximately KM 150 million were completed. One should note that this
does not mean that all this money was spent in this period, but that projects were finalised.
Moreover, a total of half a billion KM of new reconstruction projects started, some of them being
completed within the described period, most of them to be completed in the future. Of these new
projects, around 30% was started in the RS, with close to 10% that benefits both Entities. This is a
clear indication of increased donor effort after the government turn around in January this year.

99. Reconstruction

100. On 7 July, Mostar Airport was officially opened for civilian traffic. After Sarajevo and Banja
Luka, Mostar is the third airport in BiH to open for regular international air services. The opening
was made possible after the Spanish Government and the EU made necessary funds available. In
1998 and 1999, the International Community will finance projects that will result in a complete reequipment of the airport.

.

101. Civil Aviation:
On 2 March 1998 DCA BiH signed a bilateral agreement with
EUROCONTROL relating to air navigation charges. EUROCONTROL has informed Zagreb
(ATSA) and Belgrade (FATCA), who had been providing temporary air traffic control in the
airspace of BiH since 24 April 1997, and has been charging users of BiH airspace with effect from
6 April 1998.

102. FATCA continues to collect air navigation charges from users of the portion of BiH airspace
wherein it provides air traffic control. In consequencethe respective users are charged once by
EUROCONTROL and once by Belgrade. This problem will be resolved when DCA signs the
protocol with FATCA.
103. An Aviation Law was prepared and submitted to the Council of Ministers on 6 August 1998,
which would, inter alia, give DCA the power to delegate duties and functions to the Entity Civil
Aviation Departments.
104. On 11 September 1998 COMSFOR signed a letter delegating the authority and responsibility
for air traffic control of BiH upper air space to DCA . DCA will need to review the letter and
advise the Council of Ministers to sign it. At the moment BiH will need to contract the air traffic
control services from third parties.
105. Mostar Airport , since being placed under the authority of OHR by an Arbitration Decision,
was reopened for civilian traffic on 7 July 1998. The first scheduled commercial flight, operated
by Croatian Airlines, took off from Mostar to Zagreb on 14 July 1998. The arbitration period has
been further extended until March 1999. The new MOU for Sarajevo Airport, signed on 20
August 1998, introduced cargo operations and overnight parking for aircraft and further facilitates
civil air operations in Sarajevo. Jugoslav Airlines (JAT) and Montenegro Airlines operate
schedules into Banja Luka Airport. SATAIR, the first Airline of Republica Srpska, wishes to

commenceoperationsfrom Banja Luka oncean amendmentto the existing MOU, to allow for

/ ...

S/1998/947
English
Page 20

overnight parking, is approved.
106. Demining
The mine action programme has now been handed over to the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, with the formal reception of the BHMAC by the Council of Ministers from the
UN on 16 July 1998. The MOU between the Parties and SFOR on Humanitarian Demining by the
Entity Armed Forces (EAF) was signed on 6 July 1998. The EAF now have 360 qualified
deminers who have been trained at the centres in Banja Luka, Mostar and Travnik, providing a
total of 45 Demining Teams.

107. The delayed EU demining programme has received unfavourable media attention in recent
months, both locally and across Europe. The equipment left in storage became the focus for the
media coverage, while there were no explanations for the delay forthcoming from EU officials. In
August the programme was reinvigorated with the signing of a contract with the German NGO
‘HELP’, and is now in its planning phase. It is unlikely that any mines will be removed from the
ground before the start of the next ‘season’ in Spring 1999.
108. The Slovenian Trust Fund is an initiative of Congress, whereby funds have been pledged on
the basis that the US will match any other donation up to a maximum of $28m. An MOU has been
produced by Slovenia for the Council of Ministers to consider, after which an Action Plan will
need to be approved by the Demining Commission.
109. The Ottawa Treaty on the prohibition of anti-personnel (AP) mines, to which BiH is a
signatory, will come into effect on 1 March 99. The EAF still hold their stockpiles of AP mines in
SFOR monitored sites, and have yet to formulate the plans for their destruction. SFOR’s intent is
that this programme be incorporated into the EAF’s winter demining campaign.
