Resolutions adopted on the report.I of the Second Committee

the Council of the Food and Agric:nlture Organization
to take appropriate action.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 neamber 1965.

2096 (XX). Programme of studies on multilateral
food aid
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 2095 (XX) of 20
December 1965 extending the ·world Food Programme,
Considering that the problem of hunger will continue
to be one of the most serious problems facing the international community in the years to come,
Noting the finding of the Conference of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
at its thirteenth session that, while it was possible to
discern a trend towards the reduction of world surpluses, the need for food aid was on the rontrary
increasing,
Considering further that, withont prejudice to the
efforts being made to increase food production in developing countries, it is essential to intensify international co-operation in this field so long as many countries continue to experience difficulties in importing the
additional food-stnffs needed for their steadily increasing populations,
·
Considering that the experience gained with the
\Vorld Food Programme and the increase in its resources should enable it to enlarge its potential in this
field and also to facilitate progress towards the objectives of the recommendation contained in annex A.II.6
of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, 49
Recognizing that various proposals intended to make
the \Vorld Food Programme a more effective instrument of international co-operation, induding the proposal to convert it to a world food fund, have given rise
to a number of fundamental issues, and that among
these the United Nations/FAQ Intergovernmental
Committee of the World Food Programme at its eighth
session had identified the following as signific-ant:
(a) The needs and absorptive C'apacity of developing
countries for food aid,
( b) ,The technical and economic feasibility of utilizing the productive capacity of developing countries,
efficient primary exporting countries and developed
countries to sustain an enlarged. W"11-ha1anced programme of food aid to needy peoples,
( c) The implications for the <1gricultural export
earnings of developing countries. developed primary
exporting countries and countries heavily dependent on
the export of primary commodities,
( d) The problerns nf distribution and administration,
( e) The relationship between food aid arrangements
:ind commodity trade arrangements,
(f) The problems of financing. h0th over-all and
for individual countries,
·
Bearing in mind that, while these issues are of particular significance to the World Food Programme,
their study goes beyond the terms of reference of the
United Nations/FAQ Intergovernmental Committee
and comes within the c-ompetence of such organizations
as the United Nations. tlw Food and Agrirnlture Or49 See Proceedings of the [/nited Nations Co11fere11re on
Trade and Development, vol. l. Final Art and Report (llnite<I
\' ations puhlkation, Sales No. : 64 TI R.11), p. 32.

33

g-anization of the United Nations, the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund and the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade,
Considering further that the Committee on Commodity Problems of the Food and Agriculture Organization, at its thirtv-ninth session, had drawn attention
to the following a·dditional issues:
(a) The implications of proposals on total aid to
developing countries,
( b) The aid-giving capacity of donor countries,
( c) The impact on agricultural trade as a whole and
the possible effects on prices of food commodities no'
in surplus,
Appreciating that a study of this kind should be as
comprehensive as possible and should deal with the
proposals made and the problems they raise in terms
as concrete as possible, with reference to different
types of food commodities and the implic"tions for
different categories of countries,
Noting that the United Nations/FAQ Intergovernmental Committee decided to refer the whole matter
to its parent bodies for consideration,
Noting further the action taken since that time by
the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization
and the relevant items in the programme of work recommended to the Trade and Development Board by its
Committee on Commodities.
Recalling the words of His Holiness Pope Paul VT
to the General Assembly on 4 October 1965: "Your
task is to ensure that there is enough hread on the
table of mankind", 50
1. Requests the Secretary-General-in co-operation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agricnltnre
Organization of the United Nations and in consultation
with the executive heads of other interested international organizations and programmes, including the
Tnternational Bank for Reconstrnction and DevelopmFnt. the Tnternational Monetarv Fund and the General
i\greement on Tariffs and Trade, and utilizing the total
facilities of the United Nations. including the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the
TT nited Nations Development Programme and the
\Vnrlcl Food Programme-to examine, with a view to
snggesting various alternative types of action and in the
c-ontext of the efforts being made in connexion with
th<> United Nations Development Decade, the means
and policies which would be required for large-scale
intFrnational action of a mttltih1teral character, under
t lw auspices of the United Nations system, for combating
hunger effectively. this comprf'hensive study to he based
upon. hnt not necessarily limited to, the proposals
already made for adapting the techniques of food aid
so :is to benefit developing- rnuntries which are exporters
of food-stuffs. as well as those which are importers. and
with rlne regard. infer alin. to the issues mentioned in
the sixth and eighth preambular paragraphs of the
present resolution, especially those relating to the need
for financial resources and to the possible rebtionship
of this tvpe of action to long-term internationa 1 :1greF111ents on stRple food-stuffs:
2. Requests the Secretary-GenerRl to submit to the
General Assemblv :it its t~enty-first session. through
the Economic :ind Social Council. a report whic-h wot;ld
deal, inter alia. with the :irrangements mRdF for under"o Official Records of tfre General Assembly, Twrntietli
Session, Plrnary Meetin_lls, 1347th meeting, para. 40.

General Assembly-Twentieth Senion

34

forty-first session and to the General Assembly at its
twenty-first session on the ways in which the Council
might adapt its procedures and working methods so as
to enable it effectively to fulfil its role, taking into
account the comments of Member States and the suggestions made during the thirty-eighth and thirty-ninth
sessions of the Council and the twentieth session of the
Assembly;
2. Requests Governments of Member States which
have not yet done so to inform the Secretary-General
of their views on this subject.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.

taking this concerted study, any preliminary findings
and the anticipated time-table for the completion of
the task.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2097 (XX). Review and reappraisal of the role
and functions of the Economic and Social
Council

The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 1091 (XXXIX) of 31 July 1965, which pointed
to the necessity for a thorough review and reappraisal of
the Council's role and functions as a result of the great
increase in the activities of the United Nations and its
related agencies in the economic, social and human
rights fields,
Welcoming the enlargement of the membership of
the Economic and Social Council so as to reflect better
the total membership of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the responsibilities entrusted to the
Economic and Social Council in Chapters IX and X of
the Charter of the United Nations,
Taking into account also the particular responsibilities
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development as described in section II of General Assembly
resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964,
Noting with appreciation the comments of Member
States on the role and functions of the Economic and
Social Council, 51
Noting further the Secretary-General's report in
response to Economic and Social Council resolution
1091 (XXXIX) 52 containing his views, conclusions and
recommendations on this question.
l. Requests the Secretary-General to submit detailed
proposals to the Economic and Social Council at its

2098 (XX). General review of the programmes
and activities in the economic, social, technical co-operation and related fields of the
United Nations, the specialized agencies, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the
United Nations Children's Fund end all
other institutions and agencies related to
the United Nations system

The General Assembly.
Considering that the importance of this item merits
a thorough discussion, for which time is not available
at the present session,
Noting the steps already taken at this session towards
increased efficiency,
Noting the draft resolution submitted to the Second
Committee on this subject,58
Decides to include' this item in the provisional agenda
of its twenty-first session and, in the meantime, to draw
the attention of the Economic and Social Council and
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination to
the present resolution.
1404th plenary meeting.
20 December 1965.

5t E/4052 and Add.1-16.

53 A/C.2/L.814/Rev.1. For the printed text, see Official
Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Session, Annexes,
agenda item 100, document A/6201, para. 3.

52 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth
Session. Annexes, agenda item 96, document A/6109.

*

•

*

Notes
Decentralization of the economic and social activities of the United Nations
(item 43)

At its 1404th plenary meeting, on 20 December 1965, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the Second Committee114 that the consideration of
this item should be postponed to the twenty-first session.
Permanent sovereignty over natural resources (item 45)

At its 1404th plenary meeting, on 20 December 1965, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the Second Committee 55 that the consideration of
this item should be postponed to the twenty-first session.
Population growth and economic development (item 46)

At its 1404th plenary meeting, on 20 December 1965, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the Second Committee 56 that the consideration of
this item should be postponed to the twenty-first session.
114 Official Records of the General Assembl3•. Twentieth Session, Annexes. agenda item 43,
document A/6194, para. 6.
Ill! Ibid., agenda item 45, document A/6196, para. 13.
116 Ibid., agenda item 46, document A/6197, para. 12.
