United Nations

S/PV.6563

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6563rd meeting
Thursday, 23 June 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Messone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Berger
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Laher
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-38541 (E)

*1138541*

S/PV.6563

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Permanent Representative
of Colombia, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour today of providing the 90-day briefing
to the Security Council on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in
accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of that resolution.
The report covers the period from 22 March to 23 June
2011, during which time the Committee held two
informal consultations, on 8 and 16 June, and
conducted additional work using the no objection
procedure.
During the Committee’s consultations held on
8 June, Ms. Salome Zourabichvili, Coordinator of the
Panel of Experts, provided an overview of the main
findings contained in the Panel’s final report, which
was submitted to the Council and the Committee on
7 May, in accordance with paragraph 29 (d) of
resolution 1929 (2010). Due to time constraints,
Committee members had the opportunity only to make
general comments on the Panel’s report.
On 16 June, the Committee discussed in depth the
Panel’s recommendations. The Committee will
continue to consider actions to implement the
recommendations that enjoy consensus. As a way to
implement some of those recommendations, the
Committee decided to request the Panel of Experts to
draft a series of implementation assistance notices
based on the five thematic areas covered by the
recommendations.

2

During this period, in addition to submitting its
final report, the Panel, first, also held a series of
consultations in China, Qatar and Azerbaijan to discuss
issues relevant to the Panel’s work; secondly,
investigated three reported violations, of paragraphs 9
and 13 of resolution 1929 (2010) and of paragraph 5 of
resolution 1747 (2007); and, thirdly, conducted
assessments of Member States’ implementation reports
under paragraph 31 of resolution 1929 (2010), which
were circulated to the Committed on 3 May.
Since my last briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.6502), the Committee was notified of three
additional cases of alleged violations of the provisions
of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), which
imposes a ban on the export to and procurement by
Iran of arms and related materiel. Some of the cases
notified to the Committee are still being examined by
the Committee and the Panel of Experts. The
Committee commends the readiness of States to report
alleged sanctions violations and encourages them to
cooperate with the Panel of Experts in its
investigations of incidents of non-compliance.
During this reporting period, the Committee also
received five notifications: two from a Member State
with reference to paragraph 15 of resolution 1737
(2006) and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007),
concerning the authorization for exemptions from
financial restrictions; two from a Member State
announcing its intention to authorize, under paragraph
13 (b) of resolution 1737 (2006), certain economic
resources to the benefit of an entity included on the list
contained in the annex to resolution 1737 (2006); and,
finally, one from a Member State concerning the
authorization, under paragraph 15 of resolution 1737
(2006), of payments due under a contract entered into
prior to the Security Council measures against a certain
entity.
The Committee also received a query from a
Member State that sought information on whether there
were Security Council measures imposed against an
Iranian company or individuals working for that entity.
In response to a Committee letter asking for details
regarding an alleged violation previously reported, a
Member State asked for clarifications regarding its
involvement in the incident. The Committee is still
considering appropriate responses to those letters and
will provide answers in due course.

11-38541

S/PV.6563

During this period, the Committee also received a
response to its previous request for clarifications from
the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Ambassador Osorio for today’s briefing and for
his leadership of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
As the Panel of Experts’ recent report to the
Committee makes clear, Iran continues to violate the
Council’s sanctions, both as a nuclear and conventional
weapons proliferator. The Iranians themselves say as
much. Earlier this month, the head of Iran’s Atomic
Energy Organization announced Iran’s intention to
increase its capacity to produce 20 per cent enriched
uranium at Qom. This directly contravenes six Security
Council resolutions requiring Iran to suspend
enrichment immediately, and it illustrates the fact that
Iran’s illegal enrichment programme is completely
incompatible with its claims to be pursuing a peaceful
programme.
Iran’s test of three medium-range ballistic
missiles since October and its launch of the Rassad-1
satellite using ballistic-missile technology are further
clear violations of resolution 1929 (2010).
The June report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) highlighted once again the
failure of Iran to provide the agency with the necessary
access to locations, equipment, documents and
individuals, or to answer questions about its
procurement of nuclear-related items and the possible
military dimensions of the Iranian programme. It
makes clear, as have successive reports of the IAEA,
that Iran has not suspended its enrichment activity and
that the agency is unable to confirm that all nuclear
material is being used for peaceful activities. In short,
the IAEA concluded that Iran has once again failed to
comply with its obligations both to the Agency and to
the Council.
Against that backdrop, the renewal of the
mandate of the 1737 Committee’s Panel of Experts was
essential. The Panel plays a key role in promoting the
implementation of resolution 1929 (2010). We offer
them our strong support and full cooperation in the

11-38541

year ahead. We encourage the Panel to continue
actively investigating violations and engaging the
wider United Nations membership to promote the
implementation of resolution 1929 (2010).
We welcome the Panel’s efforts to raise
awareness of the steps that all Member States are
required to take to implement the sanctions and to
foster better collaboration between States. We welcome
the Committee’s recent discussions of the Panel of
Experts’ report. In particular, we welcome the
agreement that implementation assistance notices will
be drawn up and considered by the Committee in
response to the five main areas of recommendation in
the Panel’s report. These will be of great benefit in
raising awareness among Member States of their
responsibilities and of the actions they can take to
prevent further violations.
The Committee should also take forward the
Panel’s recommendations by designating those
individuals and entities involved in reported violations.
We look forward to discussing these notices and further
designations in the Committee.
We regret that the Panel’s final report has not yet
been published. In refusing publication, some members
of the Council are denying the wider United Nations
membership access to this valuable assessment, which
could assist with the full implementation of sanctions.
The Committee should agree to release the report as a
matter of urgency.
At our last meeting to discuss a 90-day report
(see S/PV.6502), we raised the issue of the interdiction
of Iranian rockets sent to the Taliban in Afghanistan,
another clear violation of Security Council resolutions.
We remain gravely concerned that the Iranian
Government is directly engaged in providing arms to
the insurgency in Afghanistan. We look forward to
receiving the Panel’s report on this violation shortly.
We remain committed to engaging with Iran to
address the Council’s concerns, but it is clear that Iran
continues to proliferate and continues to pursue a
nuclear-weapons programme. Iran has given us no
good reason to believe that it is willing to engage in
meaningful negotiations on its nuclear programme. For
the dual-track strategy to succeed, rigorous
implementation by States of the measures contained in
resolution 1929 (2010) and the Council’s previous
resolutions is essential. We should keep these measures

3

S/PV.6563

under review to ensure that they remain effective and
up to date.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
thank Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today. We
are grateful for his able leadership, which has done so
much to ensure that the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) remains active and
focused on the implementation of its important
mandate.
One year ago, the Council adopted resolution
1929 (2010) in response to Iran’s continued
non-compliance with its international nuclear
obligations. Iran’s continued failure to comply with
those obligations reminds us how important sanctions
are and how important it is that the international
community implement and enforce them.
I will focus on three points today.
First, let me turn to the latest report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), which clearly demonstrates Iran’s
continued non-compliance, lack of cooperation with
the IAEA and refusal to resolve the outstanding issues
related to its nuclear programme.
Most notably, the Director General’s report
confirms once again that Iran is continuing its
enrichment- and heavy-water-related activities, in
violation of the demands of the Council and the IAEA
Board of Governors. The report also highlights Iran’s
continued refusal to respond substantively to
information indicating that its nuclear programme may
have military dimensions.
These developments only deepen our concerns
about Iran’s intentions. So does Iran’s recent
announcement that it intends to triple production of
near 20 per cent enriched uranium and move that
production to its enrichment facility near Qom, a
facility built in secret and with an unclear purpose,
despite years of IAEA requests.
The Council established many years ago that Iran
must demonstrate the “exclusively peaceful purpose”
of its nuclear programme. The IAEA Director
General’s latest report underscores why Iran must be
held accountable and why the international community
must continue to demand that Iran comply fully with
its international obligations and fully implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

4

Secondly, in the light of Iran’s continued
non-compliance, the international community must
further strengthen the implementation and enforcement
of United Nations sanctions. The 1737 Committee, the
Panel of Experts and States Members of the United
Nations each play an important role here. The United
States strongly supports the Panel of Experts. We
welcome the Council’s decision last week to renew the
Panel’s mandate for another 12 months.
The United States remains impressed by the
Panel’s high quality, professional work. We are
particularly pleased that the Panel has been able to
uncover so much information about Iran’s attempts to
evade United Nations sanctions. The Panel’s recent
final report contains troubling findings, including
significant evidence about several reported violations
of United Nations sanctions related to Iran. In its
report, the Panel made 30 recommendations to more
tightly enforce United Nations sanctions. We
encourage the Committee to take immediate steps to
implement these recommendations. Our goal should be
to implement them before the 1737 Committee reports
back to the Council in September.
The Panel’s final report must be quickly
disseminated to all States Members of the United
Nations, as is standard practice for United Nations
expert panels. The report, which the Council has not
yet released publicly, highlights information and best
practices that can help States carry out their
obligations. It needs to be shared. Making these reports
publicly available shows important transparency. It
also underscores the fact that we are serious about
implementing the sanctions we have imposed on Iran.
That brings me to my final point. My
Government remains committed to a diplomatic
solution, but diplomacy can succeed only if Iran
complies with its international nuclear obligations and
engages seriously with the international community to
address the world’s concerns about Iran’s nuclear
programme. As we and our P5+1 partners stated last
week, we have tried several times to engage Iran in a
constructive dialogue towards a comprehensive,
negotiated long-term solution to the global crisis of
confidence about Iran’s nuclear programme. But Iran
was not prepared to enter into a genuine dialogue
without preconditions, so our attempts have reached no
substantive result.

11-38541

S/PV.6563

We reaffirmed our unity of purpose to use direct
diplomacy in the context of our dual-track strategy to
resolve our shared concerns about Iran’s nuclear
programme. Our objective remains clear: to prevent
Iran from developing nuclear weapons. We remain
committed to working closely towards that goal with
our partners in the 1737 Committee, the Panel of
Experts, the Council and the international community.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), Ambassador Néstor Osorio of Colombia,
for his briefing to the Council on the Committee’s
work in recent months. We appreciate the effective
work that was done during the reporting period. It is
important that this work be carried out within the
Committee’s mandate. The Committee must continue
to work along those lines, as must the Panel of Experts,
which provides useful, practical assistance to the
Committee.
It is very important that the work of the Experts
be impartial and independent, and that they use only
reliable sources of information when making
recommendations or conclusions. No unverified or
politicized information should be used to promote any
initiatives in the Security Council or the Committee.
We expect that the new practice of discussing the
preliminary programme of work of the Panel in the
Committee will enhance the Committee’s guidance of
the work of the Panel and should help to increase the
effectiveness of its efforts.
Russia continues to comply strictly with the
sanctions regime against Iran. To ensure the maximum
effectiveness of this regime overall, all members of the
international community must strictly comply with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, and not
deviate from them.
With respect to the current situation regarding
Iran’s nuclear programme, we are in favour of dealing
with the problems that have arisen through dialogue
with the country. Russia continues to focus on
diplomacy and on involving Tehran fully in talks.
The statement made at the International Atomic
Energy Agency meeting several weeks ago by the
group of six States — Russia, the United Kingdom,
Germany, China, the United States of America and
France — which was already mentioned by the
representative of the United States, reaffirmed the

11-38541

quest for a comprehensive solution to the Iranian
nuclear issue, recognizing Iran’s right to the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy under the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Following a meeting on 15 June between the
Presidents of Russia, Kazakhstan and Iran, Iran
recognized the importance of the six-country forum
and stated its readiness to cooperate with it, including
with respect to nuclear activities. However, during
talks, Iran expressed an interest in addressing other
issues, such as the easing of sanctions and other
regional issues. Such an approach to dealing with the
Iranian nuclear programme, tying it to regional
economic issues, is fully in line with what is being
promoted by the six countries. We hope that nothing
will hinder the resumption of talks between Iran and
the E3+3 on the basis of mutual respect.
Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) over the past 90 days. Under his outstanding
leadership, the work of the Committee has been
proceeding in a balanced and orderly way. China
expresses its appreciation for this and attaches great
importance to and gives consistent support to the
Committee and its work.
On 9 June, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1984 (2011) (see S/PV.6552) on the renewal
of the mandate of the Panel of Experts under the
Committee. China hopes that the Panel will strictly
implement the principles and requirements enshrined in
the resolutions and the guidance of the Committee in
its work, in keeping with the principles of neutrality,
objectivity and independence, and, on the basis of
reliable information, prepare reports and formulate
recommendations in order to play its due role in the
comprehensive and effective implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
China believes that dialogue and negotiations on
the basis of progressiveness, equality and mutual
benefit represents the only way to reach a
comprehensive, adequate and lasting settlement to the
Iranian nuclear issue and meet the common interests of
all parties. China hopes that all parties will intensify
their diplomatic efforts and that a new round of
dialogue will be launched as soon as possible between
the six parties and Iran.

5

S/PV.6563

As a signatory to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Iran is entitled to the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It must also honour its
relevant international obligations. China hopes that
Iran will take positive steps to improve the confidence
of the international community in the peaceful nature
of Iran’s nuclear programme.
China believes that so long as all parties remain
patient, adopt a flexible and pragmatic attitude,
mobilize positive efforts and take proactive measures
to continue to improve mutual confidence, they will
surely be able to promote substantive progress in the
dialogue and negotiations. China will continue to work
with the other parties in playing a constructive role to
this end.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Osorio for his 90-day report. The final
report that the Panel transmitted to the Council paints
an alarming picture of Iran’s violations of its
obligations. These violations are systematic and
deliberate and cover all the categories of measures
adopted by the Security Council — in the nuclear,
ballistic, arms embargo, transport, financial and trade
areas. They involve increasingly complex methods, the
use of shell companies and aliases, multiple
intermediaries,
physical
concealment,
false
declarations and forged documents. The Panel has
highlighted the recurrent involvement in these
violations of the members of the Revolutionary Guard
and the maritime company IRISL.
I would like to emphasize one aspect of the report
in particular: Iran’s violation of the arms embargo,
which is at the core of the violations brought to the
Committee’s attention. Indeed, three new cases have
been brought to our attention since our last meeting, in
March. These arms transfers are a threat to the security
of us all.
We are particularly concerned in this regard by
the active role of Syria in these illicit arms transfers. It
is involved in the majority of the cases of embargo
violations brought to the attention of the Committee.
Moreover, Syria refuses to cooperate with the Panel
and the Committee, which is a serious violation by that
country of its obligations to the Security Council.
Furthermore, I would recall that the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
in accordance with the Agency’s statute, has brought to

6

the attention of the Security Council Syria’s violations
of its nuclear non-proliferation obligations.
We are also greatly concerned by recent
announcements by Iran. It has stated its desire to
produce 20 per cent enriched uranium at its Fordow
site and to triple its production capacity. I would
remind the Council that Iran had hidden the existence
of this site, which was revealed by the international
community in September 2009. I would also recall that
the background and original purpose of that site are
still not well known, because Iran has refused to
provide the Agency all the clarifications it has
requested. Moreover, on 15 June Iran announced that it
had launched a satellite into space. Satellite launchers
and ballistic missiles use similar technology, and
resolution 1929 (2010) prohibits Iran from using
technology related to ballistic missiles. We would like
the Panel to investigate that launch and the space and
ballistic programme Iran has developed.
The independent Panel of Experts created
pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) last year plays a key
role in ensuring that the measures adopted by the
Council are implemented and remain effective, even as
Iran increases its efforts to violate them. In a very short
time the Panel has done an excellent job, and I would
like to express our appreciation for its professionalism.
We fully endorse the recommendations of its final
report. The Panel’s task, however, is far from over, and
we welcome the renewal of its mandate for another
year. This sends an extra signal to Iran from the
international community that it must fully abide by its
obligations under the Council’s resolutions.
For its part, the Committee must also shoulder its
share of the responsibilities. We hope that the Panel’s
recommendations will be followed up and that the
Committee will adopt the necessary measures,
particularly with respect to updating the lists of assets,
individuals and entities, pursuant to its mandate from
the Council. This particularly applies to individuals
and entities involved in cases of violation. It would be
unthinkable for the Committee not to proceed with
their designation. We also trust that the Panel’s final
report will soon be published as an official Security
Council document, in accordance with the standing
practice of the sanctions Committee, because
transparency is essential in order to keep all United
Nations Member States informed and improve
implementation of the sanctions.

11-38541

S/PV.6563

The most recent report of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to the
Security Council, on 24 May, increases our concerns. It
shows that Iran continues to refuse to respect its
international obligations. The report is especially
detailed on serious issues linked to the possible
military dimension of the Iranian programme,
involving in particular the development of a nuclear
payload for a ballistic missile. The Agency is more
concerned than ever about the possibility of secret
activities being or having been conducted in this area
in Iran. The Director General emphasizes seven issues
in particular where the Agency is still awaiting
explanations from Iran — for example, design work
involving replacing the conventional payload in the
warhead of the Shahab-3 missile with a spherical one.
This, on top of the Iranian ballistic and space
programme, is extremely worrying, and we trust that
the Director General of the IAEA will continue
investigations in this area and that Iran will respond to
all the questions.
Iran has stated that its nuclear programme is
civilian, though for nine years it has not given the
IAEA any guarantees that its nuclear activities have
only peaceful purposes. In this regard, we regret, along
with our partners in the group of six States, that Iran
has not seriously considered our offers of cooperation
or our specific proposals aimed at building confidence
and facilitating the start of dialogue; on the contrary, it
has laid out conditions that run counter to Security
Council resolutions and are unacceptable, as the six
States recalled recently in Vienna. The Iranians are
heading down a dead-end street involving violation of
international obligations, isolation and repression, at a
time when the youth of the Middle East aspire to
freedom.
The door to negotiations remains open, but it is
up to Iran to show us, by its actions, that it wishes to
negotiate in good faith and that it can be considered a
serious actor in the international community. As the
Heads of State and Government of the G-8 indicated in
Deauville at the end of May, we shall determine, on the
basis of Iran’s conduct, whether or not we need to take
additional measures pursuant to the dual-track
approach.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing and for his
leadership of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006).

11-38541

Today’s briefing follows the latest International
Atomic
Energy Agency
(IAEA)
report
on
Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and
relevant provisions of Security Council resolutions in
the Islamic Republic of Iran. On 24 May, the Director
General of the IAEA reported that Iran was not
implementing a number of its legally binding
obligations: suspension of enrichment- and heavywater-related activities and clarification of the
remaining outstanding issues that have given rise to
concerns, particularly about the possible military
dimensions of its nuclear programme.
We are particularly concerned about the possible
military dimensions. In its report, the IAEA said that
the Agency had received further information about
undisclosed nuclear-related activities involving Iranian
military organizations, including activities related to
the development of a nuclear payload for a missile. We
urge Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA to clarify
the outstanding issues and provide additional
information, as well as to grant access to the relevant
locations, equipment, documentation and persons, as
requested by the IAEA. In addition, Iran continues to
enrich uranium to nearly 20 per cent at the Pilot Fuel
Enrichment Plant. At the same time, it continues to
refuse to provide the Agency with information on the
chronology and purpose of the Fordow Fuel
Enrichment Plant under construction near Qom.
Furthermore, Iran had informed the Agency that it
planned to begin feeding nuclear material into cascades
by this summer. Instead of building confidence within
the international community, Iran is moving in exactly
the opposite direction. The most recent reports on
satellite launches by Iran underline once more that Iran
refuses to abide by the Council’s resolutions.
The dual-track strategy offers two ways forward.
We continue to be ready to engage Iran in meaningful
negotiations about its nuclear programme. This would
be our preferred choice. Unfortunately, given Iran’s
unwillingness to talk about its nuclear programme, and
against the background of Iran’s setting unacceptable
preconditions for talks, we have no choice other than
following up on the pressure track to move Iran back to
the negotiation table. Germany fully supports the
proper implementation of what the Council decided on,
using four rounds of sanctions. On 9 June, the Council
adopted resolution 1984 (2011) and extended the
mandate of the Iran Panel of Experts. Germany
welcomes the renewal of the mandate, and I would like

7

S/PV.6563

to express our full appreciation for the Panel’s
excellent work. We are convinced that the eight highly
qualified experts have set the right priorities by
carefully examining the many cases of violations and
by reporting thoroughly on those accidents. We also
support the Panel’s outreach activities and ask them to
continue their work in that vein.
On 7 May the Panel provided us with a
comprehensive final report. Germany fully supports
this useful report. The detailed analysis it contains,
plus the valuable practical recommendations, provides
very good guidance to Member States. My delegation
is disappointed that the report has yet to be published
and distributed to the broader United Nations
membership. For the sake of the transparency of the
Council’s work, my delegation has formally requested
the publication of the final report in accordance with
the standing procedure of publishing the final reports
of expert groups.
Let me highlight three messages that the report is
sending. First, a number of recommendations focus on
updating designations. Germany believes that the
complex package deal that we achieved in resolution
1929 (2010) has to be adapted to the constantly
changing environment in Iran. The current designation
list includes the names of people who are no longer in
official positions with the Iran Revolutionary Guards,
for example, and new people are occupying those
posts. In order to keep pace with developments on the
ground, we should add designations accordingly.
Secondly, the report recommends that we
designate specific and well-known sanctions violators.
I would like to recall that resolution 1929 (2010), in
paragraph 26, recalls that the Iran Sanctions
Committee may designate individuals and entities who
are assisting in violating sanctions provisions or in
evading existing measures.
Thirdly, let me point out the many cases of
weapons exports from Iran to other countries, in
particular Syria. We call on all Member States to
carefully implement the weapons embargo. Weapon
deliveries to volatile regions in the Middle East and
elsewhere come with strong destabilizing effects.
Germany would like to ask the Panel of Experts to
prepare an assessment of the patterns of the many
weapon export violation cases in order to better
understand and prevent them in the future.

8

As the E3+3 pointed out in a joint statement at
the latest Board of Governors meeting in Vienna, on 8
June, we have attempted to engage Iran in a
constructive dialogue on the basis of reciprocity and a
step-by-step approach that might lead to a solution to
the confidence crisis that exists with respect to Iran’s
nuclear programme. We reaffirm our unity of purpose
and collective determination through direct diplomacy.
We call on Iran to respond in a positive and
constructive spirit.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I, too, would like to thank
Ambassador Néstor Osorio for the 90-day report on the
activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), as well
as for his leadership of the Committee. I also want to
convey my appreciation to the Panel of Experts for the
final report presented to the Council in May, which
includes concrete and useful recommendations aimed
at further improving the efficiency of the regime and at
assisting Member States in implementing the necessary
measures to that end, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions. Both reports have been crucial in shedding
light on some of the apparent patterns of violations of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, namely,
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), which enforces
a ban on the export and procurement by Iran of any
arms and related material.
I must say in that regard that Portugal is
convinced of the usefulness and urgency of making the
final report public, including by posting it on the
Committee’s website. It is important, in our view, to
make available to other Member States the concrete
contents of the report. This should be done as a
measure of transparency and accountability with regard
to the activities that are being undertaken by the
Committee, but also as a way to raise awareness among
the wider international community and ensure broader
understanding of the goals that are being pursued.
My second point relates to what my delegation
stated the last time that the Council held consultations
on Iran, that is, that the work of the 1737 Committee
takes on its full significance within the two-track
strategy that has been followed. We cannot lose sight
of the diplomatic dimension of the process, and we
reiterate the call on Iran to fully engage in meaningful
negotiations aimed at resolving the pending issues
relating to the nature of its nuclear activities, in
particular the new uranium enrichment facilities, as
well as all heavy-water-related projects. That is why

11-38541

S/PV.6563

we have to continue to be vigilant. The Council can
count on Portugal’s continued support for the work of
the 1737 Committee.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa thanks
the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
Ambassador Néstor Osorio of Colombia, for his 90-day
report on the activities of the Committee, and we
pledge our full support. We also welcome the recent
extension of the mandate, through resolution 1984
(2011), of the Panel of Experts of the Committee. The
work of the Committee is an important part of the
wider disarmament and non-proliferation goals that
South Africa adheres to.
We have often stated our concern that the
existence of weapons of mass destruction, particularly
nuclear weapons, continues to pose a threat to the
future of humanity. In that regard, we have also often
stated that disarmament and non-proliferation are
interlinked and must be pursued in conjunction with
one another. South Africa continues to closely follow
developments concerning Iran’s nuclear programme,
and attaches great importance to the important role
played by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) with regard to Iran’s implementation of its
safeguards agreement, and the Agency’s continuous
verification of Iran’s declared nuclear material. South
Africa believes that the IAEA needs to be continuously
equipped with the appropriate tools to, first, provide
international confidence that declared nuclear material
is fully accounted for; secondly, that the IAEA is able
to verify that nuclear capabilities are being used for
peaceful purposes only and; thirdly, to provide
assurances regarding the absence of undeclared nuclear
materials and activities.
We remain concerned about the lack of progress
with regard to Iran’s compliance with the relevant
IAEA and Security Council decisions — which are
mandatory decisions — and we will continue to
encourage Iran to continue its cooperation with the
Agency and clarify the outstanding issues in order to
restore confidence in Iran’s peaceful nuclear
programme. We believe that it is important that Iran
take the steps required to build confidence in the nature
of its nuclear programme. Once the IAEA verification
activities in Iran have placed the international
community on the right path to finally resolve the
outstanding issues, it is important that this process
should be fully supported.

11-38541

South Africa encourages the peaceful resolution
of the matter surrounding Iran’s nuclear programme.
We encourage further discussions, through cooperation,
in order to promote mutual confidence in a sustainable
long-term solution, with a view to facilitating the work
of the IAEA on Iran’s nuclear programme. We
therefore encourage all parties concerned to avoid any
actions that could derail progress towards finding a
sustainable solution to the matter. We also support the
view that continued dialogue will and can contribute to
a peaceful resolution to the issues at hand.
South Africa strongly calls on all parties to
resume constructive dialogue in that regard.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We
would like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his briefing
on the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) during
the past 90 days. We note that the 1737 Committee has
done very effective work in that period, which we
highly appreciate.
The role of the Panel of Experts is essential for
the full implementation of resolution 1929 (2010). We
therefore welcome the adoption of resolution 1984
(2011), which extends the Panel’s mandate for another
year. We also welcome a number of practical
recommendations contained in the final report of the
Panel of Experts aimed at improving the
implementation of sanctions provisions and at assisting
Member States in meeting their obligations under those
provisions.
According to the latest report of the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), the international community has still not
received a clear and unequivocal answer from Iran
regarding the purpose and nature of its nuclear
programme. Therefore, we reiterate our call upon Iran
to comply with all resolutions of the Security Council
and implement the additional protocol, as well as all
measures requested by the IAEA. It is imperative to
restore mutual confidence and be certain that Iran’s
nuclear programme is solely for peaceful purposes.
In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina still
believes that the diplomatic and negotiation-driven
approach with Iran, based on both good political will
and responsible judgment, can redress the current
situation. With this in mind, we call for additional
serious efforts by the parties directly involved and

9

S/PV.6563

sincerely hope that they will demonstrate the political
will to move the process forward.

members (P5) of the Council and meaningfully
participate in the talks.

Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I join others in
thanking Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his succinct
briefing on the activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We appreciate the valuable work done by the
Committee during the reporting period. In particular,
we note the efforts made to raise awareness of the
obligations of Member States pursuant to Security
Council resolutions on Iran. We assure the Committee
of our strong support for its activities in furtherance of
its mandate.

Nigeria remains convinced of the importance of
political and diplomatic efforts in finding a negotiated
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. Notwithstanding
the misgivings of the past meetings between the P5+1
and Iran, we hold the view that further impetus should
be given to the political settlement of the dispute.

Nigeria appreciates the role and valuable
contributions of the Panel of Experts to the work of the
Committee. In this connection, we welcome its
outreach activities as well as the final report on its
work. It is essential that the Panel’s report be
published, to keep the wider United Nations
membership informed of the activities of the
Committee.
Nigeria reiterates its commitment to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We
regard the NPT as the cornerstone of the global
non-proliferation regime. Given that no country is
immune to the dangers posed by nuclear weapons to
our common security, it is essential that we all remain
committed to the globally agreed ideals contained in
the NPT and other relevant instruments.
We recognize the right of any party to pursue a
peaceful nuclear programme. This must be pursued,
however, within the ambit of the NPT and other
relevant international instruments. We are therefore
concerned about the latest report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which indicates that
Iran has continued its nuclear enrichment programme
and has not fully implemented its Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement, including the additional
protocols. These actions are unhelpful, as they continue
to fuel doubts about the peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear activities. Iran has an important obligation to
dispel those doubts. It can build trust and restore the
confidence of the international community in the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme
by responding positively to all the calls made on the
country by the Council and by the IAEA Board of
Governors. It should further commit to the early
resumption of dialogue with the five permanent

10

Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his 90-day report
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). We very much appreciate the
work of the Committee and reiterate our readiness to
continue to cooperate with it. Allow me to make the
following observations.
Resolution 1929 (2010) and all other related
resolutions confirmed the right of all parties to develop
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The resolution
also affirms the importance of political and diplomatic
efforts for seeking negotiated solutions to this issue.
We therefore call for the relaunching of negotiations
and a return to dialogue, which is the best way to find a
comprehensive solution that will open a new chapter
on cooperation with the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Lebanon was one of the first countries to join the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). We are a party to all essential international
instruments against the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We also fulfil our obligations in that
regard.
Lebanon hopes to see the dream of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East become reality. In
that regard, we reiterate the importance of the Final
Document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), which called upon
Israel to accede to the NPT, as it is the only country in
the Middle East that has not yet done so, and to submit
its nuclear facilities to the IAEA comprehensive
safeguards agreement regime.
Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): I thank the Permanent
Representative of Colombia for his briefing on the
activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I assure
the Council that my delegation will continue to do its
utmost to support the work of the Committee. Last
year, following its adoption by the Council, the
provisions of resolution 1929 (2010) were incorporated

11-38541

S/PV.6563

into Brazilian domestic legislation. They are now in
force in Brazil.
The Panel of Experts was created to carry out a
number of tasks under the direction of the Committee.
We expect that the work of the Panel will strictly
conform to its mandate, as clearly defined in resolution
1929 (2010).
We took note of the Panel’s final report and its
recommendations. It is our understanding that the
conclusions and recommendations of the Panel must be
fact-based and, as a rule, be firmly grounded on
credible evidence. We agree with the Experts that the
challenge for Member States is to ensure the full
implementation of the targeted sanctions, while at the
same time enabling legitimate trade and other activities
not covered by sanctions to continue unhindered.
I wish to take this opportunity to confirm the
Brazilian invitation for the Panel of Experts to visit
Brazil during the second half of this year.
From a broader perspective, as regards
negotiations on the Iranian nuclear issue, we regret that
the continued lack of mutual trust has blocked progress
on the talks. The prompt resumption of dialogue would
be beneficial to addressing the concerns of the
international community in order to clarify outstanding
questions and ensure that the Iranian nuclear
programme is entirely peaceful.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join other colleagues in thanking Ambassador Néstor
Osorio for presenting the 90-day report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We appreciate the work of the Committee
under Ambassador Osorio’s stewardship. We also take
note of the Panel of Experts report that is under the
consideration of the 1737 Committee.

peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. We support
the intensification of efforts to address the Iranian
nuclear issue by peaceful means, through dialogue and
negotiation.
We call upon all States to fully implement the
resolutions that the Council has adopted. Every effort
should be made to ensure that the legitimate trade and
economic activities of Iran and other countries do not
suffer while implementing the measures sanctioned by
the relevant resolutions.
Earlier this month the mandate of the Panel of
Experts was extended for another year. We support the
Panel’s work to assist the 1737 Committee in a fair and
transparent manner. As with any other panel, we expect
the Panel’s work to be in accordance with its mandate.
For our part, we will continue to engage with the other
members of the Committee to enable its work to be
done effectively and efficiently.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
Gabon would like to reaffirm its commitment to
the international nuclear non-proliferation regime, of
which the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is the cornerstone. On 22 March, my
delegation expressed deep concern (see S/PV.6502)
about the cases of sanctions violations by Iran, in
particular of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007). We
called on the Iranian authorities to respect the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, to comply with the
requirements of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, and to return to the negotiating table with the
E3+3. We also noted that re-establishing confidence
between Iran and the rest of the international
community in that regard was at stake.

As a country that abides by its obligations under
international treaties and has strong credentials on
non-proliferation, India has taken a consistent stand on
the Iran nuclear issue. We support the right of all
States, including Iran, to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. The exercise of that right should, however, be
consistent with States’ international obligations.

Today, like my colleagues, I would like to thank
Ambassador Néstor Osorio for presenting his report.
My delegation welcomes the in-depth consideration by
the Committee’s members of the recommendations
contained in the final report of the Panel of Experts
submitted to the Committee and to the Council on
7 May, in accordance with paragraph 29 of resolution
1929 (2010).

We believe that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has a central role in the resolution of
technical issues concerning the Iranian nuclear
programme. Iran should cooperate fully with the IAEA
to restore international confidence in the exclusively

Likewise, we welcome the work done by the
Panel of Experts, whose preparation of notices should
facilitate the implementation of some of their
recommendations on nuclear activities, ballistic

11-38541

11

S/PV.6563

missiles, conventional weapons and their means of
delivery, export controls, maritime and other transport,
and financial and trade restrictions.
In that regard, my delegation urges the
Committee to consider all possible steps to enable the
full implementation of the recommendations, and to
continue the consultations undertaken on its
programme of work during country visits in order to
gather the necessary information for it to carry out its
mandate.
In conclusion, Gabon continues to be concerned
about the violations and ongoing uranium-enrichment
activities by Iran. We continue to call on the Iranian
authorities to comply with the requirements of the
International Atomic Energy Agency and to return to
the negotiating table with the E3+3.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.

Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would just like to say a very few words to thank all the
representatives who made statements for their kind
words and for the support that they have given to the
Committee in the work it is doing. I should also like to
mention the importance of the work being done by the
members of the Committee, with the support of the
Secretariat and the invaluable support of the Panel of
Experts.
It is clear that there have been violations and
attempted violations. The Committee has thoroughly
studied each of the notifications in the report of the
members of the Panel. I will do everything in my
power under my good offices as Chair to ensure that
the report presented is distributed as soon as possible
and that, in that way, the principle of transparency with
regard to the work of such an important Committee on
an issue as serious as this can be made public.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.15 pm.

12

11-38541
