United Nations

S/PV.6153

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6153rd meeting
Monday, 29 June 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. İlkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Rice
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-38504 (E)

*0938504*

S/PV.6153

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Bangladesh, Brazil,
Canada, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Germany, Ghana,
India, Italy, Jordan, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Spain and Uruguay.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Alice Aghenebit
Mungwa, Senior Political Affairs Adviser, Office of the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mrs. Mungwa to take the seat reserved
for her at the side of the Council Chamber.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Susana Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Susana Malcorra,

2

Under-Secretary-General for Field Support. Before
giving them the floor, I would like to make a statement
by way of introduction.
Let me first answer the question of why we asked
for such a debate in an already busy month for the
Security Council. In fact, we tried to do that in our
concept note circulated two weeks ago. There, we
highlighted the importance of maintaining the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations as a key tool of United Nations peace efforts
and the ongoing reform efforts to overcome the
challenges facing it.
In the process of reform of the United Nations
peacekeeping mechanism, numerous questions emerge
that require the active engagement of and response
from the States Members of the United Nations and
from the Security Council. Thus, the strengthening of
interaction between those who plan and mandate the
United Nations peacekeeping operations and those who
implement these mandates on the ground, often at
considerable risks, is one important aspect that calls for
further deliberation by the Council.
In our concept note, we have already touched
upon questions relevant to that aspect. We believe that
we can find the right answers to these questions only
through mutual, transparent and interactive dialogue.
In fact, today’s meeting aims precisely at that
achieving that purpose. We are so pleased that the
representatives of major troop-, police- and financingcontributing countries are also with us today,
participating in the debate.
As the Council knows, there is already a lively
debate taking place in different forums within the United
Nations, such as the Committee of Thirty-Four — the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. There are also several initiatives that have
been launched by Member States with a view to further
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping to meet the
needs that arise from the contemporary challenges,
such as the United Kingdom/France joint initiative and
the initiative of Canada and the Center on International
Cooperation.
On the Secretariat side, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support have launched an internal review of the full
range of issues confronting the peacekeeping agenda,
under the name New Horizon, on which I am sure the

09-38504

S/PV.6153

Under-Secretaries-General Mr. Alain Le Roy and
Ms. Susan Malcorra will brief us.
What we aim to do today is to continue and
contribute to the ongoing discussions on United
Nations peacekeeping by inserting new ideas and
highlighting some existing issues and thus to contribute
to the efforts under way in various forums. We are
hoping that the views expressed today by some of the
major stakeholders in the realm of peacekeeping will
present useful inputs to the ongoing debate in other
forums, particularly for the Secretariat in the
finalization of the New Horizon paper.
Now, without any further ado, let me open the
floor for what we hope will be a lively and fruitful
exchange.
I now give the floor to Mr. Le Roy.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank the Turkish presidency of the
Security Council for allowing what is for me a very
welcome debate on peacekeeping. This meeting
follows on the discussions on peacekeeping that were
launched earlier this year during the French presidency
of the Council. Indeed, I would like to thank all the
Member States that have pursued discussions on
peacekeeping in different forums in recent months. It is
proof that we have a shared interest in supporting
United Nations peacekeeping to meet current demands,
build on its strengths, address its weaknesses and,
finally, prepare for the challenges of the future.
The theme of today’s meeting — the relationship
between the Security Council and the troop- and
police-contributing countries— reflects the fact that
United Nations peacekeeping is a global partnership. It
brings together the Council, with its legal and political
authority, and the Member States, which are the only
parties with the means to provide operations with the
personnel, materiel and finances they need. It also
draws together the Secretariat, which must plan and
manage the operations as the entity responsible for
their professionalism and efficiency, and the leaders
and people of host countries, whose ongoing
commitment to peace is perhaps the single most
important factor for the success of peacekeeping. And
lastly, this partnership draws together the United
Nations as a whole with the broad range of regional
and multilateral organizations that work alongside us to
address conflict and build peace around the world.

09-38504

Each one of the partners brings a vital
contribution to peacekeeping. Each depends on the
other. Together, this partnership gives United Nations
peacekeeping its strengths of legitimacy, burdensharing and adaptability. When all the partners are
strongly united behind a peacekeeping operation, they
send an unequivocal signal of international
commitment that reinforces the authority of the
Security Council and the credibility and effectiveness
of each individual operation.
And of course, if one element of the partnership
is weak, the whole project is weakened. Therefore,
efforts to strengthen peacekeeping must be
comprehensive. For example, we cannot focus on the
military elements that provide security, without
considering the equally the civilian elements, which
support the troops. We cannot promote new policing
concepts, such as the formed police units, without an
ongoing dialogue with contributing countries as to the
tasks expected and the standards linked to them. There
are critical connections between mandates, planning,
budgets and force generation, which are addressed in
different forums of the United Nations. Commitments
in one forum need to be translated into resources in
others, as well as support on the ground.
This interdependency means that we need strong
frameworks for dialogue in order to reach a shared
assessment of the challenges as well as the potential
for peacekeeping. That was perhaps the most valuable
contribution of the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) almost
10 years ago. That report made it possible to build a
consensus on the nature and direction of peacekeeping
and to put it on a new and firmer footing. As the
Council knows, peacekeeping involves 115,000
peacekeepers, or some five times as many since the
time of the Brahimi report. We think it is time today to
take stock together and to ensure that the partnership is
ready for the new challenges we will have to face.
Mandates, as Council members know, are more
complex than ever, and there remains a lack of
consensus on how certain mandate tasks should be
fulfilled. Political differences exist as to the overall
goals and direction of a number of missions, and
limited consent from key parties hampers a number of
our missions. Needed capabilities, such as those wellknown helicopters, are not always available in
sufficient quantity to the United Nations, considerably
hindering mandate implementation in certain missions.
Our logistical and administrative systems are

3

S/PV.6153

overstretched by the scale and tempo of operations on
some of the world’s most difficult terrain. And
overarching all of that is the reality that in the current
global environment, financial constraints press us to
review the basic models of peacekeeping. Costs, troop
numbers and capability requirements cannot all
continue to rise indefinitely.
Unfortunately, there is little sign that
peacekeeping demand is decreasing. On the contrary,
factors such as environmental changes, economic
shocks, transborder organized crime and extremism
may well contribute to political and security instability
and lead to new demands for peacekeepers. That means
the peacekeeping partnership has to be broad and
strong — in terms of the participants and their
contributions, as well as in terms of consensus and
unity on goals and actions. This also means that the full
spectrum of tools and responses besides peacekeeping
must be available to the international community,
including
conflict prevention, mediation
and
multinational force deployments.
(spoke in English)
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations/
Department of Field Support (DPKO/DFS) New
Horizon initiative is our contribution to forming a new
partnership agenda for peacekeeping. The Council has
already received an executive brief of a non-paper
which will be released in July. The brief contains the
main themes we are reflecting upon and the areas in
which we will propose some recommended follow-up
actions. I should stress that we consider that we are at
the start of a process of discussion with the Council.
We would see a need to follow up with an intensified
in-depth dialogue on thematic issues both in New York
and outside. Many of the issues before us are not new.
The objective is to arrive at a set of achievable
immediate, medium- and long-term goals to help
configure United Nations peacekeeping to better meet
today’s and tomorrow’s challenges.
With that in mind, the non-paper will focus on
four main points: first, critical peacekeeping tasks and
functions that require a renewed consensus; secondly,
measures to improve mission design, resourcing and
deployment; thirdly, proposals on assessing and
building the capacities needed for future peacekeeping;
and fourthly, a strategy to create a stronger, more
flexible support system.

4

I will not go through all the proposals we make in
each area, since the brief is before the Council. I would
rather wish to focus my remarks on a few of the issues
which, on the basis of my first year in charge of
DPKO, I think are top priorities.
With regard to the first key area, we would argue
that there is a need for clearer consensus on the role of
peacekeepers in delivering, for example, on the
protection-of-civilians mandate. We also need to
establish a better common understanding of the
political, strategic and operational aspects of robust
peacekeeping, building on discussions currently under
way with Member States.
As mandates grow more demanding, robust and
dangerous, it is essential that there be a strong sense of
common purpose and close linkage between the
Council’s intent and what TCCs and PCCs are ready to
deliver. As the number of mandated tasks grows, we
also need greater clarity on the extent of peacebuilding
that peacekeeping missions should carry out and on the
resources required for this. Security sector reform and
strengthened rule of law are essential to help develop
national capacity in the host country. That is extremely
important both as part of the exit strategy of the
mission that we all wish to achieve and in order to
allow host countries to rebuild the institutions that
allow them to effectively exercise their own
sovereignty.
Broader peacebuilding also entails beginning
early recovery, infrastructure and employment creation,
and peacekeeping operations must rely on other
peacebuilding partners to help deliver these. Kickstarting that sort of sustainable development is
essential in Liberia, in Timor-Leste and in Haiti. The
forthcoming report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding will highlight the key areas of
peacebuilding in which United Nations capability
needs to be strengthened.
With regard to the second key area — the design,
resourcing and deployment of missions — I would
highlight the following as priority issues. First, there is
a need to ensure sustained political support for the
missions. We underscore the critical importance of an
active, functional political process to address the
conflict. Where our peacekeeping operations are
struggling, it is usually the case that there is a lack of
an inclusive peace process. Darfur clearly illustrates
that point.

09-38504

S/PV.6153

No matter how well trained and specialized our
peacekeepers are, they cannot be successful without a
viable peace process. Achievable mandates with clear
political goals accompanied by continued political
support from troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Security Council is key. One way of
contributing to that sustained political support is
through informal coalitions of Member States focused
on individual missions to assist in providing political
and materiel support throughout the life of a mission.
The non-paper also argues that the Security
Council should play a role to help ensure that critical
capabilities are found. As one option, it recalls the
Brahimi recommendation for a two-stage mandating
process to help generate the necessary resources to
ensure that a mandate is achievable before it is
finalized.
There is a need to improve Secretariat planning
processes and enhance dialogue with the Security
Council and troop- and police-contributors on
planning. We will look for ways to enhance dialogue
on the Secretariat’s planning process with the Council
and TCCs, in particular those countries contributing
significant capabilities and volunteering for complex
tasks. We will also make proposals for faster, more
focused mission start-ups and a better sequencing of
deployment, to prioritize earlier deployment of critical
capabilities that will advance mandate implementation
and credibility. It is also important that we resolve the
issue of rapidly deployable contingency reserves for
missions that face significant risk of security crises.
Too many of our missions are lacking in critical
capabilities. Troops in dangerous environments lack
the information and mobility critical for force
protection and mandate implementation. I believe a
priority will be to agree on the nature of the
capabilities required for modern peacekeeping. There
must also be sufficient incentives to allow United
Nations peacekeeping to obtain them We operate
simultaneously in the jungles of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in the desert of Chad and
Darfur and in urban centres such as Port-au-Prince. It
is clear that different capabilities are needed in each
setting. We believe there is a need to review the
procedure for reimbursement of contingent-owned
equipment to make sure they reflect today’s reality.
High-tech equipment cannot be reimbursed at the level
of an armoured personnel carrier.

09-38504

Out of necessity, we have focused our force
generation on numbers rather than on what capabilities
have been needed to fulfil the mandate of a given
mission. Darfur is, again, a vivid example of this. We
must together shift our focus to operational
requirements and on how to better generate capabilities
not just numbers. We need to jointly identify the type
of capacity required, including agreed minimum
standards for troops and police carrying out United
Nations peacekeeping while also delivering essential
improvements to the United Nations training system.
And we must facilitate linkage of bilateral training
capacities with potential new or existing troop- and
police-contributing countries in need of specialized
training to fulfil the requirements of United Nations
peacekeeping.
I believe one critical goal of our overall strategy
to ensure that peacekeeping has the capacities it needs
must be to expand the base of troop- and policecontributors. There must be more equal burden-sharing
in the United Nations system.
The Secretariat must also ensure that it addresses
any outstanding questions regarding command and
control that potential TCCs or PCCs may have. We also
need to increase our interoperability with regional
organizations, including, of course, the African Union,
the European Union and subregional organizations. It
is clear that supporting the African Union in building
its capacity remains a very high priority.
Finally, I hold as a priority the articulation of the
new field support strategy that the DFS is leading.
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra will comment
further on that, but I would just say that it is clear to
me that United Nations peacekeeping today is the
instrument of a hyperoperational United Nations. Yet,
our support systems have not caught up with that new
reality. We have to make adjustments in how we
support our missions to increase flexibility and
efficiency, but I will leave it to Ms. Malcorra to
elaborate on that issue.
To conclude my remarks, I would like to say that
the new partnership agenda that we have put forward is
one that we will need to work on together. Together, we
must set the agenda for the peacekeeping of tomorrow.
We are looking forward to an intense dialogue with the
Council on the way forward. I look forward to hearing
more from the members of the Security Council, troopcontributing countries and financial contributors, and I

5

S/PV.6153

will endeavour to take account of their perspectives
and concerns in the process of finalizing the
DPKO/DFS non-paper.
We hope to continue this dialogue with the
Council in the weeks and months to come. As we
approach 10 years since the seminal reforms of the
Brahimi report (S/2009/809), I believe that is the best
way in which we can honour and protect the
achievements of that report and build on it for the
future.
I would also like to close by taking this
opportunity to thank the Council for its critical role in
guiding United Nations peacekeeping, and, of course,
the TCCs and PCCs gathered here for their
contributions to our current and past missions.
The President: I thank Mr. Le Roy for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Susana Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.
Ms. Malcorra (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
echo Alain Le Roy’s expression of appreciation for the
time that the Security Council has given us for topics
that are of great importance to us all.
(spoke in English)
This is a joint exercise of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support. The two Departments are fully synchronized
in that regard. The broad strategic outlines of this
initiative have major implications for the support side
of the house for the next five years.
Mr. Le Roy has outlined what we need in a new
partnership agenda to address the problems that we are
encountering in delivering increasingly complex and
varied mandates in difficult, often isolated and
inhospitable locations. I can only echo those needs on
the support side. We cannot move ahead with
innovations to the support model without the full
engagement and buy-in of Member States.
Let me further elaborate on some of the broad
support indications for the New Horizon initiative.
First, I must stress that we are not starting from scratch
here. The past decade has several useful innovations in
the tools and systems developed for peacekeeping
operations approved by Member States. The creation of
the strategic deployment stocks in 2002 have allowed
us to equip and supply missions more quickly than

6

before. The establishment of a Peacekeeping Reserve
Fund to allow for commitment authority of up to
$50 million in advance of a Security Council mandate
has also been an important capability.
However, neither of those innovations is
calibrated to current demand. Their ceilings remain
static, while the overall peacekeeping budget has more
than tripled, and their procedures have become more
convoluted than originally envisioned.
Secondly, I am convinced that more of the same
will simply not do. We envisaged a more nuanced,
targeted approach with elements of mission support
provided globally, others regionally and the rest at the
level of individual missions. The current model of
having a full support component for each and every
mission needs to be revisited. We need to explore
options that will lead to a lighter mission footprint;
faster turnaround without compromising accountability
and oversight; smarter deployment with new security
ceilings in a way that will bring about a better
relationship between substantive and support staff in
mission; greater use of local staff and local and regional
suppliers; development and continuity of staff in safer
and more stable locations; the creation of centres of
excellence that would allow us to better support the
missions; decision-making and supply closer to the
point of delivery; and a revisit of the current
contingent-owned equipment model, including the rates
of reimbursement, as mentioned by Mr. Le Roy.
Thirdly, it is becoming increasingly important to
calibrate support to the different stages of the mission
life cycle — startup, stabilization, maturity, surge,
drawdown and liquidation — with different priorities
in terms of deployment in each of those stages. Staffing
and equipment needs and financing are different in
each of them.
In particular, we have identified specific support
challenges in the startup phase. Clearly, one of the
biggest issues that we face in relationships with
Member States is the unspent balances, and that issue
is related particularly to delays in the initial phase of
deployment. Even if we introduce some of the
improvements I have mentioned, we are still up against
a system of financial approvals and procurement
timelines that puts limits on rapid deployment.
Possible ways to address those issues include
pre-positioned stocks and turnkey service contracts,
more modular approaches, fast-track standardized

09-38504

S/PV.6153

resourcing approaches for the first year of mission
operation, some additional financial flexibility, and
more asset-sharing between missions. That is
particularly important in the case of aviation assets.
Fourthly, one way to build capability and
performance without increasing initial headcount is to
invest more in technology-driven solutions, including
some greening elements that could be very important to
our footprint in the countries where we deploy. Better
information analysis, better communications and
higher-performing equipment should be at the heart of
those aspects.
Fifthly, again, building on reforms that the
Member States have approved develops a truly global
and mobile workforce with faster, more targeted
recruitment, better skills and career development, and
greater agility across functions and locations.
We will be developing all those five lines in the
DFS support strategy that is now being worked on. I
have already had informal exchanges of views with
representatives during the month of May and have
received some initial feedback. We will provide a more
detailed non-paper in July, in conjunction with the New
Horizon paper. My team is now drilling down into the
detailed building of business cases and examining cost
benefits, which we will be sharing and presenting as
part of a comprehensive set of proposals at the next
session of the General Assembly, seeking Member
States’ approval.
That is going to be a major paper and it will be
presented together with the budgets of the
peacekeeping operations for approval, hoping that,
with Member States’ approval, we will also seek initial
opportunities in the next cycle of peacekeeping
budgets.
I thank all present. We will provide further
information for further discussion in the near future.
The President: I thank Ms. Malcorra for her
briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

09-38504

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
first like to thank the Turkish presidency of the Council
for organizing this debate. France is very committed to
improving the functioning of United Nations
peacekeeping. We welcome the current heightened
activity on this issue, which seems to us to reflect, first
of all, a convergence of concerns emanating from
various quarters and the growing desire that this
question has aroused to ensure the effectiveness of our
efforts among the Security Council, Member States as
a whole and the Secretariat.
With regard to the initiative that we and the
United Nations have launched in connection with this
issue, France has repeatedly asked that the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support make quarterly presentations on the state
of United Nations peacekeeping in connection with
operational, administrative, budgetary and financial
aspects. It is therefore with pleasure that we welcome
today’s debate, which we hope will be followed by
other similar meetings. I should like in particular to
thank Mr. Alain Le Roy and Ms. Susana Malcorra for
their presentation of the upcoming New Horizon study.
We await the presentation of the final report later this
year with great interest and anticipation.
Of course, I should also like to associate myself
with the statement that will be made shortly by my
Czech colleague on behalf of the European Union.
The elements set out by the Secretariat are
especially encouraging to us. I would briefly first like
to recall the three-pillar initiative that we launched
with the United Kingdom as a way of underscoring the
unity of perspective between the two approaches. The
first part of our initiative pertains to the strategic
conduct of operations. As the Secretariat has also done
today, we have called for improvements in how
mandates are drafted, how they are coordinated with
planning, how goals are set and how benchmarks for
success are established.
We fully support the idea of strengthening
command and control mechanisms, in particular at the
level of the Secretariat in New York. We also support
the idea of improved dialogue among the main partners
during the planning and implementation of operations.
Meetings of political and military experts have proven

7

S/PV.6153

to be very useful in that regard. We believe they should
be expanded to most operations.
It is also desirable to provide the Security
Council with genuine military expertise by organizing,
under a format yet to be determined, regular meetings
of military advisers, including with the possible
participation of troop-contributing countries.
The second pillar of our initiative pertains to the
implementation of complex mandates. In that regard,
we fully support the idea that the United Nations
should be in a position to undertake more robust
efforts. I should also like to underscore that it would be
a mistake to prevent the United Nations from carrying
out robust peacekeeping and to ignore the importance
of the contributions of countries deeply involved in
robust operations — not necessarily using Blue
Helmets but nevertheless mandated by the
Organization — such as, for example, in Afghanistan.
In that regard, I should like to point out that
France is one of the main contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, to which it is the
fifth-largest financial contributor. France provides
almost 2,250 Blue Helmets and Berets. We also
contribute some 1,300 men to peacekeeping operations
under United Nations mandates in the framework of
the European Union, NATO or at the national level —
operations quite often in especially dangerous areas.
In our joint initiative, we of course fully support
the implementation by peacekeeping operations of
civilian protection mandates. In public opinion in the
countries where the United Nations operates, the
ability of the Organization to protect civilians is the
standard by which we will be judged. In doing so, we
acknowledge that we must be aware of the
contradiction that sometimes exists — as we heard
during the Security Council’s recent visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — between
simultaneously asking peacekeeping operations to take
on a more robust posture and protect civilians more
effectively. The contradiction clearly illustrates the
need to adapt a mission’s internal structure to the
complexity of its mandate.
The third important point relates to the premature
integration of post-conflict reconstruction into our
strategies, as noted by the Under-Secretary-General.
With respect to mandate priorities, as the Council is
aware a significant effort has been made, reflected in
particular in resolution 1856 (2008), on the Democratic

8

Republic of the Congo. That effort should be pursued.
However, resolutions are documents negotiated by
sovereign States in the Security Council, including
with non-member States. Given the respective political
goals of participants, it is not always possible to
establish a full or satisfactory hierarchy of objectives.
The issue of sequential implementation deserves
further consideration. It is difficult to give a new
mission too many tasks. We must therefore avoid that
contradiction, as Alain Le Roy has also mentioned; in
prioritizing urgent tasks, we neglect structural elements
necessary both for an exit strategy and to ensure that
conflicts do not recur or become prolonged. The
establishment of the rule of law and the setting up of
security forces fall under that category.
The same point could be made about the problem
of better integrating United Nations military operations
into the efforts of the rest of the system. The
identification of an integrated approach — as was done
in Timor-Leste, Liberia and the Congo — is clearly
needed today. We must make it a reality. In that regard,
defining concrete guidelines aimed at system-wide
coherence is both crucial and urgent, and must be part
of our discussion of peacekeeping.
In that regard, I should like to conclude by
expressing our hope that the Working Group chaired by
our colleague Ambassador Takasu will now turn its
attention to a detailed consideration of the provisions
of the mandates for peacekeeping operations. That
would make a valuable contribution to the Council’s
future work.
Lastly, the third part of our initiative pertains to
resources. We call for efforts to be made in the areas of
effectiveness and cost. In that regard, we very much
welcome the preliminary ideas set out today by Ms.
Malcorra, including the crucial aspect of financial
flexibility and responsibility and the adoption of new
strategies for rapid deployment through a series of
initiatives that the Secretariat could itself undertake.
Those proposals will be fleshed out later. Ms. Malcorra
can count on us to do everything possible to enable her
to implement as soon as possible in the United Nations
system ideas that are so simple and obvious that we
could rightly wonder why they have not yet been
implemented already. We shall help her do that as soon
as possible.
Moreover, the future New Horizon study will
rightly focus on the issue of force generation. That is a

09-38504

S/PV.6153

key challenge in an overall climate of tensions ever the
poor equipping and funding of troops. We are of course
in favour of expanding the pool of troop and police
contributors. In that regard, I recall the very significant
efforts made by France and the European Union, in
particular with regard to training African forces
through the European Reinforcement of African
Peacekeeping Capacities programme and the
establishment of a network of military schools on the
continent.
In that connection, I should like to mention the
important issue of language training and promoting
participation in peacekeeping operations by staff
speaking local languages. In that connection, I am of
course calling for francophone military, police and
civilian personnel. Many operations are today deployed
to francophone areas. The lack of French-speaking
staff and the insufficient mastery of it by a significant
number of peacekeeping staff both hinders the proper
execution of operations and can even pose a risk to
staff security. At any rate, that situation does not
contribute to engendering good relations and trust
among local populations. The issue of language must
not be taboo when it comes to respecting Charter
provisions and rules pertaining to the use of official
languages at the Secretariat and in peacekeeping
operations. We hope that an effort will be made in that
regard.
The group of francophone countries over which I
have the honour to preside has conferred with other
language groups to clearly illustrate that this is a
generalized problem of adapting to the situation on the
ground. In that connection, I would just like to mention
that we welcome the participation of the UnderSecretary-General at the seminars on peacekeeping
operations organized recently at Bamako by the
International Organization of la Francophonie. We also
support a discussion on the mobility of reserves and the
calls for sustainable resources.
My delegation welcomes the emphasis in the
document — and the assumption underlying today’s
debate — on the need for consultations with the main
contributors. Such consultations are of basic importance
for the United Nations system of shared responsibility.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate our support
for the Secretariat. The various aspects of the
consideration of this issue must, of course, be taken up
within in the competent entities: the Committee of

09-38504

Thirty-Four, the Fifth Committee and, of course, in the
Security Council. In the framework of the Council, we
are determined to promote the various proposals of our
initiative, which will reach a new stage in August
under the British presidency of the Council. We hope
that we will be able to adopt an organizing framework
at that point.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
debate, which gives us a timely opportunity to continue
our discussions on this important matter. We particularly
welcome the participation of major troop and financial
contributors. Allow me to also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Alain Le Roy and Under-Secretary-General
Susanna Malcorra for presenting us with a first
executive summary of the New Horizon non-paper.
Austria also associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union later in this meeting.
We support the ongoing processes focusing on the
reform of United Nations peacekeeping. Austria would
like to thank France, the United Kingdom, Japan as
Chair of the Working Group of the Whole on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, and Canada for their
efforts. We have already witnessed some first changes
in the Council’s approach to mandate extensions,
including the more systematic use of benchmarks and
progress monitoring.
We have studied the executive summary of the
New Horizon non-paper, which identifies the key
challenges of United Nations peacekeeping, and we are
looking forward to more detailed proposals in the
non-paper.
This Department of Peacekeeping Operations
initiative is most timely. We also believe that the
Brahimi report, though written at a time when only
20,000 peacekeepers were deployed, has not lost its
validity. Some of its core issues need to be revisited,
but it can still provide useful guidance to our efforts.
Austria, as a longstanding troop and police
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping operations
and to other United Nations mandated peace missions,
supports initiatives for improved cooperation and
coordination between troop-contributing countries,
police-contributing countries and the Council. We need
a better inclusion of troop- and police-contributing

9

S/PV.6153

countries and financial contributors when planning and
reviewing peacekeeping mandates.
Clear and achievable mandates are key to the
success of United Nations peace operations. The
formulation of mandates ought to take into account all
the tools in question, on the basis of a needs
assessment. The tools we choose must be part of an
overall political strategy and serve clear goals. In many
cases, the resulting mandate will therefore need to
follow a phased approach. Given the unprecedented
expansion of United Nations peacekeeping and the
limits to human and financial resources, other available
options for responding to conflicts, in particular
preventive action, must be considered very seriously.
Shaping an integrated and coherent strategy in
close cooperation with other international, regional,
subregional, local and possibly non-governmental
actors will be crucial for the success of our future
approach. In this regard, we strongly support an
enhanced cooperation with interested regional
organizations. As far as peacekeeping on the African
continent is concerned, close cooperation with the
African Union (AU) must remain a particular priority.
Strengthening the capacities of the AU is an essential
prerequisite for fair and equitable burden-sharing in
contributing to peace and security and for stronger
regional and national ownership. For this very reason,
we are in favour of a substantial and open-minded
debate of the proposals contained in the Prodi report.
The lessons learned and the experiences gained by
the various missions on the ground, and in particular
by national contingents, can provide the Council with
comprehensive information for its deliberations on the
review and extension of mandates. Early and consistent
involvement of Force Commanders as well as troopand police-contributing countries will help to create
common understanding and trust, as well as an
increased willingness to effectively implement the
mandates adopted by the Council. While the Council
bears the main responsibility for establishing achievable
mandates, troop- and police-contributing countries and
other actors have the responsibility to deliver on the
ground and must therefore be given an adequate hearing.
In the Council’s debate on the protection of
civilians this past Friday, we reiterated our support for
the strengthening of protection mandates in
peacekeeping operations. Their role in ensuring the
physical protection of the civilian population affected

10

by armed conflict, and in particular of women and
children, is of utmost importance. Their contribution to
the promotion of human rights, the strengthening of the
rule of law and an increased role for women in peace
processes and peacebuilding, as well as in the fight
against impunity, is invaluable. It is clear that, in order
to implement protection mandates, peacekeeping
missions must be more effective and better resourced.
We are convinced that the independent study
commissioned by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs on protection mandates in
peace operations will make important recommendations
and will thus add to the overall reform efforts of
United Nations peacekeeping. As I already mentioned
this past Friday, Austria hopes that the Council will be
in a position to make progress in this matter in the
framework of the debate on the protection of civilians
scheduled for the month of November.
We also believe that the international community
needs to pay increased attention to the interface
between security and development — particularly in
post-conflict and other fragile situations.
Peace operations can make important contributions
to a sustainable socio-economic development of the
region in which they are deployed. An increased
emphasis on local and regional procurement is just one
of the options that come to mind. Building on some of
the positions put forward during the Council’s January
debate on peacekeeping, Austria has begun a dialogue
with DPKO, the Department of Field Support and the
Peacebuilding Support Office on how to optimize the
socio-economic impact of peace missions. We look
forward to working with other interested delegations
on this important issue.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating Austria’s
dedication to the reform of United Nations
peacekeeping, a process that needs our urgent and
continued commitment if we wish to achieve noteworthy
results in the foreseeable future.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): First of all, my Mission
would like to express to the President of the Security
Council, Ambassador İlkin, and his Mission, its
appreciation for their decision to convene this meeting
on peacekeeping operations. Our appreciation also
goes to the United Kingdom and France for their
initiative on peacekeeping operations.

09-38504

S/PV.6153

United Nations peacekeeping operations have
been one of the most important tools available to the
Security Council to address situations in countries
emerging from conflict. As conflict situations have
become more diverse, United Nations peacekeeping
has been faced with greater challenges.
Currently, United Nations peacekeeping operations
are tasked with a broad range of mandates.
Overstretched operations are faced with challenges in
logistics, finance and force generation, which give rise
to significant gaps between mandates and their
implementation. We welcome the New Horizon
initiative presented to the Council today by UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra to address
these challenges. We look forward to a constructive
and useful dialogue on this initiative between Member
States and the Secretariat.
Allow me to contribute the following three
observations to address the issue of mandate
implementation.
First, while the mandates are given by the
Council, there should also be a common and clear
understanding among all stakeholders, including major
troop- and police-contributing countries, countries in
the region and host nations, as to which tasks are to be
given to the mission and to what extent they are
expected to be accomplished.
Allow me to offer a useful example. Since the
Council established the United Nations mission in
Timor-Leste, the Timor-Leste core group, comprised of
countries having strong relationships with the country,
has been facilitating consideration of the issue by the
Council. The views of the countries that have direct
and broad contact with the respective host nations are
extremely valuable in enabling the Council to
formulate clear, achievable and effective mandates.
Taking them into account lends the Council’s work
greater legitimacy and authority. It is also
indispensable to hear the views of the major troop- and
police-contributing countries, whose personnel can
provide direct information on conditions in the field.
Realistic evaluation of the situation in the field is key
to the formulation of a realistic mandate. In this regard,
tripartite cooperation among the Council, troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat, through
more intensive information sharing and efforts to reach
common understanding on the nature of operations,
should be enhanced.

09-38504

Secondly, complex and robust peacekeeping
mandates require troops that are more capable and well
trained. The quality of the personnel is more important
than the numbers. For this reason, we concur with the
Secretariat on the necessity of broadening the
contributor base. To the same end, it is necessary that
the international community further develop training
programmes for the troops in a coordinated manner.
Japan is working with peacekeeping operation
training centres in Africa to build the capacity of
African troops. Japan is also working with countries of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
as shown in the third meeting of the ASEAN Regional
Forum’s peacekeeping experts in Cambodia. That
meeting was held from 24 to 26 June under the
co-chairmanship of Cambodia and Japan, and the
participants had a very fruitful discussion on ways and
means for enhancing the regional capacity to
participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Lastly, it is quite understandable that people in
distress expect much from a United Nations mission
tasked with mandates such as protection of civilians.
However, gaps between expectations and implementation
can quickly lead to disappointment and undermine the
credibility of the United Nations. That in turn makes it
more difficult to implement the assigned mandates.
To avoid this spiral, it would be useful to
establish a common understanding among relevant
partners, including the local population, about the role
of the peacekeepers on the ground through proactive
communication and by establishing standard operating
procedures governing the protection of civilians and
how the United Nations mission coordinates
with other humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations. We should also pay sufficient attention
to achieving a return to normal life for the local
populace through the early recovery of socio-economic
stability and thus alleviate any frustration that may be
building among them. At the same time, the
international community should strive to make accurate
assessments of the developments on the ground and the
work of the mission without exerting any pressure, in
order to avoid arriving at premature decisions
regarding the mandate and work of the mission. We
should try to find realistic and practical ways to
operate missions in spite of the complicated situation
surrounding them.

11

S/PV.6153

Today’s timely debate contributes to our
understanding of the challenges confronting peacekeeping
activities. Japan, in its capacity as Chair of the Security
Council’s Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
will spare no effort to facilitate exchanges of views
among all stakeholders in order to find workable
solutions for current challenges. The Working Group
has had four fruitful meetings so far this year, with the
participation of troop- and police-contributing countries,
countries contributing financially and other stakeholders,
to discuss how to address gaps between the mandate
and its implementation. In that connection, we sought
firsthand feedback on conditions on the ground from
the troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
Based on that fruitful discussion, we plan to prepare an
interim report on the work of the Working Group for
submission to the Council next month with the aim of
contributing to improvements in operational aspects. I
ask for the constructive engagement of the members of
the Working Group in this regard.
The various ongoing initiatives, including the
Working Group, should be mutually reinforcing and
should contribute to setting a new direction for
improved United Nations peacekeeping and the
accumulation of practical and realistic solutions. Japan
will continue to be actively engaged in this endeavour
as Chair of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations as well as in its activities as a Member State.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on
United Nations peacekeeping operations, bringing
together troop- and police-contributing countries.
Interactions such as this between troop- and policecontributing countries will further enhance our
understanding of the dynamics of peacekeeping and the
planning, coordination and implementation of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
We thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, and Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support,
for their presentations. In this regard, we wish to
commend the initiatives of the Secretariat in preparing
the New Horizon command paper. We also commend
the efforts of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the initiative of Canada and the Center on
International Cooperation, the review process launched
by the United Kingdom and France within the Security
Council, and the work of the Security Council’s

12

Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations in the
ongoing debate on peacekeeping.
The number and scope of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations are at the highest level ever,
stretching the system’s capacity. The reality is that for
many people out there where the United Nations has a
peacekeeping operation, the arrival of United Nations
peacekeepers brings the hope that the horrors and
insecurity they had to endure would be no more. We
know that while in some parts of the world the United
Nations has been successful in meeting the hopes and
dreams of the affected populations, in others it has not
been as successful.
Where peacekeeping has not been successful, part
of the reason is that it has been overwhelmed by the
task, or has lacked the appropriate mandate or adequate
troops, or has even lacked assets and, sometimes,
resolve. Ultimately, where peacekeeping has not been
successful, a holistic approach to handling the
challenges at hand has been lacking.
It is a fact that recent operations have highlighted
the gap between demand and supply in some of these
areas. Where the United Nations has not met the
expectations of the people, the result has been an
affected population with mixed feelings of hope,
frustration and even hostility to the United Nations
presence. As we discuss peacekeeping operations,
therefore, we must conduct a reality check so that
together the entire international community learns
some of the lessons from our successes and also from
our failures.
That underscores the importance of the relationship
between the Security Council and the countries that
contribute the men and women who serve on United
Nations missions, and the need to strengthen the
existing mechanism for engagement. Although there
are mechanisms for this interaction, there is a need to
strengthen the existing arrangements to improve the
dialogue between those who plan and mandate United
Nations peacekeeping operations — that is, the
Council — and those who implement the mandates on
the ground, where they often face considerable risks.
Thus we are convinced that this debate is timely and
will further strengthen United Nations peacekeeping to
meet the needs of contemporary challenges.
A common understanding is needed about what
United Nations peacekeeping should be mandated to do
and what it can do. In recent years there has been a

09-38504

S/PV.6153

shift towards more robust and comprehensive United
Nations peacekeeping, such as in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In addition to maintaining
peace and security, peacekeepers are increasingly
charged with assisting in political processes,
supporting humanitarian efforts, reforming justice
systems, training law enforcement and security forces,
and disarming former combatants and foreign armed
groups.
Given these challenges, it is indeed imperative to
address such issues as the degree of robustness of
modern United Nations peacekeeping, how protection
of civilians mandates can be best implemented, and
what peacekeeping tasks should be undertaken by
United Nations peacekeepers and for how long. This
requires a clear understanding of the situation on the
ground before mandates are designed.
Clear entrance and exit strategies should also be
elaborated with the principal actors concerned. To that
end, we support the revitalization of the Military Staff
Committee, with the participation of all members of
the Council, so that it can play a more active role in
providing the relevant technical input. All these issues
require a strong understanding between contributor
countries and the Council as to what is expected of
peacekeepers and what they require to fulfil these
objectives.
Developing peacekeeping capability depends on a
combination of political will and the availability of
resources on the part of Member States. The lack of
political will undermines the credibility of the United
Nations; lack of resources compounds the problem by
limiting the ability of any peacekeeping mission to
implement its mandate. The United Nations should
therefore endeavour to broaden the contributor base by
working with partners at the regional and subregional
levels and by taking advantage of their capacities.
The complexity of modern peacekeeping clearly
indicates that no single organization, not even the
United Nations, is capable of tackling challenges of
such magnitude alone. Security challenges require a
collective approach, which should seek to establish
coordination at both the strategic and the programmatic
levels. The United Nations should therefore take
maximum advantage of the strengths that respective
organizations, especially regional organizations such as
the African Union, can contribute. However, that will

09-38504

require the establishment or strengthening of strategic
relationships that may exist with regional organizations.
Effective peacekeeping is an objective that we
share. To that end, the Council and the troop- and
police-contributing countries have an important role to
play. We need to focus on strengthening their
relationship and interaction during the different stages
of a peacekeeping mission, especially early in the
planning stages of a new mission or whenever there is
a change in the mandate. We also need to give
attention to the coordination of the various initiatives
of United Nations peacekeeping in order to reinforce
complementarities and avoid the duplication of efforts.
Uganda therefore supports a stronger convergence
in United Nations peacekeeping, with a clear set of
achievable goals in the immediate, medium and long
terms so as to meet the challenges of today and
tomorrow. We also support the aim of strengthening the
unity and cohesion of all stakeholders, enhancing the
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping, and
building its capacity with a view to making it more
predictable and adaptable to emerging challenges, such
as that in Somalia. We recommend that the Working
Group of the Whole on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations undertake an in-depth consideration of the
proposals made during our debates, and report to the
Council before the end of the year.
Finally, Uganda pays tribute to the men and
women of the United Nations for their tireless
sacrifices in helping to make our world a safer place in
which to live. We especially remember and honour
those who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the
service of peace.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I thank you, Sir, for choosing the topic of
United Nations peacekeeping operations as the subject
of our discussion today. I should also like to thank
Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Malcorra for their briefings.
The maintenance of peace is one of the principal
responsibilities of the United Nations. If it is to
accomplish that important mission, it is natural that the
Organization should have a strategy for making its
peacekeeping operations as effective as possible. In
that regard and as many have pointed out, the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809) is a fundamental reference
document that has enabled us to undertake useful
reforms in the United Nations in order to adapt our
action to increasingly complex new situations.

13

S/PV.6153

As time passes, however, we must give new
consideration to how to meet the many challenges
facing peacekeeping operations in terms of the political
commitment of the actors, the participation of States,
the financing and conception of missions, the equipping
of troops and organization. We therefore encourage the
involvement of the greatest possible number of Member
States, particularly troop-contributing countries, in the
current thinking on this issue. We pay tribute to the
Japanese delegation for engaging an ever-growing
number of Member States in the Working Group of the
Whole on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations,
which it chairs. We hope that, following an
intergovernmental process, the Organization will be
able to make us of the innovative ideas that will
emerge from the process as a whole, with the principal
objective of improving the conduct of peacekeeping
operations.
It is of paramount importance that the United
Nations be able to mobilize as many troops as are
needed to address crisis situations in a timely manner.
To that end, all Member States should be able to
contribute to peace missions because, after all,
peacekeeping is a collective responsibility. It is
essential in particular to broaden the involvement of
troop-contributing countries, which should not be
confined to just a few individual countries, but should
encompass all States. Moreover, efforts must be made
to support those States that genuinely wish to contribute
troops but do not have the resources to do so.
The quest for effectiveness also requires us to
give sustained focus to the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Indeed, as many have stressed, the drafting
of mandates remains the subject of debate that is
justified in part by the gap between realities on the
ground and the missions assigned to troops. We must
continue to seek to endow United Nations forces with
realistic mandates and clear rules of engagement that
guarantee protection for innocent civilians, especially
women and children. However, they must also be
endowed with sufficient deterrent capacity in order to
ensure an operation’s success.
None of this can be accomplished without the
support of Member States, the Secretariat, troopcontributing countries and host countries, which must
all offer sustained political support and open
cooperation to peacekeeping missions. The provisions
of resolution 1353 (2001) remain relevant and should
be exploited in order to strengthen such cooperation.

14

With better-equipped and better-trained troops
and adequate mandates, the United Nations can attain
short-term goals. But sometimes that can be in vain
over the long term if the United Nations confines itself
to addressing physical security. It should support
political processes and help implement peace
agreements. It should also work with the country
concerned in the development sphere, because a lasting
peace process cannot be guaranteed unless the
underlying causes of the crisis are resolved; these
include poverty, exclusion and poor governance.
We cannot ignore the substantial peacekeeping
experience of the United Nations. While there have
been tragic examples in the course of the Organization’s
history, it is important also to highlight the successes,
which are far more numerous.
In recent years, regional organizations too have
demonstrated their commitment and their capacity to
manage major crises. It would be desirable to further
strengthen their central role in peacekeeping. The
United Nations should be able to support them in that
respect. We encourage in particular the strengthening
of the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in the peacekeeping sphere, as called for
by all delegations that participated in the Council’s
open debate on 18 March (see S/PV.6092). We are
certain that efforts will be made to strengthen the
peacekeeping capacity of the African Union, as
recommended by the African Union-United Nations
panel to consider the modalities of how to support
African Union peacekeeping operations established
under a United Nations mandate.
The available resources are limited, so we believe
that we must further rationalize United Nations action.
At the same time, we are concerned about options that
would impose sometimes subjective deadlines and
criteria regarding the termination of operations. We
remain convinced that early withdrawal can be tragic,
and more costly for the Organization. Hence, we must
better assess the threat of instability and the re-eruption
of crisis before terminating an operation or moving to
the peacebuilding stage. Specifically, during the special
phase of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), the United Nations — while ensuring the
availability of funding for DDR programmes — should
ensure that the operation is successfully carried out.
We pay tribute to the men and women who,
through peacekeeping operations, provide security and

09-38504

S/PV.6153

stability in conflict zones, many of whom have lost
their lives. War is a tragedy, and in our view more must
be done to prevent the outbreak of conflict. We must
also place a sharper focus on prevention, including by
promoting mediation and creating early warning
mechanisms to prevent latent crises from erupting into
open conflict. Such approaches are more desirable and
far less costly than peacekeeping, peace-restoration or
peacebuilding operations.
Troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat,
financial partners and regional organizations all have
their respective shares of responsibility in carrying out
peacekeeping operations. We must try to reduce the
communication gap among those players; we must
involve them in the various stages of the establishment
of peacekeeping operations. We believe that, if we all
work together, our current deliberations will help build
trust among all the key players and will enhance the
effectiveness of action by the United Nations.
Let me say in conclusion that we support the
recommendation offered by the Permanent Representative
of France regarding greater attention to the question of
languages in peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s open debate, which provides a
useful forum for the parties concerned to engage in an
in-depth discussion of the situation regarding United
Nations peacekeeping and many challenges faced by
United Nations peacekeeping operations. I thank
Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra for
their briefings. We look forward to the New Horizon
report, to be submitted soon by the Secretary-General.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have
been developing for more than six decades; they have
become an important tool for the maintenance of
international peace and building collective security.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have evolved
from their initial role of supervising ceasefires into
integrated, multisectoral, multifaceted operations that
cover the political, human rights and security areas.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are facing a
situation of increasing demand, expanding scale,
increasingly diverse mandates and growing complexity.
That situation has placed greater demands on these
operations in terms of financing, personnel and
management.

09-38504

To enhance the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, it is important that necessary
reforms be undertaken.
First, we believe that, in order to increase the
effectiveness of these operations, it is important to
strengthen and enhance their strategic design and
planning. The Security Council should devote attention
to coordination between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Equal attention should be devoted to the political
settlement of armed conflicts on the one hand and to
the dispatch of peacekeeping operations on the other. It
is important to ensure that there is a peace to keep. At
the same time, the Council should devote attention to
other approaches that could result in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, with a view to reducing
peacekeeping costs.
Secondly, in order to increase the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations it is necessary
to ensure that the operation is provided with the
financial resources it needs. Against the backdrop of an
expanding world financial crisis and the continued rise
of peacekeeping costs, the resources available for
peacekeeping have grown increasingly strained. We
urge that United Nations Member States continue to
pay their assessments in full and on time in order to
ensure that peacekeeping operations can be carried out
smoothly. On the other hand, in order to meet an
increasing demand for peacekeeping operations, we
would also welcome exploration of other channels for
the financing of peacekeeping. We favour strengthened
evaluation and monitoring of United Nations
peacekeeping operations so as to effectively enhance
the efficiency of the use of resources and to ensure that
limited resources are allocated to critical areas.
Thirdly, in order to increase the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations it is necessary
to enhance the capacity to raise personnel and
equipment. The key to translating a commitment to
peace into real results on the ground is the ability to
raise adequate personnel and equipment in a timely
manner. We encourage more Member States to
participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
At the same time, we believe that the Organization
should assist relevant countries in training their
peacekeeping personnel. We support continued efforts
by the Secretariat to enhance its rapid deployment
capacity and enhance its communication with troopcontributing countries.

15

S/PV.6153

Africa has special requirements with respect to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. At present
75 per cent of peacekeepers are deployed in Africa.
The Council should therefore encourage the African
Union to play a more active role. It is also important to
strengthen strategic cooperation between those two
actors.
Fourthly, in order to increase the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations it is important
to secure the full understanding and participation of the
parties concerned. In recent years, some United Nations
peacekeeping operations have been reproached as
having been less than impartial and fair. Moreover,
peacekeeping personnel are facing severe security
challenges on the ground. There may be many causes
behind that situation, but one of them is host countries’
misunderstandings concerning peacekeeping operations.
Thus, adherence to Dag Hammarskjöld’s three principles
of peacekeeping is an important basis for carrying out a
successful United Nations peacekeeping operation.
The process of deciding upon and deploying a
United Nations peacekeeping operations involves a
number of actors, including the Security Council, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries. It is
necessary that they be permitted to offer their
comparative advantages and that cooperation and
consultation among them be strengthened. It is very
important to benefit from the wisdom and strength of
all the parties concerned.
Fifthly, in order to strengthen the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, it is
important to improve their management. We support
the Secretariat’s continuing efforts to maintain close
contact with the Council and to ensure that the mandate
of the peacekeeping operations is more targeted and
pragmatic. We support improving the management
capacity of peacekeeping operations; at the same time,
any measures taken in this area must be transparent.
United Nations Headquarters must be given adequate
and capable personnel, and it is important to provide
each mission with a highly qualified special
representative of the Secretary-General and troop
commander. On top of that, it is necessary to further
strengthen coordination between Headquarters and the
ground. We support the Secretariat in its continued
efforts to explore adequate means of logistics, and we
also encourage Member States that are able to do so to
give assistance in this area.

16

China has always actively participated in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and has made its
contribution to the United Nations peacekeeping cause.
We support reasonable reforms to the peacekeeping
operations and are ready to work with other parties to
this end.
Mr. Heller (spoke in Spanish): We were extremely
pleased by the initiative taken by the Turkish
delegation to hold this debate, as well as to develop the
concept paper on peacekeeping operations. This gives
us an opportunity to continue collective discussion
within our Organization in order to improve working
relationships and communication between the Security
Council and the financial and troop contributors to
peacekeeping operations.
We are also grateful for the presentation made by
Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, as well as by Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.
We are pleased to see the document that will
serve as the basis for defining a New Horizon, based
on a strengthened convergence of partnerships around
the purpose, action and future of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Special attention should be
given to the proposal to establish a new partnership
agenda, which would incorporate three elements: first,
improving the unity and cohesion of the actors involved
in the management, planning and administration of
peacekeeping operations; secondly, endowing the
operations themselves with greater credibility; and,
thirdly, strengthening this capacity so that they may
continue to be an instrument for safeguarding world
peace and security. We hope that the proposals
generated by this meeting will make it possible to
establish better mechanisms for dialogue between the
Security Council and the contributing countries.
During the Security Council’s last debate on this
topic, in January, my delegation underscored the need
to identify areas where we need more action, as well as
good practices that may be applied in the future, given
the growing complexity of the international scenarios
that United Nations peace operations are facing. In this
respect, there seen to us to be five key areas: First,
centralization of the decision-making process for the
establishment of a peacekeeping operation; the need
for precise political leadership in order to help define
the conditions that will determine the success of a
mission; taking into account the multidimensional

09-38504

S/PV.6153

character of operations, as well as the nature of
conflicts, in order to arrive at collective approaches
based on different types of cooperation, with greater
coordination at the strategy and programme level; the
importance of protecting the civilian population as an
essential element in strengthening peace operations;
and the need to establish an effective planning and
coordination mechanism.
Mexico is interested in seeking joint proposals in
order to improve the design, planning, preparation and
administration of peacekeeping operations. In this
respect, it is important to include the participation of
contributing countries, as it would broaden and enrich
our vision of operations and enhance their viability by
incorporating those countries’ knowledge, experience
and practices. We should stress that we need to assess
how to improve the protection of civilians, especially
children, in armed conflicts, as well as the effectiveness
of strategic partnerships between the Security Council
and regional and other field organizations. As by far
the largest financial contributor in Latin America to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Mexico is
committed to these aims.
Though there have been numerous proposals over
the years for improving communication between the
Security Council and the financial- or troopcontributing countries, we have not managed to
structure them in a formal way. Resolution 1327 (2000)
recommended strengthening the system through private
consultations, but we have not yet succeeded in
institutionalizing this proposal. We have to decide
whether the current structure and existing mechanisms
for dialogue between the Council and the contributing
countries are suitable, or if, on the contrary, we should
establish new ways and methods of promoting fuller
discussion. In this respect, we should see if it is
preferable to have a structured dialogue or to establish
interactive formats that could be even more effective.
One aspect that we could consider in order to
formalize the abundant proposals stemming from this
debate is to ask the Secretary-General to establish a
mechanism with the contributing countries within the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations that could
provide timely support and advice to the Security
Council before it establishes particular mandates. It
would be a type of advisory council.
It would also be useful to increase the
participation of the Department of Peacekeeping

09-38504

Operations, as well as the main countries contributing
to each operation, in the analysis carried out by the
Council of every mandate before the latter is renewed
or changed. This would make it possible to have a
specific and timely review of the achievements,
challenges and opportunities that every mission faces,
as well as the priorities and viability of the components
of every mandate. It would also be desirable to update
the request contained in resolution 1353 (2001) for the
Secretary-General to always include in the reports on
peacekeeping operations a section on his discussions
with contributing countries.
The complexity of peacekeeping operations
reflects the need to seek ever-larger and more flexible
mechanisms for complementarity and coordination
among its various bodies, as well as with other entities
in the area of peacekeeping. Today we have helped to
improve the dialogue with countries that contribute
troops, police and resources to the peace missions. In
the future, we believe that we will also have to include
in this dialogue those who contribute through other
activities, such as constructing hospitals, assisting
refugees, supporting electoral processes, building
institutions, as well as providing training for education,
health and judicial system programmes, among others.
It is important to take advantage of the experience that
these countries provide by taking it into account when
we design peacekeeping operations.
It is also crucial to promote an ongoing dialogue
with the major financial contributors to peace
operations. In this respect, we must reflect on the
distribution of financial responsibilities between the
Security Council and the General Assembly in the area
of peacekeeping operations, especially given their
proliferation.
Let us not forget that we find ourselves in an
especially serious global financial crisis that makes the
burden of financial commitments for the States and
international organizations even greater. This is a
valuable lesson for the future which we cannot overlook.
To conclude, Mexico believes that, in order to
ensure the credibility and legitimacy of the United
Nations, we have to establish peace operations that
have the proper financial, political and military
resources to fully comply with their mandates in the
terms that we have described.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
I join others in thanking you for scheduling today’s

17

S/PV.6153

debate. We welcome the opportunity to hear later in the
meeting the views of the Member States that play a
leading role in making United Nations peacekeeping a
reality. I would like to thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Le Roy and Malcorra for the important work
under way in their Departments and for the executive
summary of their Departments’ recent work. Their
briefings today cover some important plans for reform.
The United Kingdom fully supports a new effort
to ensure a meaningful dialogue between the Secretariat,
which plans and manages peacekeeping operations; the
Security Council, which agrees to political objectives;
and the troop- and police-contributors, which provide
the personnel. The enhanced consultation will help
ensure that, together, we have a shared understanding
of the purpose of each mission; we set realistic,
achievable and manageable mandates, we ensure more
coherent and integrated mission planning; and we make
best use of the resources available.
This year has seen a number of initiatives on
United Nations peacekeeping launched across the
United Nations community. I believe that the various
initiatives reflect the concern we all share that
peacekeeping in ever more complex environments
demands greater efforts to ensure that we achieve the
effect we want and that the current initiatives are
complementary and mutually supportive.
Ambassador Ripert of France spoke of the United
Kingdom/French initiative in the Security Council. Our
objective is to improve the Council’s own approach to
the process of mandating and reviewing peacekeeping
missions. We have made progress and we plan to
reflect on that during the United Kingdom presidency
of the Council in August. Our goal is to ensure that the
Security Council plays its part in improving the strategic
management of peacekeeping. We are not seeking to
infringe upon those parts of the wider debate that remain
the prerogative of the General Assembly. Peacekeeping
is an important resource that belongs to all of us, and
we have a shared responsibility to ensure that the huge
resources and effort that go into peacekeeping produce
the best possible results.
The Security Council has examined in the past
how to strengthen consultations with countries outside
its membership which contribute the personnel and
resources to peacekeeping operations. The topic was a
feature of the Brahimi report, and resolution 1327
(2001) established an improved system of consultations

18

with the troop-contributing countries, with the goal of
building a common understanding of a mission’s
mandate and its implementation.
The evolving nature of peacekeeping requires that
we look again at the way we do this and, in particular,
at the involvement of the troop-contributing countries.
Member States reiterated this point in meetings of the
Japan-chaired Security Council Working Group. The
United Kingdom would like to see more profitable use
made of the structures and meetings established by
early resolutions.
Engagement between contributors, the Secretariat
and members of the Council early on as to the
challenges and opportunities a mission faces, well in
advance of Council decisions, will mean that those
decisions on the extension, adaptation or termination of
a peacekeeping mandate will be better informed and
more fully considered.
The consultation should also embrace the
thematic challenges facing peacekeeping. For example,
we need greater clarity and consensus on what can
reasonably be expected of peacekeeping operations
with respect to the protection of civilians. We had an
opportunity to consider some of these issues in our
debate last week and we will have further opportunities
to address the issue during the Austrian presidency. We
hope that this subject can also be an issue for
discussion during next year’s session of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
The Council has seen first-hand the importance of
building local capacity in countries with peacekeeping
operations, particularly the local police and security
services. It has become evident from the recent Council
visits to Haiti, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Liberia that too little emphasis is being placed on
this issue, and that there remains a high dependence on
United Nations peacekeepers to provide local security.
If we are to achieve the national ownership we all
strive for, we must concentrate on ensuring that
peacebuilding objectives, particularly for local capacity
in the security sector, can be established at the outset.
In the executive summary of the forthcoming
New Horizon report, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) proposes that the Security Council
consider ways to mobilize coalitions of States and
other parties to ensure political and practical support to
United Nations missions. We welcome this proposal.
One possibility would be for a lead nation to be

09-38504

S/PV.6153

identified within a core of contributors that could be
involved in the planning and development of a specific
mission from the outset.

actors involved in peacekeeping operations are a
crucial factor for a mission’s success, while the lack of
both could have serious implications on the ground.

The United Kingdom firmly supports the goals of
the New Horizon project set forth by the DPKO and
the Department of Field Support (DFS). We now need
to agree on a new agenda for partnership across
Member States to ensure efficient and, above all,
successful peacekeeping operations. I was particularly
struck by Ms. Malcorra’s proposals to combine support
packages for missions in the same region, to seek more
local staff and local and regional suppliers, to tailor the
United Nations approach to the different needs of the
various stages of peacekeeping operations and to
shorten the procurement timelines to allow for more
rapid deployment. We look forward to working with
both DFS and DPKO to assist in delivering on these
demanding but important objectives as part of our wider
goals on strengthening United Nations peacekeeping.

In order to improve and strengthen this
partnership among the Council, the troop-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the host country, we need
proactive and specific action on the part of all of
actors. It is clear to us, following our experience as an
elected member of the Security Council, that we have
to change the exclusive institutional culture that prevails
within the Council in order to make it more inclusive.

Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to begin by thanking you
and your delegation for organizing this debate. We
believe that this is an extremely valuable opportunity
to exchange points of view on the current challenges to
peacekeeping operations, especially at a time when
several initiatives for discussion on this item are being
developed within and without the Security Council. We
are especially pleased to see the participation of
several troop- and police-contributing countries and we
hope that we can continue the practice of including
these countries in the Council’s discussion on this item.
The concept paper that has been circulated by the
delegation of Turkey invites us to focus on the important
topic of the relationship between the Security Council
and troop- and police-contributing countries. This is a
topic that the Council has been discussing for more
than 15 years and that has been the subject of several
presidential statements and resolutions over the years,
which shows the importance of the topic.
However, we go on discussing this matter
because, unfortunately, we acknowledge that the level
of interaction between the main partners involved in
peacekeeping operations is still very limited. We have
all witnessed the wide gap that exists between the
Council, the contributing countries, the Secretariat and
even host countries. This situation is of enormous
concern to us because it is clear to our country that
communication and coordination among all of the

09-38504

In this regard, over the next six months it will
continue to be a priority for our country to work with
other delegations in the Council to ensure full
compliance with existing standards, in particular, the
note by the President of the Security Council contained
in document S/2006/507, resolutions 1327 (2000) and
1353 (2001), and Article 44 of the Charter of the
United Nations, and to promote specific steps to
increase the frequency and, above all, quality of the
interaction between the Council and the troopcontributing countries, the Secretariat and host
countries, especially at the expert level. Likewise, we
hope that one of the results of the France/United
Kingdom initiative to analyze the different aspects of
peacekeeping operations will be a renewed
commitment by the Council to deepen the interaction
among those actors. We hope that will be the case.
We also view very positively the efforts of the
delegation of Japan — whom we thank for their
leadership — as Chair of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and in organizing meetings of
the Working Group with the TCCs and the Secretariat.
We hope that practice will continue, and we believe
that it would be valuable to consider holding similar
meetings on individual missions before the next
renewal of their mandates.
In the past, Costa Rica has also argued for closer
involvement of the Secretariat during the Council’s
decision-making process on peacekeeping operations.
When the Council’s experts meet to negotiate a
resolution, they should take the advice of the
Secretariat into account, as we have seen in many
negotiations in the General Assembly and as in fact we
have heard that the Council has done in past years. In
that manner it could inform the Council in a timely
manner of the practical, operational and financial
implications of the Council’s proposals.

19

S/PV.6153

An important step was taken with the recent
establishment of the group of experts on the protection
of civilians, through which the members of the Council
can interact with officials from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs prior to
negotiating the mandate. However, similar interaction
is lacking with other entities of the Secretariat, in
particular with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support.
As we said earlier, strengthening relations
between the main players involved in peacekeeping is
everyone’s responsibility, not only that of the Council.
The Secretariat must ensure provision of timely and
detailed information to the Council and to the TCCs,
especially in crisis situations. Furthermore, we believe
that there could be a greater effort on the part of the
Secretariat to share information with all Council
members — not only, as we sometimes see, with some
members, mainly the permanent members.
On the other hand, although it is true that we
need greater opportunities for dialogue with the TCCs,
we are concerned that the opportunities that already
exist are underused, especially the private meetings of
the Council with the TCCs, where on many occasions
the level of participation and interaction is minimal, if
not to say non-existent. We would like to hear the
views of the TCCs on how those meetings could be
more interactive, or if they believe that another form of
dialogue would be more conducive to greater interaction.
My delegation would also like to call upon the
host countries to take greater advantage of the
Council’s public meetings to refer to specific aspects of
operations. It is also crucial that we all work together
to improve the Council’s interaction with the General
Assembly, especially with the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee.
Costa Rica is aware that some of our
recommendations could prolong the Council’s
negotiations or increase its level of work. But we are
also convinced that greater and more substantive
interaction among all the actors would make it possible
for the Council to take better decisions, to design
clearer and more viable mandates and to guarantee
more effective implementation of those decisions on
the ground. Even more importantly, we believe that
those proposals would help to strengthen trust between
the different participants within a peacekeeping
operation and would thus contribute to strengthening

20

the partnerships that support and legitimize that
emblematic activity of the United Nations.
I would like to thank Mr. Le Roy and
Ms. Malcorra for their valuable statements and also for
having circulated the executive summary of the New
Horizon document and for having presented some of its
main points in this debate. My delegation will await
the final publication of the document to make
constructive contributions to its recommendations. But
we take this opportunity to briefly look at three points
that were made in the document.
First, we agree with the important point that
peacekeeping should be part of a political solution and,
as we have argued on many occasions, on the need to
be more creative in using the broad range of
instruments that are available to the Council for the
prevention and resolution of conflicts. For that reason,
we look forward with interest to the recommendations
along those lines. It would seem valuable to us if those
could include specific proposals on current operations
where those additional political tools could be deployed.
Secondly, we also hope to receive recommendations
and proposals on strategies that could be used to
mobilize coalitions of Member States and other
partners to support peacekeeping operations, especially
as we have seen the success of that approach in Haiti.
It would be interesting if the document could provide
specific cases of current operations where that type of
strategy could be followed.
Thirdly, we agree with the urgency of building a
consensus on policies to define the implementation of
key mandates in peacekeeping operations, such as the
protection of civilians. My country has in recent
months been advocating in different forums the need to
begin a process to define clear, realistic and
appropriate guidelines and operational requirements for
resources and training that make up the additional tasks
related to the protection of civilians. For that reason,
we await with interest the recommendations on this
topic.
Lastly, Costa Rica will continue to work in a
committed manner to promote close consultations
among all partners involved in peacekeeping, bearing
in mind at all times that our efforts will have a direct
effect on the situations and lives of millions of
civilians in armed conflict — the very raison d’être of
peacekeeping operations.

09-38504

S/PV.6153

Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): First, I wish to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this discussion on peacekeeping operations,
which my country hopes will be an important link in
the chain of reform of peacekeeping operations. We
wish to thank Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Malcorra for their
extremely useful briefings.
Since it was established, the United Nations has
used peacekeeping operations as a tool to achieve
peace and stability, alongside preventive diplomacy,
mediation and peacebuilding. Peacekeeping operations
have proven to be effective in many countries where
they have insured security and stability, such as
Cambodia, El Salvador, Guatemala and Mozambique.
Currently we are witnessing the ongoing success
of certain peacekeeping operations, such as in Burundi
and Sierra Leone. However, it must not be forgotten
that some missions have failed miserably in building
peace in time and to protect civilians. We have also
witnessed unimaginable horrors such as those that
occurred in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Rwanda and in
Somalia.
Despite the mixed results of peacekeeping
operations, they are still the most appropriate tool for
peacekeeping and for ensuring stability and preserving
the lives of civilians. Nonetheless, the growing demand
for peacekeeping operations and for their expansion
and the growing costs have raised questions about their
effectiveness and how best to manage and enhance
them. How can we provide those operations with the
necessary human and financial resources? Other
questions concern the nature of their mandate, when
and in what conditions we should resort to force and
now best to fulfil their mandate to protect civilians.
Numerous efforts have been made to reform the
planning and management of peacekeeping operations,
from the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) to the 2010
reform agenda, the restructuring of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the establishment of the
Department of Field Support. The work of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has ensured
follow-up to and assessment of the reform. We look
forward to receiving the non-paper on the New
Horizon initiative on peacekeeping reform to be
presented by the Secretariat, of which we have
obtained an executive summary.
We hope that the debate that began in the Security
Council on the United Kingdom/French initiative on

09-38504

the reform of peacekeeping operations will lead to
concrete results through open debate in which all
interested parties, including troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs),
participate. There is no doubt that the participation of
TCCs and PCCs is important in order to fill in the gaps
in peacekeeping operations and to find ways to
strengthen their effectiveness within the context of
clear, agreed and verifiable mandates. We believe that
it is high time to expand the corps of TCCs so that more
of them will provide troops. That could be achieved
through financial support to certain countries that are
unable to provide troops, weapons and equipment.
The establishment or extension of any peacekeeping
mandate must be in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, agreed
guidelines, the consent of the parties concerned, the
non-use of force except in legitimate self-defence, and
strict respect for the neutrality, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, as well as non-interference
in their internal affairs.
In that regard, we affirm the importance of all
TCCS participating in all aspects and phases of
peacekeeping. The growing need for peacekeeping
operations requires more cooperation between the
United Nations and relevant regional organizations,
which must be encouraged to take part in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping through regional mechanisms.
The African Union is the primary organization for
two reasons. First, the majority of conflicts take place on
the African continent. Secondly, the African Union has
acquired special mechanisms for peacekeeping with the
establishment of its Peace and Security Council, which
is playing an increasingly important role in peacekeeping.
Furthermore, the African Union has launched
initiatives that merit the support and encouragement of
us all. We also support the implementation of a joint
working programme between the African Union and
the United Nations in order to strengthen the
capabilities of the African Union’s peacekeeping
operations in the short and long terms, as well as those
of its mission in Somalia. We welcome Mr. Le Roy’s
statement to that effect earlier in this meeting.
The success of peacekeeping operations depends
on an active accompanying political process that
includes the resolve of all parties to a conflict to
repudiate violence and to favour a dialogue to restore
peace. Peacekeeping must be part of all mandates, and

21

S/PV.6153

peacebuilding must also include support for strengthening
and restructuring State institutions and the security
sector, as well as the establishment of an effective
police force, a robust legal system and the State’s
authority over its entire territory.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful to Ambassador İlkin for convening this timely
debate and for including troop- and police-contributing
countries in the discussion. The United States deeply
appreciates the chance to hear their views, and we
salute the sacrifices made by their brave and women
serving under the United Nations flag. Allow me also
to thank Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and
Malcorra for their thorough briefings.
Much of what we have just heard echoes what
key stakeholders say. United Nations peacekeeping
operations save lives. They stop wars from escalating
and spreading, and they can provide hope after decades
of despair, as we have been told by the democratically
elected leaders of such countries as Haiti, Liberia,
Timor-Leste, Sierra Leone and Burundi.
However, for all the good that United Nations
peacekeeping does, it faces, of course, serious challenges.
Host Governments warn that violence may return if
Blue Helmets leave too soon. Civilians plead for better
protection from marauding gangs, rebel groups and
renegade soldiers. Troop and police contributors point
to a widening gap between the risks they face on the
ground and the degree of input they have when mandates
are discussed here in the Council. Financial contributors,
in the throes of a global economic crisis, struggle to
enforce budget discipline, cut waste and prevent abuse.
The Secretariat appeals for political support to
advance peacemaking efforts and to assemble better
equipped and rapidly deployable forces. Peacekeeping
missions often need stronger leadership and endure
persistent delays in acquiring critical personnel and
materiel. And Security Council members question
whether the way we produce mandates for those
missions does justice to all those concerns and to the
responsibilities that all of us on this Council must
shoulder.
Those responsibilities do not end when we adopt
a peacekeeping mandate. In many ways, it is where
they begin. Tackling those challenges is one of my
highest priorities, and the United States stands ready to
do its part. Allow me to spell out five of the principles
that will guide our approach.

22

First, we will seek mandates for United Nations
peacekeeping operations that are credible and achievable.
We will urge the Council to continue to weigh the full
range of responses to a given challenge. Poorly armed
and disorganized gangs, rebel groups and others outside
a peace process should not be allowed to thwart a
peacekeeping mandate or block a United Nations
deployment. Peacekeepers are often authorized to use
appropriate force to defend themselves and to fulfil
their mandate, including protecting civilians under the
imminent threat of violence. They must be willing and
able to do so.
At the same time, we recognize that United
Nations peacekeepers cannot do everything and go
everywhere. There are limits to what they can
accomplish, especially in the midst of a full-blown war
or in the face of opposition from the host Government.
Peacekeeping missions are not always the right
answer; some situations require other types of United
Nations-authorized military deployments, such as
regional efforts or multinational forces operating under
the framework of a lead nation. Effective mediation
must precede, as well as accompany, peacekeeping
efforts if they are to succeed.
Those lessons have guided our approach in a
number of instances, most recently in Somalia, where
conditions are not yet appropriate for successful United
Nations peacekeeping. But that is a country that still
urgently needs sustained, if not increased, international
support.
Secondly, the United States will intensify
diplomatic efforts to give new momentum to some of
the stalled or faltering peace processes in areas where
United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed,
starting with Darfur and the Sudan’s North-South
peace process. As the Council is aware, President
Obama appointed General Scott Gration as his special
envoy for the Sudan for precisely that purpose.
Successful diplomatic and political efforts are crucial
to enabling the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations
Mission in Somalia and the United Nations Mission in
Chad and Central African Republic (MINURCAT) to
better implement their mandates.
Thirdly, the United States will strengthen its
efforts with the United Nations and other partners to
expand the pool of troop and police contributors for
both current and future United Nations peacekeeping

09-38504

S/PV.6153

operations. That will require work on several fronts.
The United States, for its part, is willing to consider
directly contributing more military observers, military
staff officers, civilian police and other civilian
personnel, including more women, to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We will also explore ways to
provide enabling assistance to peacekeeping missions,
either by ourselves or together with partners.
Let me single out one immediate priority. We will
assist with generating the missing forces in enabling
units required for UNAMID, MINURCAT and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to better protect civilians under
imminent threat of physical harm, including sexual
violence.
We will be open-minded about practical suggestions
to deepen consultations among troop and police
contributors, the Security Council and the Secretariat,
including redoubling efforts to implement undertakings
in resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353 (2001). In those
consultations, we should also be clear about what we
are asking of troop contributors and what we are
willing to do to assist them.
We will provide improved training and equipment
assistance through the United States Global Peace
Operations Initiative and its Africa-oriented programme,
the African Contingency Operations Training and
Assistance programme. Through the Global Peace
Operations Initiative, the United States has already
trained 75,000 peacekeepers and facilitated the
deployment of some 49,000 peacekeepers to
20 operations around the world, mostly in Africa. Over
the next five years, the Global Peace Operations
Initiative will continue direct training, but will make it
its top priority to help partner countries to become selfsufficient in peacekeeping training.
The United States will engage in longer-term
discussions about how best to increase the interoperability
and supply of rapidly deployable brigade-size forces —
the very forces that could join, reinforce and buy time
for United Nations peacekeeping operations in an hour
of crisis. And the United States will consider different
ways to support the increasing need for effective
formed police units.
Fourthly, the United States will dedicate greater
attention to Security Council discussions on the
renewal of existing peacekeeping mandates. We will
seek more comprehensive assessments of the progress

09-38504

that has been made and the obstacles that remain. That
includes carefully considering the early-recovery and
peacebuilding activities that enable peacekeeping
operations to depart successfully, such as demobilizing
and reintegrating former combatants, reforming the
security sector and strengthening the rule of law.
We will use these discussions as opportunities to
take stock of the ways that United States assistance can
accelerate the transfer of responsibilities from
peacekeepers to the host country in success. We plan to
start this new approach in September, when the
Security Council is scheduled to discuss Liberia and
Haiti. But let me be clear: We will not support arbitrary
or abrupt efforts to downsize or terminate missions
before their downsizing or termination is warranted.
Finally, the United States will carefully review
and keep an open mind about reform proposals from
the Secretariat and others, especially those to be
contained in the New Horizon non-paper and related
field-support proposals, in order to address the many
challenges we have discussed today.
We are ready to work together with members of
the Council, the Secretariat, the countries that provide
troops and police, and the many other partners on
whose efforts success in peacekeeping depends, notably
the countries in which United Nations peacekeeping
operations now exist or may be deployed in the future.
We thank our colleagues, in particular the United
Kingdom, France, Japan, Turkey, Canada and Nigeria,
for urging us to confront the challenges facing United
Nations peacekeeping. We thank the peacekeepers and
those who support them for all their efforts and
courage. We look forward to the lifesaving work we
can continue to do together.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, and to
the Turkish delegation for organizing today’s meeting
on the topical issue of peacekeeping operations. We
have listened with great interest to the statements by
Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Ms. Malcorra.
The increase in the number of peacekeeping
operations, the rise in the number of staff involved in
them, and the growing complexity of their peacekeeping
mandates — all against the backdrop of a shortage of
financial and technical resources — are conditions of
contemporary United Nations peacekeeping and the
development of comprehensive planning and
implementation strategies. We believe that any steps to

23

S/PV.6153

reform peacekeeping should be geared towards enhancing
the effectiveness of United Nations operations. It is
truly important that they be carried out in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and the norms
of international law, including international humanitarian
law; in full respect for the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security; and in line with universally
recognized principles of peacekeeping.
We see opportunities for the improvement of
United Nations peacekeeping primarily in the areas of
operationalization, more effective use of the resources
of regional organizations and the growing potential of
the United Nations itself in all crucial areas of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Of course, mandates
must be very clear, implementable and appropriate to a
situation.
We call for continued improvement in consultations
between members of the Security Council, troopcontributing countries and other contributors to
peacekeeping, as well as with the Secretariat, on all
matters related to peacekeeping activities, including at
the level of planning. We should make maximum use
of the procedures already in place and of previous
Security Council decisions. We believe that, in order to
organize such dialogue, we must make even fuller use
of the Council’s Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. In that connection, we acknowledge the
efforts of Japan as Chair of the Group.
We call on troop-contributing countries to more
actively utilize the dialogue format already in place so
as to keep members of the Security Council and the
Secretariat fully informed of their assessments of
operations under way. We have often said that dialogue
with troop contributors should be a path for genuine
two-way communication.
The Security Council has a very special
responsibility for drawing up realistic mandates for
peacekeeping operations. We believe that the decisions
of the Council to create peacekeeping operations
should be based on prior agreements with potential
troop contributors with the aim of ensuring full staffing
of the missions and their speedy deployment. Given the
increasing complexity and multifunctionality of
contemporary peacekeeping mandates, it is particularly
important to clearly define functions in connection
with peacekeeping and in post-conflict peacebuilding.
We believe that United Nations peacekeeping forces

24

should be involved only in the initial stages of
reconstruction, while we should involve more actively
in United Nations peacebuilding and socio-economic
reform those bodies that deal with such subjects, for
example the Peacebuilding Commission, regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
bilateral donors.
We should give special attention to the problem
of ensuring that the necessary level of military
expertise is available to the Security Council, which I
must say that it is still unsatisfactory. We support the
idea of involving military experts from Council
members’ delegations in reaching agreement on and
reviewing the mandates of peacekeeping operations.
We also think that the Security Council should work
more systemically on the military aspects of
peacekeeping.
The Russian proposal that the Military Staff
Committee be made more active and have all 15
Council members represented in it is still on the table,
and we hope it will be welcomed. We are convinced
that an assessment by the Military Staff Committee of
the military situation in countries where peacekeeping
operations are deployed, recommendations from the
Committee on operational aspects of peacekeeping and
its participation in missions to determine the level of
readiness
of
peacekeeping
contingents
and
infrastructure would provide the Council with reliable
and timely information. Such an approach would
strengthen the military expertise of United Nations
peacekeeping as a whole.
We stress the responsibility of the Secretariat in
improving the comprehensive planning of operations
and coordination between Headquarters and the field.
In the context of the recent restructuring of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, the strengthening of the
Office of Military Affairs and the establishment of an
Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions, we
believe that the Secretariat is fully capable of carrying
out this work effectively.
Additional attention could be given to improving
the day-to-day coordination of the activities of all of
these Secretariat structures. Achieving a systemic
approach will be possible only if there is a rational
distribution of powers and responsibilities among the
various departments and offices of the Secretariat,
while preserving the unity of command and control.

09-38504

S/PV.6153

This is particularly relevant today in the light of the
deployment of the United Nations operations in Darfur,
Chad and the Central African Republic.
It is important to develop criteria for adjusting
mandates and drawing down peacekeeping operations.
To that end, it must be recalled that the main purpose
of peacekeeping is establishing conditions for a
successful political process. This is the key principle in
the Council’s adoption of decisions in this area. In that
context, I fully agree with the statement made today by
Ambassador Rice of the United States of America to
the effect that it is unadvisable and counterproductive
to wind operations down too early. We believe that this
approach is of key importance and that it should be
applied to all United Nations peacekeeping operations,
without exception.
Experience has shown that more active resort to
regional organizations is effective, provided that their
activities are carried out in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter and that their
relations with the United Nations, and the Council in
particular, are governed by the provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter. Along with such traditional
partners as the African Union and the European Union,
the United Nations could strengthen its relations with
other regional structures, many of which have quite a
bit of experience, for example in mediation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. We feel that there are
good prospects for cooperation between the United
Nations and such well-tested organizations as the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization.
Given the complex tasks and challenges facing
United Nations peacekeeping, we look forward to the
forthcoming New Horizon report to be issued by the
Secretariat, which was presented today by Mr. Le Roy
and Ms. Malcorra. The report will be a valuable
contribution to the work of reforming peacekeeping
mechanisms of the United Nations to make them more
effective. The report will clearly require very careful
study.
It is important to ensure optimal coordination
between the work of the Secretariat with the relevant
work of the Council and the General Assembly. The
Russian Federation attaches great importance to the
role of United Nations peacekeeping activities in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
we intend to increase our participation in peacekeeping

09-38504

operations. Russian peacekeepers are deployed in the
Middle East, various parts of Africa, Haiti and Kosovo.
There is a Russian helicopter unit in the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan and another Russian airborne unit
in the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad. The training of African specialists
of the All-Russia Institute of Advanced Training for
Workers in the Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs is
important and useful work. We are willing to cooperate
in such relevant activities with all interested
delegations and the Secretariat.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): First of all, I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate. I thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, for their presentations and introduction
of some preliminary findings and proposals under the
New Horizon initiative for United Nations
peacekeeping.
Peacekeeping operations have beyond a doubt
established a niche role in the spectrum of options
available for the maintenance of international peace
and security. Together with other collective efforts to
assist countries emerging from conflict to achieve a
steady state of stability, peacekeeping has proven to be
a versatile tool and a credible mechanism to deter or
reverse conflicts and has accumulated a good track
record of legitimacy when deployed appropriately.
Since the beginning of the new millennium,
however, contemporary peacekeeping has faced one of
the most critical moments in its history as a result of
the
evolving
demands
for
complex
and
multidimensional mandates, the sheer overstretch of
authorized troop and police availability and capability,
the changing nature of conflicts and the increasingly
unpredictable security environment for peacekeepers.
With an annual budget of well over $8 billion and
the mounting pressures of the global financial crisis,
peacekeeping missions have had to shoulder a daunting
agenda of deploying at a rapid pace into remote areas,
maintaining economies of scale, laying the groundwork
for sustainable peace dividends and ensuring
achievable mandates with clear benchmarks and within
specific timelines.
In the meantime, the unsustainable equilibrium
between costs and capacities that vary across
operations continues to expose looming gaps among

25

S/PV.6153

those who take decisions on peacekeeping operations,
those who implement them, those who allocate
resources, those who have to implement decisions on
the ground and the recipient countries.
Sharpening the peacekeeping tool to make it
more effective and successful is a continuous process
of the Organization. The non-paper on the New
Horizon initiative to be formally introduced by the
Secretariat should receive thorough consideration by
the Security Council and the broader United Nations
membership, as well as other stakeholders in
peacekeeping activities, in order to enable us to draw
good lessons and to make peacekeeping ever more
effective in the interests of international peace and
security.
The challenges emanating from the expansion
and complexity of today’s peacekeeping make it
necessary to review existing practices and formulate a
comprehensive strategy that cuts across the whole
range of activities from the design of concepts and
policies to proper and comprehensive planning; from
objective analysis of ground realities to the formulation
of clear, realistic and achievable mandates and the
provision of commensurate resources; from ensuring
the safety and security of personnel to integrated
command and control; and from the implementation of
mandates to sound drawdown and exit strategies.
Against that backdrop, since the launch of the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809) nine years ago, the
Secretariat has undertaken a number of initiatives to
enhance the effectiveness, impact and efficiency of
peacekeeping operations. A good number of efforts are
also under way among the various bodies involved in
the decision-making process, such as the Fifth
Committee, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Peacebuilding Commission, United
Nations agencies and programmes, and the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
It is therefore fundamental to decisively improve
the coordination of these efforts so as to avoid the
duplication of resources, share best practices and
maximize complementary distributions of responsibilities.
In so doing, the exercise of mandates and reforms on the
peacekeeping track should be carried out in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter and universally recognized guidelines, namely,
the consent of the parties, the non-use of force except in
self-defence, total impartiality, respect for the sovereignty

26

and territorial integrity of States, and non-interference in
their internal affairs.
The entire United Nations membership and
international partners can have a role to play in helping
to alleviate the manifold burdens and tackle the varied
obstacles confronting peacekeeping. Troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs), most of which are non-aligned and developing
countries and bear the overwhelming majority of human
and material costs of missions, should be involved early
and fully in the preparation, planning, monitoring,
conduct and evaluation of peacekeeping operations so
that their operational experience and intellectual input
can contribute to the appropriate, effective and timely
decision-making and policy-formulating process both at
Headquarters and in the field.
It is henceforth crucial to strengthen the
triangular communication among TCCs and PCCs, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, as laid out in
resolution 1353 (2001) and the note by the President of
the Security Council contained in document S/2002/56.
Cooperation between the Organization and regional
and subregional organizations may have added value if
it helps us to fully comprehend the nature of the
situation and enables missions to achieve their intended
objectives, provided that those relationships are
regulated on the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter.
Given the specific limits and comparative
advantages that they possess, peacekeeping operations
should not be considered to be panaceas for the
definitive settlements of conflicts, which can be
achieved only by addressing the comprehensive
political, security, economic and humanitarian
dimensions of a given problem.
Experience has shown that, when operations are
deployed in inappropriate circumstances, the results
can be disastrous for the population in the conflict
area, for the peacekeepers themselves and even for the
viability of the instrument of peacekeeping.
Conversely, an in-depth understanding of the specific
country setting, the sequenced application of the right
tools in response to the underlying conflict dynamics,
and the early synchronization of steps leading towards
a more normalized situation are the best guarantors of a
smooth, gradual transition to early recovery and the
best deterrence against the risks incurred by
peacekeepers.

09-38504

S/PV.6153

In the final analysis, finding a lasting solution to
a conflict requires us to go beyond military and
security measures, incorporating broader and more
effective long-term responses that address the root
causes of the conflict and promote national ownership
of and contribution to future stability. It is in this
context that the Organization’s potential on parallel
tracks should be further strengthened, above all in the
areas of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention,
mediation, peacemaking and peacebuilding.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): First of all, I would like to
thank the Turkish presidency of the Security Council
for convening this important debate on an issue of
special importance to Security Council members and
the general membership alike. No other issue
considered by the United Nations brings together so
many branches of its everyday work, which has
naturally kept it in the focus of this body for many
years.
I would also like to thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their
valuable presentations today. I also express our
appreciation for the initiative of the United Kingdom
and France in that field and for the steady work of the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, under its Japanese chairmanship.
We are not saying anything innovative when we
affirm that the international landscape has changed
sharply over the past 20 years, and with it the nature of
contemporary conflict. Traditional peacekeeping as we
have known it has also gone through transformations
and reincarnations, and is nowadays becoming
increasingly robust and multidimensional in its
approach. Peacekeeping missions are moving away
from — if I may put it this way — the old way of
thinking that involved separating forces and
monitoring ceasefires, and are increasingly being
tasked with rebuilding societies from the ground up.
That is a reality, and we commend both the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the
Department of Field Support (DFS) for factoring this
new reality into their organizational and operational
preparations.
Cognizant of this new reality on the ground and
of the need to strengthen unity and cohesion amongst
all stakeholders in order to make the future of
peacekeeping as successful as possible, especially in
the light of the challenges we are facing, we should

09-38504

like to highlight some issues that we feel need further
attention.
Whenever we approach the question of
contemporary peacekeeping in a holistic manner, it
would be remiss not to mention the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) and other United Nations documents that
have followed, including the recently distributed
executive brief contained in the DPKO/DFS New
Horizon non-paper. We support the guidelines provided
in these documents, especially given the fact that the
United Nations acts under the premise that conflict
cannot be resolved first and foremost by military and
seeks rather to address problems through their root
causes.
Croatia fully supports the notion that lasting
peace and security can be built only through adherence
to the three interlinked and firmly grounded basic
pillars of security, development and the protection of
human rights. That having been said, it should also be
stressed that there is no one-size-fits-all peacekeeping
operation: each new mission needs to be tailored to the
concrete conditions and to the political realities on the
ground. A clear political strategy and integrated
mission planning are extremely important to that end
and should include the provision of a precisely defined
mandate with clear and achievable benchmarks and
goals and with a clear exit strategy.
As stated, Croatia believes that the most
promising approach to peacekeeping operations is an
integrated and comprehensive one that brings together
the various United Nations departments and agencies
in working towards a common goal. The contemporary
role of peacekeeping is not only to re-establish and
provide continued security in the area of operation;
ultimately operations are there to enable Governments
and societies to resolve their own problems in a selfsufficient manner, so that the role of the international
community can gradually be reduced to that of an
adviser. Local ownership should be the overarching
demand of both the host country and the international
community. That, of course, also includes the
development of local security forces, the importance of
which we have seen first-hand during Security Council
visits to a number of countries.
That having been said, development is of crucial
importance for the long-term success of peacekeeping
operations. If the foundations of future prosperity are
not built into the mandates of peacekeeping operations

27

S/PV.6153

from the beginning — and by this we mean long-term
issues such as the protection of civilians, the
strengthening of civil society, security sector reform,
including the strengthening of police and judicial
forces, and economic revitalization and development —
repeated recourse to violence can be and quite often is
probable. Croatia has paid a great deal of attention to
these issues and has, in fact, deployed some civil-sector
experts to places such as Iraq and Afghanistan.
Croatia considers the training and education of
peacekeeping personnel to be another key aspect of the
eventual success of any peacekeeping operation. Since
2001, Croatia has conducted education and
pre-deployment training of Croatian and foreign
officers at the United Nations-certified International
Military Operations Training Centre near Zagreb, while
since 2006 a similar international course has been
regularly organized for United Nations police officers.
That latter course has been certified by the United
Nations since 2008.
Croatia particularly supports all the proposals
aimed at greater coordination and strengthened
relations between the Security Council and troop- and
police-contributing countries (TCCs and PCCs). That
aspect is crucial, as TCCs and PCCs must have
confidence that their contribution will be fully
appreciated and that conditions will be created for
them to fully express their respective interests. It is
clearly counterproductive to plan a peacekeeping
operation without the unambiguous support of a core
number of nations willing to provide troops for the
proposed mission.
Croatia also believes that, in order to share the
burden imposed by peacekeeping, the United Nations
should strengthen its cooperation with regional
organizations and improve cooperation between United
Nations agencies and other international agencies
active on the ground. Since the majority of United
Nations peacekeeping takes place in Africa, we believe
that cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States is particular important.
Before concluding, we would like to highlight
one final issue, especially in the light of the everincreasing burdens, both financial and logistical, being
placed on United Nations peacekeeping and its troopcontributors. Much has been written and discussed
regarding the issue of multidimensional versus

28

traditional peacekeeping, but little work has been done
on the possibility of promoting the idea of preventive
peacekeeping. We have one concrete example: that of
the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) in Macedonia, which proved to be very
successful in defusing a tense political and military
situation and in preventing the outbreak of violent
conflict. We need to ask ourselves the perennial
questions of whether prevention is better than cure and
how much we can potentially save — foremost in lives,
but also in financial and logistical resources — if we
act pre-emptively in situations that have the potential
to seriously challenge international peace and security.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
Let me start by thanking Under-SecretariesGeneral Le Roy and Malcorra for their briefings, which
have set the right tone for our debate. The interventions
by Council members have also touched upon all
relevant points, so I will confine myself to four basic
questions we face in dealing with the challenges of
peacekeeping.
First, why do we need peacekeeping? Since its
inception, peacekeeping has become one of the key
tools of the United Nations for the maintenance of
global peace and security and has proved its versatility
in a number of cases by helping to deter or reverse
inter-State conflicts, ending civil wars and mitigating
humanitarian crises.
Of course, it is far preferable to prevent conflicts
before they become full-fledged crises requiring
intensive peacekeeping or peacemaking. And for that,
there is no doubt that we need to invest more in the
international community’s mediation and conflict
prevention capabilities. However, in the real world we
all know too well that the need for United Nations
peacekeeping operations will never cease to exist. And
thus, in parallel with efforts to improve our practices
on when and how hest to mandate peacekeeping
missions, we must also make sure that the necessary
political will and capabilities are in place.
The second question is: What are the problems?
Today, international peacekeeping operations face a
series of problems and challenges including military,
financial and personnel overstretch. As the largest
institutional provider of peacekeepers worldwide, the
United Nations feels these difficulties more than any
other organization.

09-38504

S/PV.6153

In addition to the dwindling of financial
resources available to peacekeeping activities, perhaps
more important is the fact that the pool of troops to
which we all resort also shows quantitative and
logistical deficiencies. The troop-contributing countries
are facing increasing difficulties in providing the
necessary troops and capabilities.
The third question is: What are the causes of
these problems? The causes of the current problems in
United Nations peacekeeping are to be found both at
the strategic-political level and at the operationalimplementation level. Incomplete reforms, strains in
management and command systems, disproportionality
between mandates and resources and problems of scale
all hamper the efficiency of peacekeeping operations.
For instance, peacekeeping operations are now
frequently mandated to protect civilians. But often,
they do not have the size or density of forces to do so.
Likewise, benchmarking of progress is a key
determinant in an exit strategy. But in actuality,
identifying the conditions for exit poses a serious
challenge.
The indispensable link between the political
process and the peacekeeping is yet another important
aspect of the problems faced. The disconnect between
those who mandate and those who implement and the
lack of effective and dynamic supervision by the
Council over all peacekeeping operations are other
factors which in varying degrees add to the complexity
of the problems faced. What is more, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support are understaffed.
The fourth and final question is: How can we
overcome these problems and what should be the way
ahead? We definitely need a compass setting out the
agreed and achievable goals and a collective
determination for the future direction of United
Nations
peacekeeping.
Implementing
reforms,
generating resources, building up the necessary
capabilities and developing effective partnership
among all stakeholders, as well as improving
interoperability, turn out to be the essential elements in
this regard.
More rapid and more flexible peacekeeping
operations require institutional and operational reforms
to United Nations command and control mechanisms,
procurement and supply systems and the overall
strategy. We believe that the two central tenets of the

09-38504

Brahimi report (S/2000/809) should be our guide:
deployment of forces should be tied to a viable
political strategy and mandates should be linked to the
reality of available resources.
Enhancing the deterrent power of peacekeeping
forces by providing them with sufficient assets,
establishing close cooperation between the civilian and
military parts of a mission, strengthening early warning
mechanisms in possible crisis regions, integrating the
political
and
socio-economic
dimensions
of
peacebuilding into peace support operations and
enhancing cooperation with regional security
organizations such as the African Union, the European
Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe would all add to the efficient
operation of peacekeeping missions in the field.
Capacity-building and the training of peacekeepers
also constitute an indispensable component of
conducting a successful peacekeeping operation.
In short, to meet the challenges before us, we
need a new coalition, a strategic dialogue that will
include all stakeholders, particularly the Security
Council, the Secretariat, the United Nations Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Fifth
Committee, the Peacebuilding Commission and in
some cases the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, as well as troop- and policecontributing countries (TCCs and PCCs). The new
agenda for partnership as described by UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra is thus
essential. In particular, earlier and more substantive
consultations by the Security Council with troop and
police contributors would be of significant importance,
since enhanced cooperation would enable the design of
mandates based on a clear picture of available troops
and police, and thus could provide realistic options for
what can and cannot be achieved. As a result, mandates
would have earlier and wider acceptance from troop
contributors, and benchmarking would be easier.
Given the operational and political risks that
United Nations peacekeepers face in tough
environments, it is natural that the troop- and policecontributing countries want an increased say in how
operations are run. There have been a number of
experiments on how to include TCCs and PCCs more
effectively in monitoring and sustaining missions.
Building on these examples and experiences, we
could — and we should — look for a more concrete
and regular process of dialogue with the TCCs and

29

S/PV.6153

PCCs. As a dedicated troop- and police-contributing
country, Turkey has a keen interest in strengthening the
viability, sustainability and effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping and will continue to maintain its
commitment to that end.
In conclusion, despite the scale and complexity of
the challenges facing United Nations peace operations,
we believe that this is not a moment for despair.
Indeed, times of crisis carry with them opportunities
for reform and progress. And it is encouraging to see
that there is a true willingness and a strong desire for
fresh ideas, both in the Secretariat and among Member
States, for reviewing and reforming how the United
Nations system responds to conflicts. The challenge
now is to translate this will into concrete steps and
reforms.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Mission of Turkey for
organizing this important and timely debate. I would
also like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy
and Malcorra for their presentations today, and for the
considered thought and analysis they have given to the
challenges facing peacekeeping and how to meet those
challenges.
For a decade or more, thoughtful observers have
lamented the strains on United Nations peacekeeping
and proposed solutions, modest or grand. Much of the
relevant machinery has been overhauled; significant
progress has been made. The time since the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809) has not been wasted, and most
important, the changes have helped the United Nations
to save lives.
The core logic of Lakhdar Brahimi and his
colleagues still obtains: United Nations missions are no
substitute for resolute effort by the international
community to seek and safeguard peace. Yet the
Brahimi principles have to be complemented by
concrete actions aimed at renewing the strategic
partnership among core peacekeeping partners: namely,
those who decide — that is, the Council; those who
pay — the financial contributors; those who do — the
troop- and police-contributors; and the Secretariat and
regional organizations. And the wider support of the

30

membership of the General Assembly is important as
well.
Indeed, much remains to be done. The present
renewed attention to peacekeeping is, in part, a
reflection of how much the circumstances of United
Nations peace operations have changed since 1999. In
this context, an intensive, inclusive consultation
process with Member States and partner organizations
is necessary. Canada welcomes a dialogue aimed at
reaching a common understanding of the critical
aspects of peacekeeping, as outlined in the summary
paper presented today.
As members of the Council know, Canada
recently launched an informal thematic series with the
aim of bringing together all the major actors in
peacekeeping to discuss the main challenges that are at
the heart of the New Horizon project. Our aim is to
complement the other important work now under
way — by Japan, as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group, by the United Kingdom and France
and, of course, by the Secretariat. Over the course of
the fall and winter, Canada will host a series of followup events designed to dig deeper into issues of
strategic significance to the future of United Nations
peacekeeping — specifically, on mandates and
modalities, on the political dimension and on
resources. We believe these three baskets of issues are
at the heart of any effort to update and renew broadbased support for United Nations actions. Canada very
much supports the non-paper’s comprehensive
coverage of this terrain, with a view to enhancing
credibility, capacity and cohesion.
Let me just say a few words about these three
strategic challenges from a Canadian perspective. First,
on mandates and modalities, we all know that the
Security Council is deploying missions in response to a
wider, more complex array of challenges than at any
point in its history. In the most difficult environments,
such as in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Darfur, the effectiveness and credibility of United
Nations operations are limited by a mismatch between
mandates and resources. Alleviating this gap requires a
means of sustaining support among the Council, troopand police- contributors, the Secretariat and the host
Government. It also requires improved capacity for
strategic planning and designing mandates and
revisiting the Brahimi panel’s recommendation on a
two-phase approach to mandate making, in order to

09-38504

S/PV.6153

design implementable mandates, including robust tasks
such as the protection of civilians.
The second challenge lies in the political
dimension. It is often said that peacekeeping cannot
substitute for effective peacemaking. However,
peacekeeping missions have often been called upon to
do exactly that. As we look at the future of United
Nations missions, it is essential that greater attention
be paid to the political dimensions: peacemaking,
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Accomplishing this will mean integrating the New
Horizon initiative with the recently released reports of
the Secretary-General on mediation and on early
recovery, recognizing the critical relationship between
peacebuilding and peacekeeping and enhancing
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. But, above all, a renewed
commitment by the Council to sustain its political
engagement in countries on its agenda would assist in
ensuring that fragile political settlements are not
derailed by local or regional disputes.
The final challenge is resourcing. Ensuring
appropriate human, financial and material resources
and recognizing the growing role of regional
organizations and arrangements in implementing
mandates are vital to the continued success of United
Nations missions. Reforms inspired by the Brahimi
report have helped, but the process has stalled. The
Department of Field Support strategic support plan
offers innovative first steps in logistics, procurement
and human resources that Canada views as necessary
for today’s operations.
In conclusion, there are clearly no easy answers.
But with sustained and serious effort by the Secretariat,
the Council, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the membership as a whole, Canada
believes it is possible to renew and indeed strengthen
the ability of the United Nations to meet contemporary
challenges to peace and security. Canada stands ready
to support this effort.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I extend the deep gratitude
of the Nigerian delegation to you, Mr. President, for
the invitation to participate in this meeting and for the
concise concept note provided to facilitate the
discussion. This initiative is greatly appreciated not
only for its value as a stock-taking endeavour, but also

09-38504

because it strengthens the current momentum in
reviewing United Nations peacekeeping strategies. We
thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Susanna Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, for their
insightful and informative statements today.
In our time, reform of United Nations
peacekeeping has become inevitable given the rapid
expansion, complexity and multidimensional scope of
peacekeeping and humanitarian relief missions. Several
missions are constrained by lack of basic equipment,
transport, food and medical supplies. This situation is
compounded by gaps between mandates, inadequate
planning of operations, fluid exit strategies and perhaps
imprecise relationships between troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), the Secretariat and the Security
Council.
The Nigerian delegation believes that as
formidable as these challenges are, they do not in any
way diminish the relevance of United Nations
peacekeeping as an essential instrument for conflict
resolution and peacemaking. We also believe that
Member States need to forge a consensus on the
strategies for addressing these challenges, particularly
the relationship between TCCs, the Secretariat and the
Security Council. Consensus is required especially on
issues of mandate, resources, entry into peace
operations, exit benchmarking and strategic long-term
planning.
Considering the relationship between TCCs and
the Security Council, we note that the broader and
more sustained dialogue envisaged by resolutions 1327
(2000) and 1353 (2001) has not been fully realized.
Undergirding this situation is the urgent need for
strengthening the triangular cooperation between the
Security Council, the TCCs and the Secretariat. It is
imperative that TCCs that implement peacekeeping
mandates in the field are involved from the conception
and resolution-drafting stages of a peacekeeping
operation through to its deployment and final exit.
Resource constraints remain the single most
important challenge to effective peacekeeping. This
dampens the morale and enthusiasm of peacekeepers
and the political will of TCCs. Therefore, resources
must be adequate and predictable in order to
accomplish the mandated tasks. Furthermore, adequate
predeployment training should be a prerequisite to the
successful implementation of any mandate.

31

S/PV.6153

There should be a larger consensus-building
process encompassing political negotiations at the
highest levels of Member States on the difficult issues
of doctrine, entry, exit, rapid deployment, resources
and Security Council working methods. Nigeria
supports intensified dialogue and consultations
between the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations in order
to overcome some of the clearly delineated challenges
facing United Nations peacekeeping operations.

My Government believes that the SecretaryGeneral should indeed be encouraged in the direction
of pursuing reforms aimed at strengthening the
Secretariat and making it more efficient. Given the
growing interconnection between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, a standing rule of law capacity could be
favourably considered based on the model of the
standing police capacity, whose transfer to the Brindisi
Logistics Base as a permanent operative centre for a
genuine United Nations police force will be a first
strategic step in the crucial development of the rapid
response capacity of the United Nations.

The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Italy, who will be the last speaker for
the morning session.

With almost 9,000 men and women deployed on
United Nations-led or -authorized missions, my
country is a top contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. It is a top contributor among
European and the Group of Eight (G-8) countries and
is one of the top 10 of all contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. It hosts and actively
supports a number of programme initiatives and
infrastructure facilities, among which I would like to
mention the United Nations Logistics Base.

Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): Allow me to
take this opportunity to express my sincere
appreciation to you, Ambassador İlkin, for the
invitation to take the floor this morning, and especially
for taking the initiative to convene this extremely
important debate on peacekeeping. I would also like to
express my sincere appreciation to Under-SecretariesGeneral Le Roy and Malcorra for their thorough
briefings, and I would also like to note that their
remarks have been extremely helpful in setting the
whole tone of our debate and that their leadership in
United Nations peacekeeping operations has been
extremely helpful as well.
In taking the floor today, I wish first of all to
endorse the statement that the representative of the
Czech Republic will make on behalf of the European
Union in his country’s capacity as President of the
Union.
Today’s debate allows us to focus on how to
further strengthen the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping and to ensure an efficient use of
resources. The Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Secretariat have all undertaken important
initiatives, while research institutes and internationally
recognized experts are also contributing to shaping our
shared views and our proposals.
The discussion to date now has proven once again
the priority that Member States attach to this effort of
improving our peacekeeping operations and structuring
our peacekeeping potential. All of this is also very
clear in the references that have been made to the New
Horizon project.

32

We also hold training programmes and make other
forms of contributions. I would like to mention that an
event dedicated to children in armed conflict attended
by Foreign Minister Frattini, Rome’s Mayor Alemanno,
Under-Secretary-General Koomaraswamy and other
participants was held last Tuesday in Rome. There we
proposed a joint training programme together with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) for
the protection of children as part of peacekeeping
mandates. We sincerely hope that this new programme
called “See the Light” will come to fruition in future
months.
There is a need for greater coordination between
the Security Council and countries that provide troops
and financial resources. As soon as a mandate is
defined, those who are called upon to operate on the
ground must be fully involved. While the fundamental
responsibility to decide mandates and objectives of a
mission belongs to the Security Council, the definition
of tasks, resources and concepts of operation must also
take into account the expertise of countries that provide
troops and essential resources. As has been stated
repeatedly during our debate, the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) recommended a two-step definition of
mandates: first, identifying objectives; and secondly,
defining jointly with contributing countries the

09-38504

S/PV.6153

operative details. This is an idea that we should again
consider in the framework of the New Horizon project.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is another very fundamental
aspect. The experience of the European Union in Chad,
for example, taught us that a shared strategy can be
successfully implemented even in a very complex
transition.
The wide majority of peacekeeping missions take
place in Africa, and therefore a shared vision between
the United Nations and the African Union is needed.
Regional dimension and ownership must be supported
and encouraged. Much has been done in that area. The
United Nations-African Union panel that was
established months ago has made several important
recommendations that could be pragmatically
implemented. For example, for missions led by the
African Union under the aegis of the United Nations,
we should contribute to crisis management capacity, to
sustainability in all aspects and to more adequate
financial support. In particular, we could accomplish
that through greater certainty and predictability of
resources and better coordination among decisionmaking bodies, both at the level of the United Nations
and the level of the regional organizations.
As president of the Group of Eight (G-8), my
country is presently focusing on aspects of
peacekeeping. We have been actively engaged in
fulfilling the commitments taken by the G-8 leaders at
Sea Island and Hokkaido to strengthen peacekeeping

09-38504

capacities and structures, in particular in African
countries, in support of the principle of national
ownership. A report will promptly be made available
along the lines anticipated by the declaration adopted
in Trieste last Friday by the G-8 Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, stressing the development of police
components, the promotion of rule of law and training.
In that framework, I would also like to mention
the Center of Excellence for Stability Police Units in
Vicenza, which was established by the G-8 countries. It
has trained 2,500 officers in only four years, 1,000 of
whom are from Africa. The Center is increasingly
active in cooperating with the United Nations.
As a global organization, the United Nations
needs an efficient and flexible logistics structure that
would ensure economies of scale and rational use of
resources. The United Nations Logistics Base, whose
strengthening Italy has constantly supported, appears to
be a key element for improving logistics support both
at the global and regional levels. Within that logic, my
Government supports proposals that could strengthen
African capacity-building efforts, including through
regional hubs.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

33
