VI,

32/62.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Conunittee

Draft convention against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment

The General Assembly,
Having regard to article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 24 and article 7 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Política! Rights, 25 both of which
provide that no one may be subjected to torture or
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, contained in the annex to its resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Believing that further international efforts are needed
to ensure adequate protection for all against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
W elcoming in that regard the work that has been
done, or is being done, on the basis of General Assembly resolution 3453 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Considering that a further significant step would be
the adoption of an international convention against
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
l. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
draw up a draft convention against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
in the light of the principles embodied in the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
2. Further requests the Commission on Human
Rights to submit a progress report on its work to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the ítem entitled "Torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment" for the purpose of reviewing the progress
achieved in accordance with the present resolution.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
32/63.

Questionnaire on the Declaration on the
Protection of Ali Persons from Being
Suhjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
contained in the annex to its resolution 3452 (XXX)
of 9 December 1975,
Recalling its resolutions 3453 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 and 31/85 of 13 December 1976,
Having regard to article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Política! Rights, 26 which provides
24 Reso!ution 217 A (III).
25 Resolution 2200 A (XXJ), annex.
26 /bid.

137

that no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Taking note of resolution 7 (XXVII) of 20 August
197 4 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities 27 regarding its
annual review of developments in the field of human
rights of persons subjected to any form of detention
or imprisonment,
Reiterating that the Declaration should serve as a
guideline for all States and other entities exercising
effective power,
Grave/y concerned over continued reports from which
it appears that in sorne countries State authorities are
systematically resorting to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to draw up and
circulate among Member States a questionnaire soliciting information concerning steps they have taken, including legislative and administrative measures, to put
into practice the principles of the Declaration on the
Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment while giving special attention to the
fol!owing subjects:
(a) Publicity given to the Declaration, not only in
governmental bodies and services but also among the
public at large;
( b) Effective measures for the prevention of torture;
(e)
Training of law enforcement personnel and
other public officials rcsponsible for persons deprived
of thcir liberty;
( d) Any pertinent legisla ti ve or administrative action taken since the adoption of the Declaration;
(e)
Effective legal remedies for victims of torture
or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
2. Requests thc Sccretary-General to submit the
information provided in response to the questionnaire
to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session and
furthermore to submit such information to the Commission on Human Rights and to the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities at its thirty-second session.

98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
32/64.

Unilateral declarations by Memher States
against torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the principles proclaimed in the
Charter of the Unitcd Nations concerning the dignity
and worth of the human person place upon Member
States the obligation to promote universal respect for
and observance of, human rights and fundamental free~
doms for alI,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 28 and article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 29 which stipulate that
27 See E/CN.4/1160, chap. XIX.
2HResolution 217 A (III).
29 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
