S/PV.7919

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7919th meeting

Friday, 7 April 2017, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-09482 (E)
*1709482*

S/PV.7919

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Expression of sympathy on the terrorist attack
in Stockholm
The President: On behalf of the Council, I would
first like to offer my condolences to the Government of
Sweden and the victims of the senseless attack today in
Stockholm. We have been reminded this week that the
scourge of terrorism affects many countries, and we are
united in our shared resolve.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: Let me also convey, on behalf of
those of us in the Secretariat, our condolences and
our shock to our friends from Sweden on the attacks
in Stockholm. The Secretary-General is following this
with great concern.
The Council has requested the Secretariat to provide
an update on Syria. In addition, the Special Envoy for
Syria, Staffan de Mistura, will brief the Council in less
than a week. I will therefore keep my remarks short.
In the last two months, we have seen the 30 December
2016 ceasefire falter amid a steady escalation of
military activity. In mid-February, Government forces
escalated their military operations in several areas
of Damascus and Homs, recapturing Wadi Barada
and Al-Waer in Homs. Military advances there were
accompanied by the large-scale evacuation of fighters
and their families. The Syrian Government cited the
presence of the Al-Nusra Front in these areas, claims
that were disputed by the opposition. Subsequently,
during February and March, armed opposition groups,
2/20

07/04/2017

sometimes coordinating with the Al-Nusra Front,
launched offensives in Dar’a, Damascus and Hamah.
On 4 April, as Government forces were fighting to
regain territory recently lost to opposition offensives
in northern Hamah, alarming reports emerged of an
alleged chemical attack in nearby Khan Shaykhun,
in southern Idlib. Sources on the ground reported
airstrikes. The Council, of course, discussed this at an
emergency meeting on 5 April (see S/PV.7915).
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) has announced that its Fact-Finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic is starting to
investigate the alleged Khan Shaykhun attack. The
Secretary-General, in a public statement, shared that
he was appalled by the chemical-weapons attack in
Khan Shaykhun and the deaths of and injury to many
innocent civilians.
This morning at approximately 4.35 a.m., two
United States naval vessels deployed in the eastern
Mediterranean Sea launched a total of 59 cruise missiles
targeting the Al-Shayrat military airbase in Homs
governorate. The United States has stated that this was
in response to what it says was the Syrian Government’s
use of chemical weapons from this airbase. The United
States claimed that the missiles severely damaged or
destroyed Syrian aircraft and support infrastructure
and equipment. According to news reports, the United
States said that it had informed Russian Federation
forces of the strike in advance, using the established
de-confliction mechanism, and taking precautions
to minimize the risk to Russian or Syrian personnel
located at the airfield.
A statement from the Syrian General Command
of the army and the armed forces called the attack a
“blatant act of aggression” that had caused six deaths
and “huge material damage”. Iran and the Russian
Federation condemned the attack. The United Kingdom,
Australia, Germany, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Italy, Japan,
the Netherlands and New Zealand have expressed some
support for the strikes.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for international peace and security. We hope that the
Council can unite and exercise that responsibility to
investigate the alleged use of chemical weapons in Khan
Shaykhun. It is important that the Council send a strong
collective message that any use of chemical weapons
will not be tolerated and will have consequences.
The Secretary-General stresses that the international
17-09482

07/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

community has a responsibility to hold any perpetrator
of chemical-weapons attacks accountable and to ensure
that chemical weapons are never again used as an
instrument of warfare.
The protection of civilians and accountability
should be at the top of our peace and security agenda. In
the case of Syria, there can be no genuine protection if
the parties to the conflict, Government and opposition
alike, are permitted to act with impunity and if the
Syrian Government continues to commit human rights
violations against its own citizens. Protecting the
Syrian people requires immediate action, action that
is rooted in the principles of the United Nations and
international law. Mindful of the risk of escalation, the
Secretary-General has publicly appealed for restraint in
order to avoid any acts that could deepen the suffering
of the Syrian people. We further urge all parties
involved in military operations to abide by international
humanitarian law and take all necessary precautions to
avoid and minimize civilian casualties.
As the Secretary-General has said, these events
underscore our belief that the only way to resolve the
conflict is through a political settlement. We urge the
parties to renew their commitment to making progress
in the Geneva talks as soon as possible. In that regard,
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué of
30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) remain the foundation
of United Nations mediation efforts and contain the core
principles for them — and, ultimately, for a solution.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Madam President, for
giving me the floor and for organizing today’s open
meeting of the Council. It is essential to ensure that the
entire world, not just the members of our Organization,
can be witness to Council members’ positions with
complete transparency in the wake of the recent events
in Syria.
The delegation of Bolivia asked that today’s
meeting be held because we are concerned about the
events of the past 24 hours. While the Security Council
was debating proposals about what the investigation
mechanism should be for the horrendous chemical
attacks witnessed by the whole world, while we were
discussing how to word a draft resolution for the

S/PV.7919

Council’s consideration and while the permanent and
non-permanent members were making suggestions
about its text, the United States was once again preparing
and carrying out a unilateral attack. Those missile
attacks are indeed a unilateral action and represent
a serious threat to international peace and security.
That is because for the past 70 years humankind has
been creating and building a structure that is not just
physical or institutional but also legal. We have created
international legal instruments precisely in order to
avoid situations in which the most powerful can attack
the weakest with impunity, to ensure a balance of
power in the world and to avoid the most serious kinds
of violations of international peace and security.
We believe it is the duty not only of the Security
Council but of all the bodies of the United Nations to
defend multilateralism. That is why we are here. We
have agreed that the Charter of the United Nations must
be respected, and the Charter forbids unilateral actions.
Any action must be authorized by the Security Council
in accordance with the Charter. I would like to refresh
our memories a little by reading from Article 24, which
states that
“In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its Members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
and agree that in carrying out its duties under
this responsibility the Security Council acts on
their behalf.”
The Security Council is not just the 15 members
who are seated here at this table. We represent the
193 States Members of this Organization, and through
them we represent the people of the world. And we
have agreed that unilateral actions violate international
law. Yesterday, as we in the Security Council were
discussing draft resolutions and striving to come up
with alternatives and consensus, the United States not
only launched a unilateral attack but — while we were
discussing and demanding an independent, impartial,
thorough and conclusive investigation of those previous
attacks — the United States had taken it upon itself
to be investigator, prosecutor, judge and jury. Where
is the investigation that would enable us to establish
objectively who was responsible for the attacks? This
is an extremely serious violation of international law.
This is not the first time that this has happened.
Throughout our history we can recall many episodes

17-094823/20

S/PV.7919

The situation in the Middle East

in which not just the United States but various Powers
have acted unilaterally and violated the Charter. But
the fact that it has now happened again does not mean
that the United Nations and its members must accept
it. In September 2013 the United States also launched
attacks on Syria. I would like to recall what the then
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, said at the time,
and I will read it in English, if I may.
(spoke in English)
“[T]he Security Council has primary responsibility
for international peace and security... That is my
appeal, that everything should be handled within
the framework of the United Nations Charter. The
use of force is lawful only when in exercise of selfdefence in accordance with Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, and/or when the Security Council
approves such action.”
(spoke in Spanish)
That was the position of the then SecretaryGeneral, which helped to avert the taking of unilateral
action in circumstances very similar to those we are
experiencing today. This attack represents a threat to
international peace and security because it threatens
the political processes in Geneva and Astana.
Mr. Feltman expressed it very well in the message from
the Secretary-General when he said that it is essential
to avoid any escalation of tensions that could damage
the progress that has been made in Astana and Geneva.
As I said, this is not the first time this has happened,
and I would like to recall here something that happened
some years ago, on Wednesday, 5 February 2003,
when the then Secretary of State of the United States
of America came to this Chamber in order to present
to us what he said in his own words was convincing
proof that there were weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq (see S/PV.4701). I believe that it is essential that
we remember those images and the fact that in this
very Chamber we were told that there were weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq and that was the reason for the
proposed invasion. That invasion resulted in 1 million
deaths and set in motion a series of atrocities in the
region. Would we be talking about the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham without that invasion? Would
we be talking about the series of horrific attacks that
have occurred in various parts of the world without that
illegal invasion? I believe it is vital that we remember
what history teaches us, and on that occasion the United
States affirmed that it had all the proof necessary to
4/20

07/04/2017

show that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction. They
were never, ever found.
I would like to repeat here what President Evo
Morales Ayma said this morning.
“I think and feel — I hope not to be
wrong — that chemical weapons in Syria are an
excuse for a military intervention. Unilateral
actions are imperialistic actions. The United
States is not interested in international law. It sets
the United Nations aside when it suits it. Internal
problems of States must be resolved through
dialogue, not through bombing. This action
threatens international security and world peace.”
It is important that we talk about the
double-standards — when we are in the United Nations
meeting rooms, on the one hand, and when we are
dealing with what can be considered real life, on the
other hand. My own peoples — the peoples of Latin
America and the Caribbean — have lived this reality
throughout our history. They speak to us in the language
of human rights, which we are supposed to live up
to, but when their interests make the human rights
discourse inconvenient for them, they systematically
violate human rights.
The series of coups d’état in Latin America was
organized and financed by the CIA. That is historical
truth. It is not rhetoric. It is not a speech-making. It is the
truth. Let us remember the coup d’état in 1973 against
the constitutional Government of Salvador Allende,
which was financed by the CIA. Let us remember the
Escuela de las Americas at which soldiers were taught to
torture people. There were training manuals for torture,
which was taught to Latin American military personnel
as part of the so-called national security doctrine.
When they are interested in human rights, the
human rights are fine, but when human rights no
longer comport with their interests, human rights no
longer matter. The same goes for democracy. When it
suits their interests, they are defenders of democracy,
but when it does not they finance coups d’états. And
unfortunately the same thing is happening with the
United Nations and with the Security Council itself.
When it is no longer in line with their interests, then
multilateralism is not important. For the few things that
suit them, multilateralism is fine. The United Nations
is fine, but when it opposes their interests, then they
are no longer interested in the United Nations, human
rights or democracy.
17-09482

07/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

When we unequivocally condemn chemical
attacks, we are saying that the Security Council must
not be used as an echo chamber for war propaganda
or interventionism. The Security Council should not
be used as a pawn that can be sacrificed on a chess
board, the chess board of war. The Security Council
is ultimately the last hope we have to guarantee
international peace and security, based on principles,
norms and the international rule of law.
I would also like to point out that, just as you have
convened this meeting in a very transparent manner,
Madam President, it is absolutely vital that we show
concern about the unfortunate fact that there are
first-class and second-class members of the Security
Council — the permanent members that not only
have the right to veto but also control the procedures
that govern decision-making, and the other 10, which
are members only temporarily, that are brought in or
consulted only occasionally, not to carry any weight but
simply to support the positions of the permanent five.
This is not multilateralism.
Bolivia would like to reiterate its strong
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons or the
use of chemical-weapons precursors as an unjustifiable
and criminal act regardless of its motivation, wherever
it may be, whenever it may be and by whomsoever it
may be committed. We reiterate that when these cases
arise we demand independent, impartial, complete and
conclusive investigations.
Unfortunately, yesterday’s attacks have dealt a
mortal blow to the Joint Investigative Mechanism and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and their ability to carry out an investigation and find
out exactly what happened a few days ago in Syria. We
reiterate that those responsible for acts must be duly
prosecuted and punished to the fullest extent of the law.
The same is true of any actions that violate international
law and that endanger international security.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I deeply regret that
the previous speaker showed more outrage against the
United States than against the Al-Assad regime, which
on Tuesday deliberately dropped chemical weapons
killing over 100 men, women and children in the most
barbaric fashion.
More than three and a half years ago, the Syrian
regime made a pledge: it would join the 189 countries
that had already signed the Chemical Weapons
Convention and it would reveal the full extent of its

S/PV.7919

chemical arsenal and proceed with its full destruction.
What spurred this pledge was a chemical-weapon attack,
that time in Ghouta. Hundreds, if not thousands, were
dead. There were images of men, women and children
choking, foaming at the mouth, clearly asphyxiated.
Three and a half years after a historically heinous
war crime was committed, after the stockpiles were
supposed to be destroyed, Al-Assad on Tuesday showed
us yet again, this time in Idlib, that he is capable of
redefining horror. Tuesday’s attack must be fully
investigated. Impunity cannot be the norm. We will
continue to work with our partners on the Security
Council to ensure that those responsible are brought
to justice.
The United Kingdom supports the United States air
strike on the Al-Shayrat air field because war crimes
have consequences, and the greatest war criminal
of all, Bashar Al-Assad, has now been put on notice.
The United States strike was a proportionate response
to unspeakable acts that gave rise to overwhelming
humanitarian distress. It was also a strong effort to save
lives by ensuring that such acts never happen again.
The resolution that we adopted three and a half
years ago (resolution 2118 (2013)) provided a framework
for the destruction of chemical weapons in Syria. It
had a clear author and a clear guarantor. At the time,
Russia assured us that Al-Assad would fully declare his
chemical arsenal and would continue to cooperate with
international inspectors. Perhaps that was the assurance
that Russia received from Al-Assad, and perhaps Russia
has now learned the hard lesson that backing a war
criminal comes with its own consequence: humiliation.
Russia has barely any support from the Arab world
for its policy of propping up the criminal Al-Assad
regime as it carries out chemical-weapon attacks
against its own people. Russia needs to listen to the
Security Council, listen to the Arab world, listen to
the rest of the international community, and above all
listen to the Syrian people. Their message is clear: end
Al-Assad’s bombs, his use of chemical weapons, his
torture dungeons.
Instead, Russia has given Al-Assad everything he
could dream of. Without Russia’s seven vetoes in the
Security Council defying the views of other members of
the Council, Al-Assad would now have faced sanctions
and justice. And what did Russia get for its unconditional
support? Al-Assad ignores Russia’s requests for him to
obey a ceasefire. Al-Assad defies Russia’s request for

17-094825/20

S/PV.7919

The situation in the Middle East

him not to gas his own people. Al-Assad thumbs his nose
at Russia’s calls for him to join a peace process. Russia
sits in this Chamber today humiliated by its failure to
bring to heel a puppet dictator entirely propped up by
Russia itself and Hizbullah and Iran.
Let me bust some myths about our private
negotiations over the past couple of days. We were
seeking agreement on a draft resolution. I repeatedly
asked the delegation of the Russian Federation why
it could not support our draft resolution. If it wanted
the truth, why did it not want the United Nations and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons to have access to the places, the people and
the information that they needed? What possible excuse
does the Russian Federation have for keeping that
information from the investigators? What reason does
it have to continue to protect Al-Assad? If it cared about
the Charter of the United Nations, why would it protect
a dictator who has repeatedly violated international
law? I received no answer.
There is another way for Russia. I appeal to the
Russian Federation to abandon its failed strategy;
join the rest of the Council in its call for justice and
accountability; end its protection of a war criminal; and
join all of us in supporting a genuine political process
that would lead to a transition to a more legitimate and
representative Government.
The only reason that we are here and these
discussions are taking place at this moment in the
Chamber is because the international community
has not done enough. Things can be different. The
difference that can and must be made lies in a political
solution. That will not happen if we take the familiar
route that has plagued the Council, the countries of the
region and the millions of Syrians looking for a future.
The new road must see the Syrian regime engage. The
new road must have Russia and Iran not only at the
table but negotiating in good faith.
We are here within the walls of an Organization
that was built to guide us when peace seems out of
reach. The United Nations has a vital role in convening
those negotiations and helping the parties resolve their
disputes. The agenda has been set, and it is long overdue
that a proper negotiation happens on a future Syrianled transition that meets the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people. Al-Assad must engage in serious
discussion about that future to meet the aspirations of
all Syrians.
6/20

07/04/2017

In conclusion, the United Kingdom supports the
United States action as an appropriate response to
a heinous act by a brutal and uncaring dictator who
believes that gassing his people is somehow a legitimate
step on the road to stability. It is now time to get a
genuine political process back up and running. Those
discussions may be long and difficult, but the people
of Syria deserve nothing less. If we want to ensure that
the shocking images that have haunted us this week are
truly confined to history, then that is our duty.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We have
been following with great concern events following the
Khan Shaykhun incident, which claimed the lives of
dozens of innocent Syrian civilians. Numerous reports
have confirmed that the incident was once again the
result of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We
have also been following the dangerous developments
concerning the Syrian situation on the ground since
last night.
The Khan Shaykhun incident and other incidents
and crimes in Syria of the past seven years are a clear
indication of a lack of conscience. They are living proof
that the people of the region — specially the Syrian
people — are the main victims of a proxy war that
has paralysed the international community. Serious
dialogue has been absent because of the decision of
many parties to fall back on their narrow interests,
as if the deaths of hundreds of thousands of civilians
and the displacement of millions of Syrians were only
a matter of collateral damage to be deferred to a later
date following a political deal that the puppeteers of
this war might reach in line with their interests.
I honestly believe that, within the Security
Council, the disagreements and the rivalries that
sometimes concern issues unrelated to Syria have led
to the daily increase in the number of innocent civilians
killed. We are exasperated by statements of regret
and condemnation by the international community
following every human tragedy that befalls the Syrian
people. We are fed up with such statements because
they have become empty expressions and mere words
that are unaccompanied by any genuine and serious
international effort that would meet the interests of
the Syrian people and have a genuine impact on their
daily lives. I therefore urgently call on all members to
dispense with their disagreements and divergent views,
and focus on a way out of the Syrian maze.
17-09482

07/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

All parties at the international, regional and
Syrian levels should support an immediate ceasefire
and seriously and objectively move forward without
any preconditions or procedural manipulation within
the framework of the International Syrian Support
Group (ISSG) under the auspices of the United Nations
in Geneva.
We believe that the Syrian people are capable of
determining their own future. However, achieving their
aspirations for democracy, reconstruction and stability
is impossible without genuine international support
for containing the negative impact of the spoilers and
helping Syrians combat terrorism in Syria and build
their own State on a firm and stable foundation.
Perhaps the time has come to be frank. I call
on the United States and the Russian Federation in
particular, owing to their capacities, role as co-Chairs
of the ISSG and their influence on the various local and
regional parties, to move resolutely in that direction
in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions
to reach middle ground and a political settlement in
Syria. I urge them to resume their coordination and
cooperation on the ground and in the political realm
so as to salvage what can be salvaged and avoid any
further deterioration of the situation.
In conclusion, I stress that a Syrian settlement
will be possible only if it is based on clear and sincere
intentions. Egypt will welcome every honest and
serious action to save Syria from the abyss and contain
the present and future repercussions of the crisis in
the region.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing and for relaying the message from the
Secretary-General.
In the midst of horrendous attacks, several decades
ago the British people coined an expression that is truly
appropriate for today: “Keep calm and carry on”. We
believe that today more than ever our first priority
should be to keep calm and continue in our work. For
despite its complicated and long-running, the Syrian
conflict must remain within the multilateral.And that
is precisely why the Security Council has a primary
responsibility. We must resolutely reinvigorate and
strengthen the political nature of the three primary
forums in which the issue has been discussed — the
Security Council, the Geneva negotiations and the

S/PV.7919

Astana talks — so as to strengthen the ceasefire and
contain the use of violence.
The fundamental principles that guide the conduct
of Uruguay at the international level are deeply rooted
in its character as a small country without an army
posing a threat to absolutely anyone else. The non-use
of force in international relations is therefore a cardinal
principle Uruguay’s foreign policy. We accept the
use of force only in accordance with the principles of
international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. Uruguay deems any other use of
force illegitimate.
Uruguay, throughout its history, has consistently
rejected the unilateral use of force, including in such
cases as the 1950s Korean invasion and the invasion
of Hungary, as well as the use of force against Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Afghanistan and Iran. We have always
rejected the unilateral use of force. Uruguay hopes
that this individual incident, which occurred against
the backdrop of the inability of the main Powers to
resolve the conflict in Syria, does not lead to additional
attacks and that the parties will refrain from further
actions that will only aggravate the situation and lead
to an endless spiral of violence that could also spread,
directly or indirectly, to other neighbouring countries.
Uruguay believes that the principles of international
law must be considered as a whole and that therefore
another key principle here is absolute respect for
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. In the past six years, we have seen
the worst atrocities committed against the civilian
population. The investigations carried out by the
Joint Investigative Mechanism have revealed the use
of chemical weapons by both the Syrian Government
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham/Da’esh
terrorist group. The most recent example was Tuesday’s
horrendous chemical-weapon attack, a war crime that
should receive the strongest possible condemnation on
the part of the international community, as the use of
chemical weapons poses a threat to international peace
and security.
However, in the midst of all of this we must
not overlook the Council’s duty to identify those
responsible for the chemical-weapon attack in Khan
Shaykhun. Up until a few hours ago, the Council was
intensively negotiating to adopt a draft resolution that
would facilitate the conduct of an investigation aimed at
determining who was responsible. Now more than ever

17-094827/20

S/PV.7919

The situation in the Middle East

before, the Council must shoulder its responsibilities so
as to clarify that incident and demand accountability
for the abhorrent crimes committed.
We must also reflect on the situation in which
the Council finds itself owing to the existence of the
privilege of the veto in the adoption of its resolutions,
and the aggravating factor of the use or threat of the use
of the veto with respect to resolutions relating to crimes
against humanity.
Uruguay, as a signatory to the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group code of conduct,
calls once again on the members of the Council to
commit to not use the veto in situations of this kind. The
use of the veto strips the Council of its functionality
and effectiveness and further imbalances its work. We
reiterate the importance of resuming all multilateral
negotiations under way so as to bring about a solution
to the conflict that is afflicting the Syrian people.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, let me express
our solidarity with the Government of Sweden and
our condolences in connection with the victims of the
attack this morning in Stockholm.
It bears repeating that the attack conducted on
Khan Shaykhun on 4 April was ruthless and cruel,
with a high death toll that included many children.
It is a vile action that Italy and the European Union
have firmly condemned and that add to Al-Assad’s
repeated violations of the ceasefire and the acts of
violence repeatedly perpetrated by his armed forces
against civilians.
The Government of Italy is closely following the
events that are unfolding in the Mediterranean in
consideration of its many and direct interests in the
stability of the region, where we are also playing a role
as the security provider for the international community.
As Foreign Minister Alfano stated this morning,
Italy understands the reasons for the United States’
military action, which was proportionate in time and
manner and a response to a prolonged sense of impunity
that is completely unacceptable. It is also a deterrent
to the risk of any further use of chemical weapons in
Syria, in addition to the cases already ascertained by
the United Nations, for which there already should have
been a prompt and meaningful response, including
in terms of accountability, which the Council must
continue to seek.
8/20

07/04/2017

It is now, we believe, necessary and urgent to bring
together all the main actors involved in the Syrian
crisis so that they can work together to finally achieve
a political solution that will free the Syrian people from
of the tragedy that they been suffering for the past
six years.
We must take a forward-looking approach. Italy
calls on the international community to continue
and redouble its efforts to achieve a United Nationsled political transition in Syria, in compliance
with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). This remains the
only way out of the crisis and the only way to avoid
further violence and further tragedies in the country.
We believe that all parties must now leverage
all their influence so as to facilitate a real ceasefire,
ensure full access to humanitarian aid and promote a
process aimed at progressively building trust between
the Syrian parties.
All of the different tracks of the Syrian issue — the
non-proliferation of chemical weapons, cessation of
hostilities, the fight against terrorism, humanitarian
access and political talks — can advance only if the
Security Council is united. As an elected member of
the Council, Italy will continue to work towards this
strategic goal.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): My
statement is an extension of the joint communiqué
issued last night by the President of the French
Republic, Mr. François Hollande, and the Chancellor of
the Federal Republic of Germany, Ms. Angela Merkel.
I, too, would like to begin by expressing once
again to Sweden our most sincere condolences and full
solidarity with it following the tragic terrorist attack in
Stockholm this morning.
The Security Council is meeting once again
following the use of chemical weapons by the regime of
Bashar Al-Assad. Almost four years after the large-scale
massacre in Ghouta, in August 2013, the 4 April attack
has revealed the truth: Al-Assad has never renounced
the use of chemical weapons or deviated from his
ultimate goal: the annihilation, pure and simple, of all
those who resist him, whatever the price may be.
France has consistently called for strong action
on the part of the international community in the face
of the serious and repeated violations of international
humanitarian law by the Damascus regime, which
17-09482

07/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7919

constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity,
as was already underscored by the Secretary-General
in 2013 following the chemical attack of 21 August
2013. My country has spared no effort to ensure that
these crimes do not go unpunished. That includes
proposing that the Security Council refer the matter
to the International Criminal Court. Those initiatives,
however, have been met with obstacles and vetoes,
notably Russia’s. The Syrian regime has violated
its international obligations to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their
Destruction. The actions of Syria also constitute a clear
violation of the resolutions of the Security Council.

signal of impunity. In parallel, Russia has not met its
responsibilities or exerted the necessary pressure on the
regime in Damascus. It is the responsibility of all of the
members of the Council to ensure that light be shed on
the circumstances of the attack carried out by the Syrian
regime in Khan Shaykhun and that its perpetrators are
held accountable for their actions before a court of law.

In that context, the American airstrike constitutes
a legitimate response to the chemical attack. The
airstrike is also an important reminder that the future
use of such weapons will not be tolerated. To those who
pretend to be astonished, Bashar Al-Assad bears full
responsibility for the situation. For years, the regime
has openly flouted the basic principles of our system of
collective security. It has repeatedly and systematically
violated its obligations under international humanitarian
law, the norm on the prohibition of the use of chemical
weapons, particularly against civilians, as well as
Security Council resolutions. It has become imperative
to respond and deter the regime from such actions.

The attack of 4 April definitively demonstrated
to the world the urgent need for a political solution
in Syria. The maintenance in power of a dictator who
carries out chemical attacks against civilians is not
only a moral abomination. It is an unsustainable threat
to the region and to the world.

Recourse by anyone to chemical weapons constitutes
a war crime and a crime against humanity, which cannot
go unpunished. Syria cannot be an exception. That was
already the position of France in the aftermath of the
chemical attack on Ghouta, and we have never deviated
from it. The international community can no longer be
duped by the dilatory tactics of the Al-Assad regime.
In adopting resolution 2118 (2013), the Security
Council made a very clear commitment to sanction any
failure by Syria to fulfil its obligations. That has not
prevented Bashar Al-Assad’s regime from continuing
its repeated, methodical and barbaric use of weapons
of mass destruction since 2013, openly flouting
the authority of the Council and its international
commitments. Those violations have been irrefutably
documented by a mechanism created by the Security
Council, the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
On 28 February, action by the Security Council
was once again prevented by Russia’s unwarranted
and abusive use of the veto (see S/PV.7893). That
blockage was perceived by the Al-Assad regime as a

France reiterates its full support for the mechanisms
of the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to carry out a diligent
inquiry into the matter. France will not compromise
regarding the disintegration of the chemical
non-proliferation regime. France will continue to work
with its partners to strengthen it in all relevant forums.

All members of the Council agree on one point: the
Syrian crisis will never be settled by military means
alone. Today, because of the tragedy of Khan Shaykhun,
we have the moral and political responsibility to
reinvigorate the talks that have begun in Geneva to find
a political settlement in Syria under the auspices of the
United Nations. That is the top priotity. In that context,
France calls on the international community to coalesce
around a political transition in Syria, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). France and its
European partners will soon be circulating proposals
in that regard.
Our responsibility is to history. Every member of
the Security Council, particularly Russia, must live
up to their responsibilities. We must commit ourselves
to seeking an urgent political solution. It is an urgent
matter because we are talking about the security of
the Syrian people and the region. The fight against
terrorism is at stake. Let us not forget that Al-Assad’s
regime is the biggest generator of terrorism.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Syrian conflict has been going on for seven years,
which has led to large numbers of casualties among
innocent civilians. China would like to empathize with
the profound suffering of the Syrian people. The present
situation must not last any longer. Swift action must be
taken. We must resort to dialogue and consultations in

17-094829/20

S/PV.7919

The situation in the Middle East

order to assure an appropriate solution. We must help
the Syrian people lift themselves out of suffering at
an early date, help Syria rebuild itself and ensure that
Syrians can lead peaceful and stable lives.
China has always advocated for dialogue and
consultations as the best means to resolve international
conflicts. All parties need to make efforts to prevent the
situation in Syria from further deteriorating. A political
solution is the only way out of the situation. A military
solution will not work. It would only exacerbate the
suffering of the Syrian people, further complicating the
situation in the region and making it more turbulent,
which is not in the common interests of Syria, countries
of the region or the international community.
China calls upon all relevant parties to firmly persist
in diplomatic efforts, insist on a political solution to the
situation in Syria through dialogue and consultations
and support the role of the United Nations, including
the efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura, as the main
channel of mediation and achieving progress in the
Geneva talks. We should therefore safeguard all efforts
to maintain the hard-won momentum for a political
solution to the Syrian question.
Recent days have brought about complications in
certain areas of Syria. The international community
must remain highly alert regarding such relevant
developments. We must stick to uniform criteria in
fighting against all terrorist organizations listed by the
Security Council.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I join others in expressing
my sincere condolences to the families of the victims
of today’s attack in Stockholm. We stand in solidarity
with the people of Sweden.
Turning to Syria, the use of chemical weapons
is not permissible under any circumstances. Three
days ago, we faced another shocking report that many
innocent civilians had become victims of chemical
weapons in Syria. The act is extremely inhumane and
violates the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Government of Japan supports the determination
of the United States Government to never allow the
spread or use of chemical weapons. We understand that
the United States took the action last night in order to
prevent further aggravation of the situation.
The Council must reaffirm its determination to
address the reported use of chemical weapons in Idlib.
Once again, Japan urges the Organization for the
10/20

07/04/2017

Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding
Mission to expeditiously conduct an investigation and
report its conclusion as soon as possible, so that the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
can conduct its own investigation in order to identify
those who are responsible.
In conclusion, Japan reiterates its position that
there is no military solution for Syria. We must advance
the political process based on resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we convey our deep condolences
to the Permanent Representative of Sweden to the
United Nations following the tragedy that took place
in Stockholm.
On the night of 7 April, the United States carried
out an attack on the territory of sovereign Syria.
We describe that attack as a flagrant violation of
international law and an act of aggression. We strongly
condemn the illegitimate actions by the United States,
whose consequences for regional and international
stability could be extremely serious. The attack was
a flagrant violation of the 2015 memorandum on
preventing air incidents and ensuring security during
operations in Syrian airspace. The Russian Ministry of
Defence has stopped its cooperation with the Pentagon
under that memorandum.
In recent times, the United States Administration
has often talked about the need to combat international
terrorism, and that provided the justification for
American troops and their allies being present on Syrian
soil, although they were there without the invitation
of the legitimate Government of Syria and without
the approval of the Security Council. Manipulating
Articles of the Charter of the United Nations is beyond
any criticism. The aggression by the United States has
merely served to strengthen terrorism. The attack was
directed at Syrian armed forces infrastructure and its
air force. In other words, it was directed at those, who
over all these years, have been involved in the fight
against terrorism. It is not difficult to imagine how
much terrorists’ spirits were raised after the attack
by Washington.
Immediately following the attack, major attacks
were perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front against Syrian
military sites. Once again, we repeat that the Syrian
armed forces will continue to be the main anti-terrorist
entity of the Syrian Arab Republic. Who will combat
17-09482

07/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

terrorism? Will it be the illegal armed groups that
have entered Syria by the hundreds of thousands?
Iraqi and Libyan military bases have been destroyed,
and look at what then happened. Such actions are
contrary to international decisions, including the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), which we all
played a part in designing. The communiqué includes
references to settlement, while ensuring that national
institutions remain intact. Are those actions the way to
ensure sustainability?
The Russian Federation, from the tribune of the
United Nations, has stated the need to establish an
international coalition to combat terrorism, which
would be based on international law. On many
occasions, we have sent signals to Washington about
our readiness to undertake such cooperation. As we see
it, Washington has chosen a different path. We must
recall that unilateral actions lead to reprehensible and
tragic consequences for region and its inhabitants.
Think about the consequences and remember the
outcome of United States actions in the Middle East.
Think about the steps it has taken and their impact
on the process to bring about a political settlement in
Syria. Unfortunately, today’s appeal to move forward
the political process after the military attack shows its
hypocrisy. With regard to the Astana and Geneva tracks,
clear progress has been made in recent days. What
goals guided the United States when it undermined that
progress, especially given that the progress achieved
was no thanks to the United States at all.
Returning to the use of chemical weapons as
a pretext yet again, the United States, the United
Kingdom and France put forward a draft resolution
(S/2017/172) that was quite erroneous in its very logic.
The logic behind predetermining that Damascus was
guilty was deeply flawed. What about the gold standard
of the presumption of innocence? Why do they apply it
in their own capitals but forget about it when it pertains
to the Middle East and or to other regions? Why do the
capitals of those countries forget that principle when
it pertains to the Middle East and or to other regions?
Why do they forget the presumption if innocence in such
cases? All of that is taking place because Washington,
London and Paris — I have spoken about this topic
in closed consultations and would like to reiterate
it — are paranoid about overthrowing the legitimate
Government in sovereign Syria. That was clearly
shown by non-diplomatic actions and the statements
made by the Permanent Representative of the United

S/PV.7919

Kingdom, Mr. Rycroft. Stop putting forward such
unprofessional arguments and levelling accusations
against my country; they fly in the face of diplomacy.
They are all lies. Once again, I warn them not teven try
to sow the seeds of discord between us and the Arab
world. Nothing will work or be achieved. That is why
they are becoming annoyed. All Arab countries recall
the colonial hypocrisy.
In his statement, Ambassador Rycroft tried to
divert the attention from the core issue. Once again it
did not work. That is why I would like to recall exact
events. Those who put forward this initiative are in
no way interested in an impartial investigation by a
competent international body to determine exactly
what took place in Khan Shaykhun. In addition, I would
also state that they fear such an investigation. They are
afraid of a genuinely independent investigation. What
would happen if the outcome of that investigation were
to contradict their anti-Government paradigm? They
feared investigations into the events in Khan al-Asal,
then in eastern Ghouta and now in Khan Shaykhun.
With regard to Khan Shaykhun, the Permanent
Representative of the United States stated that there is
credible evidence from the United States intelligence
services who claimed that Syrian Government forces
used chemical weapons. We said, “Show us, and experts
will determine whether or not that was the case”. I
would recall that General Powell talked in this very
Chamber about chemical weapons and weapons of mass
destruction, which were not found (see S/PV.4701).
Let us work together as professionals, and not
issue ultimatums. We are living in a very complex and
multipolar world, and we cannot live like this. Russia
has proposed a constructive alternative to its partners
in the Security Council. They just didn’t have a trump
card or a winning alternative. They have not put forward
any professional alternative or good arguments to us.
Our initiative was specifically based on the appeal
for specialists, chosen on a geographical basis by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Fact-finding Mission and the United NationsOPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism on chemical
weapons in Syria to visit the site where this incident
took place in Khan Shaykhoun, as well as neighbouring
areas, as soon as possible, in order to carry out a
professional investigation.
All Syrian parties were asked to grant these expets
immediate access to where the events took place. It

17-0948211/20

S/PV.7919

The situation in the Middle East

is not irrelevant to recall that the Syrian Government
does not control that area of Idlib province. Supported
from aborad, military groups that are closely linked
to Al-Nusra Front terrrorist units rule over those
territories, and they have things to hide, including in
the context of chemical weapons. But some are trying
to back them again, as they backed notorious bandits
in eastern Aleppo. However, everything became clear
once Aleppo was freed. It is no coincidence that the
many complaints of the Syrian Government related to
the massive entry of chemical weapons into the country,
their warehousing by extremists in special warehouses
and their use against the army and civilians have simply
been ignored — or it has been considered for month
after month with comtempt and without any outcome.
The OPCW Fact-finding Mission does not work in a
conscientious manner. It prefers to be guided in its work
by statements from opposition groups, Internet blogs,
social networks and a whole range of non-governmental
organizations of highly dubious reputation. They do not
even look at information and evidence from areas where
the incidents took place. And they want us to agree with
that information? It is not even worth looking at.
In our draft resolution we also set out the need to
establish a geographical balance with regard to staffing
the investigation group. That is an important point,
which has a direct bearing on the issue of impartiality
and trust. Thus far, the Fact-finding Mission was
usurped by representatives from a single country that
is in the forefront of anti-Damascus parties.
Proof of blatant double standards includes ignoring
the chemical attacks carried out by terrorists in the
Middle East as a whole. In that regard, members could
recall the recent events in Mosul, Iraq. Where was the
international community’s reaction? Where was their
warning — first and foremost, of those who carried
out this headline-grabbing public action in regard to
Khan Shaykhoun? Are these victims of a different
category? Are they perhaps second-rate victims? Why
do we not see in their countries’ headlines the tragedy
in the besieged town of Mosul? We are talking about
hundreds of thousands of people.
Thus is the attack in Syria an attempt to distract
attention from the many victims among the peaceful
populations in Iraq and Syria caused by unilateral
actions, including attacks on homes and other civilian
targets. There are no properly working Hhumanitarian
corridors. Let us recall the little girl from Mosul named
12/20

07/04/2017

Hawra. No one said anything at all about this little
girl, who became a symbol of this tragedy: everyone
in her house was killed when a coalition bomb fell on
her house. Thank God, the little girl lived. She had to
fight for her life, but is now out of danger. However, she
is almost blind. We will not set up a cynical show and
hold up photographs here in the Chamber. But people
must know about the Mosul tragedy.
Do not tell me that we are trying to draw attention
away from Syria when we talk about Mosul. That is
a lie. Those who know our position on this will know
that this is a shameless lie. We do not want to draw
anyone’s attention from anything, in particular from
what terrorists are doing. We merely want to say that if
we are fighting terrorism, we should do it on the basis of
single standards and not by dividing parties into good
and bad, allies and foes. Let me say once again that no
one should try to set us at odds with Iraq. No one will
be able to ruin our relations that country. They should
look at our relations with Iraq, as opposed to their own.
The 10 non-permanent members of the Security
Council did try to find compromise last evening during
the consultations we called for. They thanked the
American delegation for the fact that voting had been
postponed. However, there really was nothing to thank
them for. Our colleagues did not even imagine that
the decision was made with totally different ideas in
mind. It certainly was not with the idea of continuing
constructive and conciliatory dialogue. Washington had
already chosen to take military action, which took place
with members barely having left the United Nations
building. We call upon the United States immediately
to cease its aggression and to join the efforts being
made towards a political settlement in Syria, as well as
to work together to combat the terrorist threat. We are
still prepared to engage in such cooperation.
We have heard many insulting words today with
regard to our right to the veto — our right. We have
won it and have exercised it in a responsible manner,
but we use it only in such circumstances when others in
the Security Council try to impose their irresponsible
geopolitical projects. The Council must develop agreed
international decisions. Reckless geopolitical schemes
will never be supported.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, I would like to express, through our colleague
Ambassador Skoog, the sincere condolences and
sympathy of the Senegalese delegation to the people
17-09482

07/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

and the Government of Sweden in connection with the
tragic attack this morning.
We welcome the holding of this morning’s
emergency meeting, under the same format in which
we gathered on 5 April (see S/PV.7915 ). But like on
that day, with regard to late yesterday afternoon, we
are today seeing a deep divide in the Security Council
when it comes to the Syrian crisis — which, with the
use of chemical weapons, the proliferation of terrorist
groups and with the unprecedented catastrophic
repercussions — is one that constitutes the most serious
of our day. What image are we sending out to the
international community? Above all, what message are
we sending out to the Syrian people, who are lacerated
and disoriented? That we have lost our direction? What
other ambiguous message are we sending out to the
terrorists who are proliferating in Syria.
Nothing can justify an atrocity such as the use
of chemical weapons against civilians, even during
a conflict. As a party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, Senegal reiterates its firm condemnation
of the use of all kinds of weapons of mass destruction,
including chemical weapons. My delegation would
like to further encourage the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in its work,
particularly in connection with its Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic, and commends its effort
to bring together and analyse all the information from
every available source in order to determine who is
responsible for what.
Last September, in this very Chamber, the President
of the Republic of Senegal, Mr. Macky Sall, stated
that there could be no military solution to this crisis
(see S/PV.7774). That is why my delegation reaffirms
its strong conviction that only a negotiated solution,
on the basis of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2015), will make it possible
to find a final outcome to this conflict. We must not
forget that this agreement needs to cover the four
following aspects: political, security, humanitarian and
non-proliferation.
In that regard, my delegation wishes every success
to the fifth round of the Geneva talks, which opened
on 23 March, with the hope that, with the praiseworthy
efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. De Mistura, who is going to brief us here next week,
these talks will lead to substantial conclusions. The
fourth meeting had made it possible for the first time

S/PV.7919

to address substantial issues, such as constitutional
reform, the political transition and the holding of
elections under the observation of the United Nations.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join others in
expressing our heartfelt condolences to our Swedish
colleagues on the terrorist act in Stockholm.
My delegation is greatly concerned by recent
developments and the absence of unity among Security
Council members over the chemical attack in Syria.
We would like to make the following observations
and recommendations on the critical political aspects
pertaining to the situation in Syria.
We call on all parties concerned to refrain from
actions that could increase the risks of a military
escalation of tensions in Syria. We would like to
emphasize that the lack of unanimity may destroy the
new hopes of the Syrian people that arose following the
adoption of the historical resolution 2336 (2015). We
should not undermine an inclusive political negotiating
process, as provided for in resolution 2254 (2015).
The fifth round of intra-Syrian talks, held in Geneva
from 23 to 31 March, were able this time to move
from discussing formal and procedural issues to the
substantive and political aspects of future peace talks.
In that regard, we simply cannot allow a ceasefire to
dissolve, as it is our last chance to realize the longawaited peace on Syrian territory.
We consider the gas attacks in Syria to be a crime
against humanity, and we strongly condemn the use of
chemical weapons. It is important to conduct a thorough,
objective and impartial investigation into all aspects of
the chemical attack on Khan Shaykhun on 4 April, which
will make it possible for the international community
to render a fair verdict against the perpetrators, in full
compliance with international law.
We would like to remind members of the Council
that the principled position of Kazakhstan is not only
the most severe condemnation of the use of weapons of
mass destruction by any party, especially against the
civilian population, but also the resolution of conflicts
exclusively by peaceful means. We also have to respect
the sovereignty of States that are States Members of
the United Nations and the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. More
important, we urgently need a political solution. Only
a political diplomatic solution can bring about peace in
Syria, and we call upon the international community to

17-0948213/20

S/PV.7919

The situation in the Middle East

exert political will to overcome their differences and
negotiate peace and Syria.
The legitimate authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other parties must thoroughly execute
their obligations of complying with the relevant
recommendations made by Organization by the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
United Nations by accepting the personnel designated
by them, while providing for and ensuring the security
of activities undertaken by the personnel. In that regard,
they must provide staff with immediate and unfettered
access to, and the right to inspect, any and all sites in
carrying out their functions, and allow immediate and
unfettered access to individuals whom the OPCW has
grounds to believe to be of importance for the purpose
of its mandate.
The crisis in Syria, which is still unfolding, is
having an impact not only on the region, but on the
whole international community. Kazakhstan therefore
believes that a regional approach involving neighbouring
countries with influence on the parties in the Syrian
conflict should be considered as a very effective method
in mitigating the situation and preventing deterioration.
There is a strong need to continue supporting the aims
of the Astana talks and further Geneva negotiations
in order to see positive outcomes. We welcome the
significant results of the successful ministerial-level
conference held in Brussels in April, chaired by the
European Union and the United Nations and attended
by many international governmental organizations and
non-governmental organizations. The pledges made
are encouraging and send a message of solidarity
to the people of Syria and all those impacted by the
conflict. The pledges made at the meeting will increase
the amount of the much-needed essential humanitarian
assistance provided to the Syrian people, which is most
important element to achieve our political objectives.
Finally, I will conclude by quoting SecretaryGeneral Guterres who, at the opening plenary meeting
of the Brussels conference on the theme “Supporting the
future of Syria and the region”, said, “the most difficult
times call for the greatest efforts”. And, I would add,
and also the greatest of compromises.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): At the outset, I would like
to say that I am really heartened by all the expressions
of condolences and sympathies that are coming in as
we speak on my telephone from all our friends in the
Chamber this morning. I thank everyone for that.
14/20

07/04/2017

I also thank you, Madam President, for convening
this very important meeting. As we stated two days
ago in this Chamber (see S/PV.7893), the alleged use
of chemical weapons in the attack in Khan Shaykhun
was abhorrent and unacceptable. If these allegations
are proven to be correct, it will, unfortunately, be
no surprise. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) in Syria has concluded that chemical
weapons have been used by the Syrian regime on at
least three occasions. This latest attack only adds to
the many other confirmed cases of international crimes
committed in the Syrian conflict by all parties, most
notably the Syrian regime.
The use of chemical weapons is clearly illegal,
constitutes a threat to international peace and security
and can amount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity. There must be no impunity for such
atrocities. Sweden has been extremely clear on the
following points: the attack in Khan Shaykun must be
condemned in the strongest terms; there needs to be a
rapid, full and impartial investigation to confirm the
use of chemical weapons; and those responsible for this
horrendous attack must be held to account.
That is why we have worked tirelessly over the
past few days to ensure that the Council adopts a
strong draft resolution on a robust and immediate
investigation into this outrage. While those efforts did
not bear fruit yesterday, we still hope there is enough
common ground for the Council to move forward on a
strong draft resolution. Efforts should continue, and we
will remain constructively and actively engaged.
With regard to the air strike by the United States of
America last night, in response to the 4 April attack, it
is important that action is based on international law.
Last night’s missile attack also raises questions as to its
compatibility with international law. As the SecretaryGeneral said, restraint is important to avoid any risk of
escalation now.
Sweden has championed accountability for war
crimes and crimes against humanity in Syria.
We voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2017/172) on accountability for the use of chemical
weapons on 28 February. We endorsed European
Union-targeted measures against those implicated
in the use of chemical weapons. We support the JIM,
including through financial support and technical
expertise. We have also actively supported the
17-09482

07/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7919

Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, chaired by Mr. Pinheiro.
We co-sponsored General Assembly resolution 71/248,
which established the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which,
we hope, will begin its work very soon, and provided
support through an initial contribution of approximately
$400,000 to the Mechanism.

in Syria. Who is unaware that Syria has been an open
field for quite some time? The point is that the situation
has worsened and nobody knows what tomorrow will
bring. We are therefore facing a much broader and more
complicated matter that is likely to get out of hand.
In our mind, the priority should be to find a way out
before we get to that slippery slope. Now is the time for
wisdom to prevail and statesmanship to take the upper
hand. One doubts that that has been the case for some
time. In that regard, the Secretary-General said today,
among other things,

Instead of exchanging accusations and insults
around this table, we now need to come together to
urgently reinvigorate the United Nations-led political
process. Ultimately, the only way of ending the suffering
in Syria is by achieving a sustainable political solution.
That will require a transitional political process based
on resolution 2254 (2015). We reiterate our full support
for the intra-Syrian talks under the auspices of the
United Nations in Geneva and the efforts of Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura, from whom we look forward
to hearing next week. The parties must engage seriously.

“The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for international peace and security.
I call on the Council to unite and exercise that
responsibility.

Over the past few days, we have expressed our
outrage over the latest atrocity in Khan Shaykhun.
Yet every day the Syrian people continue to suffer the
brutality of war in all its forms. It is high time to end the
war in Syria and allow the Syrian people to determine
their own future.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting.
Let me express our condolences to the Government
of Sweden and our Swedish colleagues. We condemn
the terrorist attack.
I would like to raise several points. First, if the
situation in Syria continues, it will result in the
collapse of the Syrian State. We have no doubt that
the winners will be the terrorists. We have seen it too
many times before. That perhaps is another indication
that the international community enjoys no united
stand on giving priority to resolving the Syrian crisis
through political dialogue and countering the scourge
of terrorism in a unified and concerted manner.
Nevertheless, there is no justification for the crime
committed on 4 April.
Secondly, a very urgent issue that requires
clarification and a wise approach involves the fact that
too many States and non-State actors are very active

“For too long, international law has been
ignored in the Syrian conflict, and it is our shared
duty to uphold international standards of humanity.”
(SG/SM/18487)
Thirdly, there is a danger that the Security
Council, which is already being marginalized, could
lose whatever remaining credibility it might have.
That is why, in hind sight, the action taken by the
non-permanent members yesterday appears to be not
only very timely, but also wise. Will the proposal they
made yesterday help find a way out for what otherwise
will result in a dangerous development? We believe that
it might.
In the light of the fact that the rational for the
latest military action is based on the use of chemical
weapons — while those responsible remain to be
determined and the investigation needs to be speedily
concluded — it seems to us that the priority for now
should be the adoption by consensus of the draft
resolution proposed by the elected members, and,
furthermore, as the representative of Egypt said, for the
United States and the Russian Federation to exercise
greater responsibility and find a way out within
their means.
Finally, as we said two days ago (see S/PV.7915),
only an inclusive political process will ultimately be
able to address the Syrian crisis and prevent the situation
from spiralling out of control. There is therefore a need
for calm and restraint to de-escalate the situation. We
hope that the latest developments will not dampen the
prospect for a comprehensive political solution in Syria
through the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva.

17-0948215/20

S/PV.7919

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We were also shocked by
the terrorist act in Stockholm and express our solidarity
with and condolences to Sweden.
First of all, I would like to stress that we came
here not to discuss yesterday’s strike by the United
States but the consequences of the terrible and deadly
chemical-weapons attack of last Tuesday.
I would also like to draw the attention of my
colleagues to the statement issued by the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine that indicates, inter alia, that
any use of chemical weapons is an outrageous violation
of international law and constitutes a war crime; the
perpetrators of such acts have to be held accountable;
and impunity for a violator of international law in the
use of chemical weapons leads to further crimes.
The chronic blocking of the work of the Security
Council by Russia is unacceptable. The Syrian regime’s
sponsors and advocates also bear responsibility for the
use of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) in Syria
and the subsequent deaths and suffering among Syria’s
civilian population.
The United States actions must be supported to
prevent the regime from committing any further war
crimes, including against the civilian population.
Ukraine considers the United States missile strike
against a military target, namely, the airbase from which
an air strike to deploy chemical weapons was launched
against Khan Shaykhun on 4 April, to be an appropriate
and proportionate response. It is a clear signal that the
use of WMDs will no longer be tolerated.
Yesterday’s events were long overdue. For years, the
Council was paralysed with regard to many important
international security issues, including the Syrian
issue. For all intents and purposes, it was practically
held hostage by one delegation that abused its status
as a permanent member and practiced the approach of
“my way or no way”.
The Council’s efforts to address the Syrian crisis
have been blocked by Russia’s use of the veto on seven
occasions — that is, seven immobilizing vetoes and
the pairs of thousands of Syrian children’s eyes who
will never see the light of day again. All means were
employed to obstruct any meaningful action by the
Council: obfuscation, distractions, diversions, outright
lies and even bullying. As a result, despite the best
efforts of its members on numerous occasions, the
16/20

07/04/2017

Security Council was not able to deliver because of the
intransigence of the Russian delegation.
Ukraine does not consider the draft resolution
proposed by the Russian delegation to be either
adequate to the circumstances or a proper reaction
by the international community to the horrible mass
murder of people in Idlib province. Given the brutal
facts on the ground, it is actually adding insult to
injury. We cannot accept a reference to this crime
as “the alleged incident with chemical weapons” or
“reportedly causing large-scale loss of life”. Really? An
“incident”? A “reported loss of life”? Does the Russian
delegation not watch television? Or maybe it means
to assert that what is in that horrible footage from the
country was staged.
Furthermore, the draft resolution suggests that the
key focus of the international response to the use of
weapons of mass destruction against civilians, instead
of promoting the prompt identification and bringing to
justice of the perpetrators and the taking of steps to
prevent future attacks, should be limited to considering
the composition of the personnel investigating team
based on the principle of a broad-based and balanced
geographical distribution. Is this a terribly important
issue? No: it is not serious. Such an approach is aimed
at postponing practical investigations. We therefore see
it as a shameless attempt to undermine the credibility of
the Security Council.
When the United Nations is unable to take action,
the resulting void is filled. As my delegation stated in
this Chamber just two days ago (see S/PV.7915), endless
talks cannot be the substitute for concrete action. We
also reject the assertion by the Russian Federation that
the United States action constitutes an act of aggression.
The Russian side has lost the moral high ground in such
claims after its invasion of Georgia, its occupation and
attempted annexation of Crimea and after launching
armed aggression against my country in the Donbass
region, which continues until this day. The deafening
sound of salvos of Russian Grad missiles and artillery
shells pounding Ukraine’s territory and bringing death
and destruction render hollow all Kremlin statements
on the subject of respect for international law. At the
very least, the Russians are utterly hypocritical. I call
on the Russian delegation to stop mocking the Security
Council and stop calling others paranoiacs. Rather,
they should look at themselves.
17-09482

07/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Ukraine continues to believe that the final
settlement of the Syrian conflict can be achieved only
through a political solution. In the light of the recent
escalation, the only way forward is a reinvigorated
political process, a reanimation of the ceasefire and
a true commitment to a genuine political transition
based on Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015). We therefore urge the
Syrian regime and its backers to think carefully before
embarking upon an escalated level once again, and
instead read the situation correctly in a way that would
give peace a chance.
The events of this week sent a clear signal to all
of us. The international community can ill-afford
a dysfunctional Security Council. A failure by this
body to discharge its duties in an objective manner,
to stand up for what is right, to ensure accountability
for violators of international law, undermines its moral
standing. Moreover, when the time and energy of its
members are expended in attempts to achieve unity and
consensus by basically shielding the perpetrators of the
most vicious of crimes from responsibility, it destroys
its credibility.
I call on all members of the Security Council to
remember that its main task is not to achieve consensus
on any given issue at any cost, but to work diligently
and responsibly to maintain international peace and
security. When the United Nations is found wanting,
opportunistic and unscrupulous types will always rush
in to explore opened weaknesses in order to achieve
their own political or other goals, thus creating more
demand for a just and adequate response. If the United
Nations persists in inaction, sooner or later the response
will come from outside the United Nations system.
Therefore, obstructionists whose identities are well
known have only themselves to blame for events not
playing out according to their desired scenarios.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
For six years, the world has watched as the Syrian
Government and its leader, Bashar Al-Assad, have
terrorized their own people. They have murdered
hundreds of thousands and displaced millions. They have
broken international law and violated numerous United
Nations resolutions. They have committed criminal
acts that shock the conscience of all humankind.
The international community has repeatedly
expressed its outrage. The Joint Investigative

S/PV.7919

Mechanism has found, beyond any doubt, that the
Syrian regime has used chemical weapons against its
own people multiple times. On Tuesday, the Al-Assad
regime launched yet another chemical attack on
civilians, murdering innocent men, women and children
in the most gruesome way. Al-Assad did that because
he thought he could get away with it. He thought he
could get away with it because he knew that Russia
would have his back. That changed last night.
As I warned on Wednesday (see S/PV.7915, when
the international community consistently fails in its
duty to act collectively, there are times when States are
compelled to take their own action. The indiscriminate
use of chemical weapons against innocent civilians is
one of those times. The United States will not stand
by when chemical weapons are used. It is in our vital
national security interests to prevent the spread and use
of chemical weapons. Our military destroyed the airfield
from which this week’s chemical strike took place. We
were fully justified in doing so. The moral stain of the
Al-Assad regime could no longer go unanswered. His
crimes against humanity could no longer be met with
empty words. It was time to say “enough”, but not only
say it; it was time to act. Bashar Al-Assad must never
use chemical weapons again, ever.
While the Syrian regime is responsible for the
chemical-weapon attack, it is not the only guilty party.
The Iranian Government bears a heavy responsibility. It
has propped up and shielded Syria’s brutal dictator for
years. Iran continues to play a role in the bloodshed in
Syria. The Russian Government also bears considerable
responsibility. Every time Al-Assad has crossed the
line of human decency Russia has stood beside him. We
had hoped the Security Council would move forward
but Russia made it known, as it has done seven times
before, that it would use its veto once again to cover up
for the Al-Assad regime.
Further delay by compromising with Russia for
a watered-down draft resolution would have only
strengthened Al-Assad. Strengthening Al-Assad will
lead only to more murders. We were not going to allow
that. But it is even more than that: Russia is supposed
to be a guarantor of the removal of chemical weapons
from Syria. Think about that. Russia is supposed to
have removed all the chemical weapons from Syria. But
obviously that has not happened, as innocent Syrians
continue to be murdered in chemical attacks. Let us
think about the possible reasons for Russia’s failure.

17-0948217/20

S/PV.7919

The situation in the Middle East

It could be that Russia is knowingly allowing
chemical weapons to remain in Syria. It could be that
Russia has been incompetent in its efforts to remove
the chemical weapons. Or it could be that the Al-Assad
regime is playing the Russians for fools, telling them
that there are no chemical weapons all the while
stockpiling them on their bases. The world is waiting
for the Russian Government to act responsibly in
Syria. The world is waiting for Russia to reconsider its
misplaced alliance with Bashar Al-Assad.
The United States will no longer wait for Al-Assad
to use chemical weapons without any consequences.
Those days are over. But now we must move to a new
phase — a drive towards a political solution to this
horrific conflict. We expect the Syrian regime and
its allies to take the United Nations political process
seriously, something they have not done up until this
point. We expect Russia and Iran to hold their ally
accountable and abide by the terms of the ceasefire.
We expect the Security Council to speak loudly and
forcefully when the regime or its allies undermine the
political process and countless of our own resolutions.
The United States took a very measured step last
night. We are prepared to do more, but we hope that
will not be necessary. It is time for all civilized nations
to stop the horrors that are taking place in Syria and for
them to demand a political solution.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First of all, my delegation wishes to thank both
the Russian Federation and Bolivia for joining us in the
convening of this urgent meeting.
At the very outset, I have a question for the UnderSecretary General, who said that the Syrian Government
described the attack as “an aggression”, but he did not
give us description according to the Charter of the
United Nations. At 3.42 this morning, 7 April, the
United States, using a number of missiles, committed a
flagrant and barbaric act of aggression against a Syrian
Arab Air Force base in the central area of our country,
which led to a number of people being martyred and
many injured, including women and children, as well
as wide-ranging material damage.
18/20

07/04/2017

This treacherous act of aggression constitutes a
grave violation of the Charter of the United Nations as
well of as all international norms and laws. The United
States attempted to justify it with empty pretexts and
fabricated arguments that claimed that the Syrian Arab
Army had used chemical weapons in Khan Shaykhun,
without genuine knowledge of what had happened
or identifying who was responsible. Those are the
very same pretexts used by terrorist organizations
and their handlers — in Washington, D.C., Ankara,
Riyadh, Doha, Tel Aviv, London and Paris — as well as
their media outlets.
The Syrian Arab Republic has stressed that the
Syrian Arab Army does not have chemical weapons in
the first place; that it would never use such weapons
in any of its operations against armed terrorist groups;
and that it condemns the use of such weapons as being
unjustified under any conditions. In this regard, we
would like to note that it has become well known that
those weapons have been used and stockpiled in many
parts of Syria by armed terrorist groups in cooperation
with — or, rather, with a wink and a nod from — certain
ruling regimes in the region and outside it, including
Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and some European States,
which completely ignored all the facts and documented
information on the use of chemical weapons on many
occasions by terrorists in many parts of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
This act of aggression will send erroneous messages
to terrorist groups, emboldening them them to use
chemical weapons in future and to continue perpetrating
terrorist acts against Syrian civilians. Following this
aggression, Jabhat Al-Nusra and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), both of which are terrorist
organizations, and their affiliates waged many attacks
on many parts of Syria. However, the Syrian Arab
Army and its allies in the war against terrorism are
confronting them, despite desperate attempts by others
to support them. The American aggression falls under
that umbrella.
This condemnable aggression is a grave continuation
of the same erroneous American strategy that began six
years ago to provide all types of assistance to what the
United States calls the “moderate armed opposition”.
This strategy harms counter-terrorism efforts by the
Syrian Arab Army and its partners. It makes the United
States of America a partner of ISIL, Jabhat Al-Nusra and
other terrorist groups, which from day one of the unjust
war against Syria have attacked Syrian army positions
17-09482

07/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

and military bases, as well as our infrastructure and
civilians.
Let me recall here in the Security Council that the
United States of America leads a purported alliance
against ISIL. However, the real achievements of that
coalition are killing civilians and striking infrastructure
in Syria. Its real goal is to weaken the Syrian Arab
Army and its allies as they confront terrorist groups.
It is in that context that we also see the air strikes
by this illegal coalition against the Syrian Arab Army
in Jebal Thardeh, around the city of Deir ez-Zor, on
17 September 2016, in an attempt to secure a safe
corridor for ISIL elements between Syrian and Iraqi
territories.
Today’s aggression was aimed at saving Jabhat
Al-Nusra terrorists following the grave damage
inflicted upon them by the Syrian Arab Army and its
allies in the centre of the country after they attacked
peaceful villages and cities in the area. In that regard, I
note that, according to media reports, the United States
Congress recently entacted a law allowing the United
States Administration to send man-portable air-defence
systems to armed terrorist groups in Syria.
Just two days ago here in the Security Council (see
S/PV.7893), we warned that three colonialist permanent
Member States in the Council had a renewed appetite
to repeat the lies and stories spread by the United
States and the United Kingdom 14 years ago here in
the Chamber to justify the destruction and occupation
of Iraq by way of the major lie about weapons of mass
destruction. Perhaps diplomatic history has come full
circle now in a regrettable, farcical scene in which
Colin Powell, the then Secretary of State of the United
States, tried to delude the international community
and the United Nations in order to justify his country’s
aggression against Iraq by talking about highly credible
information. Today the United States of America
pursues its misleading policy to justify its aggression
against Syria by relying on fabricated information
provided by the Jabhat Al-Nusra terrorists.
This aggression incontrovertibly proves that Syria
has always been correct that successive American
Administrations will not change their fruitless policies
of targeting States and subjugating people to their will
and to impose hegemony around the world.
International public opinion and the people of the
free world have no doubt that successive United States,

S/PV.7919

United Kingdom and French Administrations have for
decades cared neither for democracy or freedom nor for
human rights — indeed, let alone the well-being of people
or their security and stability. These are just pretexts
to wage war and occupy other States, divide them and
control their wealth and energy resources. What is truly
disgusting today is that these Governments that have
supported Wahhabi thinking — the extremist terrorist
ideology of the Al-Saud entity since its creation — are
today orchestrating and investing in terrorism without
any concern for people’s lives, including their own,
after terrorism arrived at their doorstep, because of
these misguided, hypocritical policies.
I assure Council members that if the United States
Administration is still delusional that it has succeeded
in that blatant aggression in supporting the terrorist
gangs and organizations on the ground, the response of
the Syrian Arab Republic and its allies will be greater
determination to maintain their patriotic duty to defend
the Syrian people and to crush terrorism wherever it
may be in order to restore security and safety to the
territories of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Syrian Arab Republic strongly condemns this
act of aggression by the United States of America,
which runs counter to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, especially given
the status of the United States as a permanent member
of the Security Council, which is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security — let
alone the fact that such acts of aggression hold the
potential to sow total chaos in many parts of the world
and will make the law of the jungle the only way to deal
with regional and economic crises, with no heed paid to
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
I ask those who talk about the respect of the
Charter: Did this colonial trio respect the Charter
when they killed millions of innocent people, starting
in South Asia and all the way through Latin America?
The representative of France spoke about exceptions.
They are the ones who should not be the exception and
should be held accountable for the July 2016 slaughter
of more than 200 civilians by their warplanes in
Toukhan Al-Kubra, in Rural Aleppo. They and their
allies in what is called the “international coalition”
should be held accountable for the killing of more than
800 civilians in Syria from late July 2016 to 22 March
2017. They must be held accountable for their support
of armed terrorist groups and for providing them with

17-0948219/20

S/PV.7919

The situation in the Middle East

political cover so as to continue their acts of terrorism
against my own country.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
based on its belief that every effort must be mobilized
to combat terrorism, and out of respect for the rules
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, calls on the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibilities in accordance with the Charter,
condemn this act of aggression and ensure that it will
not be repeated. It is an act that threatens peace and
security in the region and around the world.
The President: I acknowledge the statement made
by the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
aksed for the floor to make a further statement.

20/20

07/04/2017

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I take the floor again only to say that I would
like to ask the representatives of the United States and
other countries not to insult my country. They have
absolutely no moral right to do so. We do not behave in
that way ourselves.
I would simply like to say that Ambassador Haley,
who has only just taken up her post here, has a real
chance, both as Permanent Representative of the United
States and as the current President of the Security
Council, to restore the collective work of the Security
Council to a healthy state. But that will not happen if
she claims a national point of view to be an absolute
truth. We would first like to ensure that our work in the
Council is mutually respectful.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

17-09482
