S/PV.8689

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8689th meeting

Tuesday, 17 December 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Craft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Allen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2019/936)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-41386 (E)
*1941386*

S/PV.8689

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2019/936)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, to participate in this meeting.
Special Representative Shearer is joining us via
video-teleconference from Auckland, New Zealand.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/936, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Special Representative Shearer and by
Ambassador Wronecka, Permanent Representative of
Poland in her capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan.

17/12/2019

security have also prompted at least 645,000 people to
return to their homes. But the choice to twice delay a
transitional Government has dampened initial hopes,
eroded some trust and confidence and caused people
to suspect that the political will between the parties is
waning. The choices that South Sudan’s leaders make
now will determine that country’s future for generations
to come.
There has been no shortage of outside support
to encourage South Sudan to head along the right
path. In the past three months, Uganda has hosted
and followed up directly on a tripartite meeting, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
has met several times and there have been efforts by
IGAD’s Special Envoy for South Sudan and visits by
South Africa’s Deputy President. The Sudan itself
has been engaged in the most recent discussions. The
African Union has kept the country under constant
review. Of course, the full 15 members of the Security
Council visited Juba to engage and hear directly from
the parties. What has been most striking is that there
has been a unity of purpose among the international
partners, and I am confident that will continue. The
international engagement, together with Mr. Riek
Machar’s presence in Juba over the past week and
during face-to-face meetings with President Kiir, has
led to positive statements from both leaders in the past
24 hours.

Mr. Shearer: It is a pleasure to participate in
today’s meeting. As I am speaking to the Council
today, one third of the 100-day extension of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan has already passed.
While this second extension has eased anxiety at least
temporarily, because it maintains the ceasefire, it has
also disillusioned many citizens who feel that more
progress should have been made.

There can always be reasons for further delay.
After all, there is no definitive or objective point where
progress on the peace process can be agreed to be
completely sufficient. But if the parties want to fully
implement the agreement and form a new Government
at the end of this 100-day period, they certainly can.
It comes down to political will — the willingness to
make concessions and to ultimately sit around a table
within a transitional Government and make it work for
the people. Again, it is about choices. The first test of
whether that political will exists will be when the 50day review is held in early January. At that point, there
has to be measurable progress in several areas.

Politics, after all, is all about choices. By choosing
to sign the peace agreement last year, the parties kickstarted a transformative process that has already paid
dividends. The country has witnessed a steep decrease
in civilian injuries, abductions and casualties. While
sexual violence remains a terrible problem, the 295
victims recorded in 2019 are substantially fewer than
the almost 1,300 reported in 2018. Improvements in

The first area is the reunification of forces. It is
unlikely that everything will be completed before
the deadline. Today’s commitments by the two
leaders have given further impetus to the process, but
substantial progress will give all parties the trust and
confidence they need to continue the reintegration and
reunification process within a transitional Government.
More than 76,000 have already gathered at cantonment

I now give the floor to Mr. Shearer.

2/17

19-41386

17/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

sites, and careful vetting is needed to verify their
status as ex-combatants. Another 12,000 are registered
in Government barracks. So far, however, supplies
to cantonment sites have been patchy, and in many
places combatants have abandoned them to seek food,
shelter and a means of income to support themselves
elsewhere. Inevitably, the concentration of forces
anywhere can also create uncertainty and suspicion
that each side is mobilizing forces for war rather than
preparing for peace. The only way to overcome that
suspicion is to accelerate training and reunification in
order to maintain trust and confidence.
The job of the National Pre-Transitional Committee
is to ensure that resources get where they are needed.
We in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan have
signalled our willingness to provide additional logistical
support on request. Last week, it was reported that
Government funding has been distributed to various
security committees, which is welcome. However, the
exact amounts delivered and how they will be spent
remains opaque. Transparency is needed to quell that
suspicion, a point that has been made by the African
Union, IGAD and the United Nations. This could
take the form of a trust fund or a similar mechanism
to provide independent oversight of finances. The
agreement between the Government and the opposition
reached in the past few hours to establish such a
mechanism is encouraging, and the United Nations will
offer its support to establish it, as it has done in other
conflict settings internationally.
Mr. Riek Machar’s presence in Juba over the past
five days for face-to-face discussions has been very
encouraging and is essential to resolving differences,
as we have all noted. As yet, however, there is no
resolution of his uncertain status and he has yet to
be given a South Sudanese passport. However, where
the sides do remain apart is on the second critical
issue, that of states and boundaries, despite the very
determined efforts by South Africa’s Deputy President
David Mabuza. This issue has the potential to anger
some and gratify others, depending on the outcome and
the side each party sits on. Because power and access
to resources are heavily vested in the states and in turn
often linked to ethnic groups, this particular issue is
politically charged. Resolving it will require a high
degree of sensitivity, leadership and a willingness to
examine contentious areas with open minds and to
accept a solution that none of the parties may consider
ideal. It needs courage. Deferring this issue to a

S/PV. 8689

referendum will cost millions of dollars and present
immense logistical difficulties, especially with one
third of the South Sudanese population displaced. It
also runs the risk of widening ethnic divisions.
In the past few weeks I have talked to many people
about the peace process during recent visits to the field.
Whether it is in Koch, Lankien, Pibor, Bentiu or Bor,
the message is remarkably similar. No one I spoke to
wants to go back to war. One of those people is Bul
Deng, a 24-year-old man who returned to Lankien
after six years in a United Nations protection-ofcivilians site because he believes peace is coming. He
told me that he wants people to be a peaceful family
and to live freely across the whole land, that peace is
what everybody wants. However, some people admit
privately that they would take up arms if ordered to by
their leaders. The good news so far is that the ceasefire
has been largely respected. But we must remain vigilant.
A recent spike of intercommunal violence and clashes
has raised tensions and risks spilling over into more
serious political violence. Fighting around Maiwut,
in the north-east of the country, for example, turned
overtly political when the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army in Opposition and Government forces
backed different sides.
Meanwhile, improvements to the humanitarian
situation have been partly negated by flooding, which
has affected 900,000 people, washed away crops,
destroyed homes and contaminated water supplies.
To their credit, the state Governments, humanitarian
agencies and donors have responded quickly. The World
Food Programme’s quick response used supplies that
were pre-positioned for 2020, but those stocks will need
to be urgently replenished and transported throughout
the country. And with an estimated 72,000 metric tons
of cereals lost, in addition to animals that have died
and pasture that has been destroyed, the fear is about
longer-term food needs. The flooding compounded
pre-existing needs. The recently released humanitarian
response plan for 2020 aims to meet the needs of
5.6 million people at an estimated cost of $1.5 billion.
Sadly, the brief respite of the accompanying peace
has been negated largely because of these natural
calamities, and concerns about hunger in many parts of
the country are again rising.
In just two months, leaders will choose whether
to form a transitional Government. Preservation of the
ceasefire, as I said, is absolutely critical. Those choices
will coincide with the dry season, a period historically

19-413863/17

S/PV.8689

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

associated with increased fighting. The joint meetings
in recent days between President Kiir and Dr. Riek
Machar are encouraging, with both sides recommitting
to the peace process. That has restored some of the
optimism and momentum that were lost with the delays
in the peace agreement. All parties now need to choose
to follow up on their words, and their international
partners should remain resolute in their support, as I
am sure they will. The parties should move towards
a transitional Government that can start planning for
South Sudan’s long-term future and ultimately for
elections in the next three years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In my capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, I have the honour
to brief the members of the Council on developments
in the Committee since my previous briefing in this
Chamber on 18 December last year (see S.PV.8431).
I intend to focus first on the visit I made to South
Sudan and the region in October and secondly to
elaborate on the interim report of the Panel of Experts,
which was submitted to the Committee on 1 November
and published as a document of the Council on
22 November. On 18 November the Committee had an
opportunity to engage with the Coordinator of the Panel
on the findings and recommendations of the interim
report, and it subsequently considered various followup actions aimed at improving the implementation and
effectiveness of the regime. Lastly, I will provide a
brief overview of developments in the Committee since
my briefing last year.
From 6 to 15 October, I had the opportunity to
visit, in chronological order, South Sudan, Uganda, the
Sudan and Ethiopia. The purpose of my visit was to
obtain first-hand accounts of the implementation of the
measures imposed by resolution 2206 (2015), expanded
by resolution 2428 (2018) and most recently extended
by resolution 2471 (2019); to strengthen dialogue and
engagement with the States concerned regarding the
implementation of the measures, including any needs
for assistance; and to inform the Council’s review of
the mandate, pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 2471
(2019). It is important to note that my visit took place
roughly one month prior to the 12 November deadline
for the formation of the Transitional Government in
pursuance of the implementation of the Revitalized
4/17

17/12/2019

Agreement for the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, following which the parties
decided to extend the transitional period by 100 days.
Before turning to the actions that the Committee
has taken in response to the observations made during
my visit, I would like to highlight the key issues
observed and raised during the trip. On the political
front, based on the discussions held during my visit,
I continue to believe that the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement, particularly the progress on
the transitional security arrangements, remains crucial
to peace and stability in South Sudan. I continue to
be concerned about the dire humanitarian and human
rights situation in South Sudan, in which the civilian
population, particularly women and children, have
been pillaged by men in uniform. Sadly, the abuse and
recruitment of children, and acts of sexual violence
directed against women and girls in particular, have
been a continuing motif in this terrible civil war. In that
connection, the lack of accountability is of particular
concern. During my visit to Juba, Bentiu and Yei, I
noticed that some interlocutors held the view that the
communities in South Sudan did not fully understand
the sanctions regime.
I remain concerned about the fact that the region is
not taking concrete actions regarding the implementation
of the sanctions regimes, and I encourage neighbouring
States to conduct inspections in accordance with
paragraph 8 of resolution 2428 (2018) in connection
with the arms embargo. It is also lamentable that
sanctioned individuals continue to travel unimpeded
throughout the region, sometimes with passports from
the region, and that in only a few cases have Member
States transmitted travel-ban exemption requests to
the Committee.
As a result of my visit, the Committee agreed on
several proposed actions based on my recommendations,
which included transmitting follow-up letters expressing
appreciation for the hospitality extended and reiterating
the importance of the effective implementation of the
measures and the need for more support for the Panel
of Experts. It was also agreed that the Committee
would organize an open briefing where the views of
my recent visit could be expressed. The Committee
also decided to organize a briefing by the Chair of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development on
the status of the peace process in South Sudan. And,
finally, the Committee is considering transmitting a
note verbale to all Member States on the measures in
19-41386

17/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

place concerning South Sudan and reminding them of
their obligations.
Let me now turn to the second focus of my briefing,
the interim report of the Panel of Experts submitted
pursuant to resolution 2471 (2019) and, more specifically,
the actions taken by the Committee in response to the
Panel’s findings and recommendations. I will not repeat
the contents of the interim report in detail, given that
it was transmitted to the members of the Council and
is now available as document S/2019/897. I will simply
remind the Council that the Panel of Experts has
presented its findings with regard to the political and
security situation in South Sudan, violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, the implementation of
the arms embargo, including the provisions related to
the exemptions to the regime, and the implementation
of the targeted financial and travel-ban measures. In
that context, I would like to reiterate the importance
of ensuring that the States of the region, particularly
South Sudan’s neighbours, continue strengthening
their cooperation with the Panel of Experts and the
Sanctions Committee.
For the third and final element of my statement
today, I would like to provide a brief overview of the
Committee’s work since my briefing to the Council
last December. To date, the Committee has met on
five occasions in informal consultations, and has held
one joint informal consultation with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
On 8 February, the Committee heard a presentation by
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on South Sudan,
open to Member States, concerning the Panel’s interim
report, document S/2018/1049, submitted pursuant to
paragraph 19 (e) of resolution 2428 (2018).
During the informal consultations held on
29 March, the Committee heard a presentation by
the Panel of Experts on South Sudan concerning the
Panel’s final report, S/2019/301, submitted pursuant
to paragraph 19 (e) of resolution 2428 (2018), and
discussed its recommendations.
During the joint informal consultations of the
Security Council Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1591 (2005), 1970 (2011) and 2206
(2015), concerning the Sudan, Libya and South Sudan,
respectively, held on 21 June, the Panels of Experts on

S/PV. 8689

the Sudan, Libya and South Sudan delivered briefings
and the Committees held an interactive discussion
on the importance of using a common approach in
addressing the presence of Darfuri armed groups in
Libya and South Sudan and preventing those groups
from engaging in destabilizing activities.
The Committee heard a presentation on 9 August by
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on work plan of
the Panel, the mandate of which was renewed pursuant
to resolution 2471 (2019). The Committee received a
briefing on 21 August by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
During the informal consultations held on
18 November, the Committee heard a presentation by
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on the Panel’s
interim report (see S/2019/897), submitted pursuant
to paragraph 3 of resolution 2471 (2019), and also
discussed the findings and recommendations contained
in the report of my visit to South Sudan, Uganda, the
Sudan and Ethiopia from 6 to 15 October.
Finally, since my previous report to the Council,
the Committee received four requests for exemptions
to the arms embargo, all of which were granted. No
exemption requests were received concerning the
travel-ban measures. I would like to reiterate my call
to all Member States to increase their engagement with
the Committee, seek clarifications on the measures and
related exemption procedures and submit requests for
exemptions to the arms embargo, the travel ban and the
assets freeze.
The President: I thank Ambassador Wronecka for
her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
I thank Special Representative Shearer and
Ambassador Wronecka for their briefings. Allow me to
congratulate Ambassador Wronecka and her team for
their leadership of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan,
over the past two years. Their expertise and dedication
have been a great help to the Security Council.
As I have said before, this month is about a cleareyed assessment of Security Council portfolios.
Let me therefore be clear: the United States and the
international community are losing confidence that
South Sudan’s leaders have the will to guide their
country to genuine peace and security. We are losing

19-413865/17

S/PV.8689

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

confidence that they share the best interests of their
people, who are calling for peace amid a devastating
conflict-induced humanitarian crisis.
The Council visited Juba to support the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, but South
Sudan’s leaders blamed each other for hindering
progress and failed to publicly affirm their commitment
to the ceasefire. The parties agreed to again extend the
pre-transitional phase of the peace agreement, but in
the months since progress has been limited. While the
parties have committed to security arrangements and
the unification of the military, there are credible reports
of recruitment by the Government and the opposition.
Civilian buildings remain occupied primarily by
Government forces. Juba remains militarized.
In response to the call for consultations on the
number of states and their boundaries, the Government
has flatly refused to compromise. In response to
calls for accountability, the Government promotes
and reappoints officials accused of serious human
rights abuses, and armed forces continue to conduct
egregious acts of sexual and gender-based violence,
including violations against children. In response to
calls for transparent funding for the peace agreement,
financial opacity reigns and expert advice is ignored.
South Sudan’s legislature recently approved a budget
that could allow a higher expenditure on health-care
alliances for members of Parliament than the healthcare budget for the entire country.
Despite provisions to ensure the full participation of
women in the formation of a transitional Government,
the parties continue to prevent women from effectively
and meaningfully participating in the peace process, and
the ability of humanitarian actors to reach those in need
is increasingly limited. Their safety is threatened, and
bureaucratic impediments remain in place, all at a time
when massive flooding is compounding food insecurity.
That lack of progress is nearly comprehensive.
However, South Sudan’s leaders can still form an
inclusive transitional Government by the end of the
100-day extension. We note today’s statement from
South Sudan’s leaders recommitting to form a unity
Government by mid-February. We and the people of
South Sudan look forward to such statements translating
into tangible results. If implemented in full, the current
agreement can provide the peace and stability for which
the people of South Sudan have so clearly called.
6/17

17/12/2019

Regional engagement will also be essential.
I want to recognize the efforts of South Africa,
working in collaboration with the Special Envoys of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
Kenya, as well as the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, to convene the parties
over the issue of the number and boundaries of states.
Nevertheless, for real progress, Member States in
the region must also hold South Sudan’s leaders
accountable for failing to take further steps towards
peace. After all, the entire region will suffer if the
current process collapses.
Silencing the guns in South Sudan will take more
than lofty rhetoric. Moreover, violence in the Equatorias,
Upper Nile and the Lakes regions demonstrates the
continued need for the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) to protect civilians and undertake
patrols in all areas of the country. The parties must
grant UNMISS and humanitarian agencies full access
without delay.
Along with easy access to weapons and continued
violence, the willingness of armed groups and security
forces to injure, and even kill, civilians justifies both a
robust arms embargo and a sanctions regime targeting
actors and entities that threaten peace and stability
in South Sudan. If South Sudan’s leaders cannot
implement basic provisions of their own agreement,
the Council should consider a stronger and expanded
sanctions regime. Indeed, the threat of sanctions and
their implementation appear to be among the only
actions that convince the parties to make progress.
While we are focused this month on the Council’s
credibility, today it is the leaders of South Sudan whose
credibility is on the line — the credibility of their
political will and this peace process. At this time, the
United States offers its full support to the people of
South Sudan. We hope that the country’s leaders do not
let them down.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): I deliver this
statement on behalf of the African countries on the
Security Council, namely, South Africa, Equatorial
Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire.
19-41386

17/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

At the outset, let me thank you, Madam President,
for convening this meeting. I would also like to express
our gratitude to our briefers today. We would also
like to express our sincere gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2019/936) and welcome his
observations. We also recognize the tireless efforts
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan under
the able leadership of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General David Shearer to assist in forging
peace and stability in South Sudan.
The Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in South Sudan continues to be the
beacon of hope and the rudder that will continue to aid
in rebuilding South Sudan and bring about the peace
and stability that has eluded the country for decades.
In that regard, the extension of the pre-transitional
period for an additional 100 days is a critical lifeline
to ensure an enabling environment to further address
the contentious issues, which, among others, include
the security arrangements and the state and boundary
issues, which are crucial components to the fulfilment
of the Revitalized Agreement.
We encourage the parties to continue dialogue
through peaceful means, utilizing the frameworks of
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) to bridge their divergent
views. Similarly, we urge the international community
to continue lending its support to the parties at this
critical juncture. Furthermore, we particularly call on
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar to continue
their efforts in forging collegial relations and rebuilding
trust so as to help to unify the country. Similarly, we
urge the Government of South Sudan and IGAD to
address the final status of Mr. Riek Machar in order to
facilitate his full and effective involvement in moving
forward with the peace process.
Through progress in the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement, we are encouraged by the
continued maintenance of the cessation of hostilities.
We call on all parties to continue on that trajectory and
to place primacy on the lives of the South Sudanese
people. Consequently, we call on all groups to join the
political process and, in that regard, request IGAD to
pursue its efforts in engaging Thomas Cirillo and Paul
Malong to join the Revitalized Agreement.
Furthermore, we welcome the Government’s
intention to further disburse $40 million for the
implementation of the Agreement. That is of paramount

S/PV. 8689

importance and it is particularly urgent that those funds
be disseminated in a prompt manner in order to avoid
any further delays in the implementation.
We encourage the Government to continue its efforts
to address the grave challenges of conflict-related
sexual violence and all human rights violations and to
hold perpetrators accountable. In addition, we continue
to be concerned about the dire humanitarian situation,
whose magnitude continues to dwarf the progress
that has been made. We therefore call on all parties
to prioritize human needs and on the international
community to continue to provide assistance to the
most vulnerable.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation to the countries of the region for their
support to the South Sudanese peace process. We
urge them to redouble their efforts in this extended
period to further bring all the parties together. We all
understand the ramifications of the failure of the peace
process and, as such, we should closely guard against
any reversal of its progress. The people of South Sudan
deeply yearn for peace, stability and development to
rebuild their lives.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
David Shearer and Ambassador Wronecka for their
insightful briefings.
I will first say a few words on the peace process,
which clearly remains at an extremely critical
juncture, as we have heard once again from Special
Representative Shearer. While it is positive that the
ceasefire has for the most part been respected, there
are many outstanding critical tasks that need to be
implemented. Those tasks, which are stipulated in
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan, must be implemented in order
to overcome the lack of progress. We fully agree with
the Secretary-General’s assessment that now is the time
to show political will during the 100-day extension
period to form a transitional Government.
We welcome the repeated personal meetings
between President Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar and
commend and take note of the statements recently issued
by the opposition and the Government, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer
mentioned. However, at the same time, we see the need
for concrete progress to be made on the implementation
of the peace agreement, especially regarding the still

19-413867/17

S/PV.8689

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

unresolved substantive issues. We urge the parties to
address key questions such as security arrangements,
establishing the security services and, in particular,
the number and boundaries of states. From our point
of view, it is important not to lose the momentum but,
ultimately, substance and inclusiveness are just as
crucial to the sustainability of the peace process.
As the representative of South Africa has just said,
we also see that the regional actors remain absolutely
crucial for making progress on these issues. It is
essential that the pressure of the region on the parties
to the conflict be maintained. We therefore very much
welcome the fact that the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and, in particular, the Sudan
and Uganda as guarantors of the peace agreement
successfully mediated reaching a consensus among
the parties as to how to continue the implementation
of the peace agreement. The region, particularly IGAD
and the African Union must remain committed, exert
pressure on all sides and support the pursuit of solutions
based on consensus between the parties. We would also
encourage IGAD to share its 50-day interim report
and its recommendations with the Security Council in
due course.
With regard to German activities, very briefly,
Germany has just made an additional contribution
of ‎ €5 million to the reconciliation, stabilization and
resilience trust fund established by the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United
Nations country team, which supports communitybased programmes that address underlying causes of
conflict and provide socioeconomic incentives for
peace. We certainly encourage others to join in that
concrete peacebuilding effort.
Turning to the humanitarian and the human rights
situation, improving the situation of the civilian
population remains our main priority, in particular
unimpeded access for humanitarian actors and UNMISS
and a tangible improvement in the human rights
situation. It is a truism but the attacks on humanitarian
workers must end immediately.
We are also extremely concerned by reports of
new recruitments, including of child soldiers, as well
as reports of soldiers leaving cantonment sites due to
the lack of food and resources. Measures to prevent and
deter violence against civilians must be implemented.
In addition, we join the call made by the SecretaryGeneral for all parties to address the unacceptable
8/17

17/12/2019

levels of sexual and gender-based violence and
hold accountable those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights.
That is a key responsibility of the South Sudanese
Government, which must build on the steps taken, with
the support of UNMISS, regarding mobile courts and
take measures to fully establish transitional justice, as
stipulated in the Revitalized Peace Agreement. I would
also like to highlight that sanctions against perpetrators
are at the Council’s disposal, and we should use them,
where appropriate, in line with resolution 2467 (2019).
Before I conclude, I will say a few words about the
sanctions. We would first of all like to commend the
Panel of Experts for its invaluable work and encourage
it to pursue its investigation into breaches of the
arms embargo and gross violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. The successful
implementation of the sanctions regime clearly depends
on close cooperation with countries of the region. We
therefore call for coherence and coordination among
all regional and international actors. The international
community must send the signal that continuing
gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including sexual and gender-based
violence, are unacceptable.
In conclusion, let me thank Ambassador Wronecka
for her tireless efforts as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan and for her dedication to
improving the situation of the people of South Sudan.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by thanking Mr. Shearer, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for South Sudan, for his
briefing and particularly for his commitment and that
of his team on the ground. I also thank Ambassador
Wronecka for her briefing and her work as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan.
There is an urgent need to form a transitional
Government. The postponement from 7 November to
20 February must be the last. It is indeed essential to
stay the course set out under the Revitalized Peace
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. That is our only option. The announcement
made this morning must therefore be acted upon.
France calls on the South Sudanese Government
and the opposition to use the next 65 days to create the
conditions necessary for the formation of a Government
19-41386

17/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of national unity. The tasks to be completed are known.
Some can be achieved immediately. In that regard, we
are pleased that the $40 million required to implement
the agreement have been provided to the National
Pre-transitional Committee. It is now necessary to
expedite the practical implementation of those funds
while ensuring accountability for the expenditure. The
Government must also issue a passport to Riek Machar
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
must clarify his status and guarantee him freedom
of movement.
France encourages the parties to show political will
and not to allow certain issues to delay the formation
of the Government of national unity. We are aware
that the issue of internal borders lies at the heart of the
conflict. That issue may not be resolved definitively in
the immediate future. In the short term, it is important
that the parties demonstrate a spirit of compromise and
agree at least on the number of states and a negotiation
mechanism. The parties also need to continue
making headway in the implementation of security
arrangements. Furthermore, both Government and
opposition officials must reaffirm their commitment to
upholding the ceasefire, which must be a top priority as
the lives of millions of civilians depend upon it.
We are acutely aware that the humanitarian
situation remains tragic, having been exacerbated by
floods that have affected more than 900,000 people
since November. I would recall that it befalls all parties
to guarantee safe and unhindered access to all those
in need of humanitarian assistance, which involves
the protection of humanitarian and medical personnel
as well as civilian infrastructure. It is also essential
to continue the fight against sexual violence and the
recruitment of child soldiers. The establishment of the
hybrid court under the agreement would help to combat
impunity and reduce the scale of the violence. In that
connection, I would like to ask Mr. Shearer how soon
that could happen.
Moreover, peace will be sustainable only if it is
inclusive. The active and meaningful participation of
women and respect for the quotas provided for in the
agreement are crucial. An inclusive peace also requires
an open political space. However, the recent incidences
of violations of the freedom of expression and violence
against journalists are very worrisome.
The guarantors of the Revitalized Peace
Agreement and the stakeholders in the region should

S/PV. 8689

continue in their endeavours. In fact, only concerted
regional pressure will encourage the parties to make
the necessary concessions. In that regard, France
congratulates the Sudan on its assumption of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
chairmanship. We encourage the Sudanese authorities
to remain fully mobilized on this issue. Our appeal also
concerns the Ugandan authorities, which have a crucial
role to play in ensuring compliance with the new
pre-transitional timeline. It is important that the new
monitoring mechanism announced by IGAD can be set
up as soon as possible and that the group of five African
States mandated by the African Union to support
IGAD’s mediation efforts in South Sudan be able to do
so fully. The Council as a whole must reflect on the best
way for the United Nations to support regional efforts.
The good offices and technical expertise provided by
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan are valuable
and should be continued.
In conclusion, the Council has put in place a
sanctions regime that allows us to list any individual
who may hinder the smooth conduct of the peace
process. It is important that the Council use the full
range of tools and leverage at its disposal in order to
ensure that the peace process is not disrupted.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Shearer and
Ambassador Wronecka for their important briefings.
We are concerned that, even today, we are facing
an extension of 100 days to the pre-transitional period
and that the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan remains
largely unimplemented, leaving controversial issues
unresolved. Nevertheless, beyond resolving issues
such as state delimitation, cantonment and military
redeployment, it is important that those pending
issues in the process be addressed from a humancentred approach.
The implementation of the agreement has not only
political implications, but also constitutes a moral
and ethical obligation with untold sociopolitical and
economic benefits for a people that has already suffered
enough. In that connection, we welcome the recent
meeting between President Kiir and Mr. Machar, in
which the unresolved issues that have thus far hindered
the implementation of the revitalized agreement were
once again up for discussion. Both parties announced
their decision to form the Government of national

19-413869/17

S/PV.8689

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

unity, even if they fail to resolve all their differences
before the deadline. Moreover, we are pleased with the
Government’s pledge of $40 million for implementation
efforts, which we hope will be fulfilled in its entirety
within the established time frame.
We regret, however, that this very backdrop
of political harmony is being overshadowed by
intercommunal tensions, as well as a dire humanitarian
situation. Approximately 40 per cent of the population
is suffering acute food insecurity, which has been
worsened by recent floods that have submerged entire
communities and led the Government to declare a state
of emergency. In that regard, it is vital that, in parallel
with the political process, programmes be promoted
for the development of resilience and the mitigation of
risks resulting from climate change, including water
and food scarcities and climate-induced vulnerability.
We are also concerned by the ongoing widespread
sexual violence in conflict, as well as the obstructions
faced by United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and other humanitarian personnel in
accessing those in need. We condemn the attacks against
humanitarian workers in recent months, while calling
on the parties involved to put an end to the violence. We
strongly reiterate our appeal for all possible measures
to be taken to end sexual and gender-based violence and
the recruitment and use of child soldiers. We also call
for the signing of the memorandum of understanding
on the hybrid court for South Sudan. In that vein, and
as a positive note, we commend the efforts of UNMISS
in coordinating and expanding mobile courts to areas
with limited access to justice and its continuous
rapprochement with the South Sudanese police and proMachar forces for the implementation of action plans
to address conflict-related sexual violence. We would
also like to underscore the need to continue promoting
the meaningful participation of women, youth and
civil society in the formation of the Government of
national unity.
In conclusion, we understand that the process of
forming the Government of national unity must be
focused on confidence-building among all stakeholders.
Inclusivity within the process must be ensured but,
above all, it must take into account the legitimate
aspirations of the Sudanese people to achieve a just,
comprehensive and sustainable peace that addresses
the root causes of the crisis. There is a clear way
forward — if both leaders decide to take it, thereby
10/17

17/12/2019

assuming their responsibility to build a peaceful future
for their people.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Special Representative David Shearer for his very
informative presentation. Allow me to complement
today’s briefing with some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
Poland welcomes last week’s meeting between
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar, which we
see as an important step towards the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We consider
those face-to-face meetings to be an extremely valuable
confidence-building measure, but they cannot replace
genuine implementation of the provisions of the
peace accord, in particular with regard to security
arrangements and the number of states and their
boundaries. It is our firm belief that a functioning,
inclusive transitional Government is what the citizens
of South Sudan both expect and deserve. We call on all
signatories to the peace agreement to work together in a
spirit of goodwill and compromise so as not to fail their
citizens any longer.
We took note of another extension of the
pre-transitional period, but we remain deeply concerned
with the pace of putting the necessary arrangements in
place. We are also increasingly worried that there is not
enough political will among the signatories to step up
efforts in preparation for a successful transition and the
formation of the transitional Government. Nevertheless,
we welcome the decision of the Government of South
Sudan to allocate funds for the implementation of
security arrangements to speed up the necessary
processes in the pre-transitional period to ensure a
unity Government is formed in February 2020.
We remain convinced that there is no durable peace
without inclusiveness. We call on all South Sudanese
political actors to put into practice the provisions of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan with regard to women’s
representation in the pre-transition, transitional and
other decision-making bodies and institutions. We
believe that the participation of women in the political
process in South Sudan is indispensable. Only by
ensuring inclusive implementation does the Revitalized
Peace Agreement stand a chance of being durable.
While we take it as a good sign that the permanent
ceasefire has been largely respected across South
19-41386

17/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan, we are concerned about the clashes in Central
and Western Equatoria and their consequences on
the civilian population. We remain deeply concerned
about the cumulative effects of years of prolonged
conflict, persisting humanitarian crisis and levels of
intercommunal violence, as well as serious human
rights violations and abuses, which include grave
violations against children and incidents of conflictrelated sexual violence. We call on the Government to
spare no effort in bringing the perpetrators to justice
and to fulfil its obligations with regard to protection
of civilians.
Another important factor, crucial for the
sustainability of peace in South Sudan, is regional
engagement. We commend the involvement of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
its member States and continue to believe that the
region’s role in ensuring the implementation of the
Revitalized Peace Agreement and holding the parties
to it accountable cannot be overestimated. We are
also convinced that the issue of the status of Mr. Riek
Machar should be resolved as soon as possible.
Since it is most probably my last chance to speak
in the Chamber on issues related to South Sudan, allow
me to conclude by expressing Poland’s appreciation and
gratitude for Special Representative David Shearer and
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, as well as the
United Nations country team and humanitarian actors
in South Sudan, for their dedication, professionalism
and tireless efforts in supporting peace and stability in
South Sudan.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): First of all, I would like to thank Special
Representative David Shearer for his briefing. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Wronecka for her briefing
and guidance on the work of the Sanctions Committee
over the past two years. The South Sudan sanctions
regime remains a useful tool, and the Security Council
should not hesitate to use it when the situation requires
such action.
We will soon be halfway through the 100-day
extension of the transition period, and we must note
the little progress that has been made on the key
issues of implementing the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South.
We take note, however, of the recent statements by
President Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar and urge them to
implement them. The challenges of implementing the

S/PV. 8689

peace process are many, complex, well-known and have
been recalled by the various speakers today. While we
tend to focus on those difficulties from the point of
view of political leaders, I would like to highlight some
challenges today from the point of view of the people
of South Sudan.
First, civilians need all fighting to stop in order
for them to rebuild their lives, homes and livelihoods.
Perhaps the most important achievement of the current
peace process is the ceasefire, which is broadly pursued.
It is entirely up to the political leaders to ensure that
their troops respect the ceasefire. However, we are
concerned that fighting continues in parts of Equatoria
and that inter-communal violence — which accounts for
85 per cent of civilian casualties — sexual violence and
crime persist throughout the country. Those conditions
confirm the need for civilian protection efforts by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). It
seems to us that conditions are not yet conducive to the
voluntary, safe, dignified and well-informed return of
displaced persons, nearly half of whom are children.
Secondly, the people of South Sudan need justice.
Let me give a concrete, and unfortunately demonstrative,
example of that. The July 2018 joint report by UNMISS
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on attacks against civilians in Unity
state identified three individuals who were likely to
exercise command over those who were committing
the violations. One of those three individuals was the
Commissioner of Gany county. Information gathered
by the United Nations suggests that that individual
ordered officers of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
and youth groups to kill, rape and abduct civilians,
recruit children, burn and loot houses and commit other
atrocities, many of which could constitute war crimes.
Initially, following the report, that Commissioner was
dismissed. However, shortly thereafter, he was not only
promoted militarily but, in November of this year, he
was reinstated as Commissioner in the same place.
We therefore urge the Government to put an end to the
culture of impunity, thoroughly investigate all cases
of abuse and bring to justice those responsible for the
crimes. In that regard, we remind everyone of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union’s call for the
Republic of South Sudan to rapidly operationalize all
transitional justice mechanisms, including the hybrid
court for South Sudan.
Thirdly, the people of South Sudan must be able
to exercise their civil and political rights. Some have

19-4138611/17

S/PV.8689

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

17/12/2019

been prevented from freely participating in political
discussions as part of the peace process. The civic and
political space is under threat. In that regard, we are
particularly concerned about the seemingly uncontrolled
powers of the national security services. We have
received reports of illegal detention of members of civil
society and the media, including cases of torture and
sexual abuse by members of that service. We call for
the urgent and thorough investigation of those reports.
In addition, political prisoners and prisoners of war
must be released without delay. There is also a need to
ensure the full, effective and meaningful participation
of women, young people and civil society in the
peace process.

to completing the tasks of the pretransitional phase
before the end of the additional 100-day extension
period, especially those relating to mandates in terms
of numbers and scope, the grouping, unification and
training of forces and the formation of the transitional
Government of national unity, in accordance with
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We also
thank the other countries of the region, especially the
Sudan, Uganda and Ethiopia, for their active role in
making peace, and we appreciate the support given
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
in connection with those efforts, most recently its
10 November communiqué.

Fourthly, the population is suffering from a severe
humanitarian crisis. As the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/936)indicates, the extreme gravity of
the humanitarian situation underscores the need to
restore peace. The World Food Programme has said
that it is engaged in a race against time to feed millions
of people. Hunger is on the rise due to droughts and
floods, but also political instability in the context of a
long-term humanitarian crisis. Significant obstacles to
humanitarian access persist, whether due to hostility or
attacks on humanitarian personnel and goods. Experts
believe that the prospects for food insecurity have never
been worse.

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we welcome the fact that the ceasefire has continued
to hold in most regions of South Sudan, and we hope
that conditions will be conducive to strengthening the
safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their areas. We call on
the international community to redouble its efforts to
alleviate the humanitarian burden on the population,
especially in the areas of health, education and housing,
and underscore the references in resolution 2417 (2018) to
starvation and conflict. Starvation is central to relapses
into conflict and we are concerned that more than
6 million people are undernourished or malnourished.
At the same time, we welcome the progressive reduction
in the number of persons in civilian protection sites at
UNMISS, and reaffirm that the protection of civilians
remains the primary responsibility of the Government
of South Sudan.

Those challenges represent only part of the daily
suffering and pain that the people of South Sudan have
been subjected to for years. Those belonging to the
political elite hold the keys to the solution. The time
has come for them to get to work.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
for his briefing. I also thank Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka for her briefing on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015). I thank
her and her team for their excellent stewardship of the
work of the Committee over the past two years.
I would like to discuss three issues: political
developments, the Mission’s mandate and the
humanitarian situation.
First, with regard to political developments, we
welcome the meetings between President Salva Kiir
Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar last month in Uganda
and more recently in Juba, as well as the commitment
12/17

Thirdly, with regard to the work and mandate of
the Mission, we appreciate the role of UNMISS in
South Sudan and we commend its good offices and the
health, humanitarian and legal services it provides, all
of which contribute to the consolidation of peace by
giving priority to political solutions. We also call for
assurance of the freedom of movement and humanitarian
assistance, supported by UNMISS, in accordance with
the status-of-forces agreement and relevant Security
Council resolutions regarding the mandate of the
Mission. We condemn the kidnapping and killing
of volunteers of the International Organization for
Migration in late October 2018 and remind everyone of
their responsibilities under international human rights
law and international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, as this is the last meeting of the
Council in which our delegation will discuss the
19-41386

17/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

situation in South Sudan, we express our hope that this
dossier will see positive developments and promote
greater unity among Council members. Kuwait recalls
the historically close relationship of brotherhood and
development that it has shared with South Sudan for
more than 45 years. We therefore look forward to
pursuing bilateral cooperation in the near future and
to playing a renewed role in supporting South Sudan
through one of the most delicate stages in its history,
towards security, stability and development in a friendly
South Sudan and in order to generate hope for a future
full of peace and prosperity.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting. I too
join my fellow speakers in expressing our appreciation
to Special Representative David Shearer for his briefing
and tireless efforts to ensure the effective contribution
of the United Nations to peace and stability in
South Sudan.
Like other speakers, we also thank our sister,
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, for her briefing on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015). Indonesia has always been
grateful for her excellent work and leadership of
that Committee.
Under United States and South African leadership
of the Council we have discussed developments in
Juba, and we have continuously sent a message for
peace and reconciliation. I think that is an important
message and I hope that the transitional Government
can be established as soon as possible. In that regard,
my statement will focus on three key issues.
First, on the political situation, Indonesia maintains
its conviction that the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan provides an unparalleled opportunity for peace
and stability in South Sudan. We take note of the
extension of the pretransitional period by 100 days.
The clock is ticking fast, and some people have already
noted that we have fewer than 65 days to go. Parties
to the agreement must utilize that extension to make
substantive progress in resolving the outstanding
issues. Like others have done, we urge all parties to
embrace goodwill and compromise, prioritizing the
interests of the South Sudanese people. We welcome
the joint statement made a few hours ago in Juba by
President Salva Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar on
the formation of a Government. Face-to-face meetings

S/PV. 8689

will certainly provide greater results and we welcome
such efforts.
My delegation also echoes the call for the
expeditious and transparent disbursement of funds
for the agreement, noting that it could contribute
to enhancing international confidence and support.
The proactive and continued engagement of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union (AU) and guarantors of the agreement is
crucial, including efforts to facilitate dialogue between
senior leaders and supervise progress on critical tasks.
We support the role of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) in providing advice and
technical assistance to support the implementation of
the agreement.
Secondly, on the security situation, the ceasefire
across the country must be preserved. We concur with the
Secretary-General that it is “a fundamental achievement
of the peace process” (S/2019/936, para. 102). We have
already witnessed an overall reduction in political
violence, except in the greater Equatoria region.
My delegation also draws encouragement from — to
borrow the Special Representative’s language from his
address to the AU Peace and Security Council — “a
real and palpable desire for peace, particularly at the
grassroots level”, manifested in confidence and trustbuilding activities. Ensuring peace at the grassroots
level is very important.
Nevertheless, recent tribal clashes and other
internal fighting in areas that have been relatively calm
over the past few months demonstrate that the security
situation remains fragile, and of course the Council
must continue to monitor that. Indonesia stresses the
need for full protection of civilians and observance
of international humanitarian law. We are concerned
by multiple incidents that have affected human rights
and protection situations, especially those directed at
civilians. Impunity will prolong the conflict cycle and
jeopardize the credibility of the peace process. That is
not what we want at this crucial stage. In that regard,
UNMISS plays an important role in strengthening
the judicial presence in the country, including by
coordinating support for mobile courts. We regret
that UNMISS remains subjected to access restrictions
and other impediments, in violation of the statusof-forces agreement, which potentially impedes the
Mission’s ability to implement its mandates, including
to protect civilians.

19-4138613/17

S/PV.8689

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Thirdly, on the humanitarian situation, we must
not forget that efforts to bring about peace and stability
in South Sudan are taking place against the backdrop
of a troubling humanitarian situation. There are
7.5 million people in need of humanitarian assistance,
among whom are those impacted by recent flooding. It
is expected that 4.54 million people are severely food
insecure. A durable solution is desperately needed
for the 1.5 million internally displaced persons and
2.2 million refugees. The operational environment
for humanitarian actors in South Sudan continues to
be challenging and dangerous. Humanitarian actors
must be provided with the space necessary to deliver
humanitarian assistance.
I conclude by reaffirming Indonesia’s support for
peace and stability in South Sudan, including through
its contribution to UNMISS.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, and Ambassador
Wronecka for their briefings. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Wronecka for her work as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan.
Since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan in September 2018, South Sudan has
seen a drastic reduction in conflict, the ceasefire
has been maintained in most parts of the country
and the security situation has continued to improve.
China welcomes those developments. Meanwhile, the
country still faces challenges in achieving peace and
stability amid a dire humanitarian situation and a
further extension of the deadline for the formation of
the Revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity. The top priority now is to continue to assist the
country in maintaining the hard-earned momentum
towards peace. The implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement is key to a political resolution of the issue
of South Sudan. The assistance of the international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
should focus on facilitating the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement by all parties through greater
efforts in the following three areas.
First, the leadership of the Government of South
Sudan should be fully respected. The parties in South
Sudan bear the primary responsibility for implementing
the Revitalized Agreement. The international
14/17

17/12/2019

community should enhance communication with all
parties, particularly the Government, listen carefully
to their opinions and proposals and provide the
necessary funding and material and technical support
on the political and security fronts, based on the
country’s needs.
Secondly, support to the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) should continue
so that it can play its role as the main mediation
channel. The United Nations and the Security Council
should enhance coordination with the African Union,
IGAD, other regional and subregional organizations
and the countries of the region, including the Sudan.
They should support their mediation efforts, focusing
on helping the Government of South Sudan and the
opposition consolidate mutual trust and confidence and
maintain a dialogue in order to reach consensus as soon
as possible on such core issues as security arrangements
and the number and boundaries of states.
Thirdly, humanitarian and economic assistance
to South Sudan should continue. The international
community should help it address issues such as
food security and the return and resettlement of
displaced persons, as well as increasing investment in
agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education, health
care and other fields in order to improve the capacity of
the South Sudanese people to rebuild their homes and
resume development.
China highly commends the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan for its important contribution
to maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan and
supports the Mission in its assistance to the South
Sudanese parties in implementing the Revitalized
Agreement and advancing the peace process. China
has been a consistent supporter of the peace process
in South Sudan. To help the country implement the
Revitalized Agreement, we are sending a batch of food
and material assistance to South Sudan and working
actively to ensure that it is delivered. We are ready to
work with the international community to continue to
play a constructive role in achieving peace, stability
and development in South Sudan.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank today’s briefers, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. David
Shearer and the Ambassador of Poland, Ms. Wronecka,
for their information. I also want to thank the Ambassador
for her confident and professional stewardship of the
19-41386

17/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan for the past two years.
The people of South Sudan are indeed living through
a watershed moment in their history, and our task is to
help them deal with the challenges facing their young
nation. Like all of our colleagues, we are unquestionably
disappointed that it has not been possible to form the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity
by the previously agreed deadline of 12 November.
However, we urge against overdramatizing the
situation or writing off the efforts that have been made
in that regard. We have observed some progress in the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, and it is important that the parties demonstrate
their willingness to engage in dialogue and overcome
differences by seeking compromise solutions. In that
connection, we have noted the meetings between Salva
Kiir and Riek Machar, which we have consistently
called for and which have now become regular. We are
sure that such contact is indispensable and can help
generate the necessary momentum for South Sudan’s
reconciliation process. We would especially like to draw
attention to the fact that just a few hours ago President
Kiir announced that an agreement in principle had
been reached on forming the Cabinet. We await further
details and hope the agreement will be implemented as
soon as possible.
We feel compelled to point to a number of things
that give us grounds for a certain degree of optimism.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/936) notes a
drop in the level of armed violence and in the number
of intercommunal clashes. In tandem with the improved
security situation, humanitarian access has improved
as well, and the number of human rights violations
has noticeably decreased. All of that is creating a
positive trend in the return of South Sudanese refugees
and internally displaced persons to their homes,
which we believe is linked to the implementation of
confidence-building measures and to contacts among
the warring parties on the ground. But of course the
main achievement — and here we concur with the
Secretary-General’s opinion — is that the parties
are complying with the provisions of the ceasefire.
We call on the South Sudanese to adhere strictly to
those agreements.
We understand that the decision to extend the
pre-transition period is through force of circumstance
and certainly not a reflection of the aspirations of the

S/PV. 8689

South Sudanese and their neighbours. We have taken
note of the position of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), which welcomed the measure.
We hope that the South Sudanese parties will take the
necessary steps to resolve the outstanding issues on the
agenda. As far as the non-signatories to the Revitalized
Agreement are concerned, we urge them to join the
concerted process of building the State without delay.
We believe it is important that regional players
take the lead in supporting the South Sudanese peace
process, and in that connection we welcome the efforts
of the African Union, IGAD, the Sudan, South Africa
and Uganda. They must maintain a united approach that
will enable them to act in the spirit of the principle of
African solutions to African problems. In our view, only
the full and comprehensive compliance of all the parties
with the obligations they have undertaken can improve
their mutual trust and ensure that the mistakes of the
past are not repeated. We were pleased with the news
that the South Sudanese authorities have earmarked
$40 million for the continued implementation of projects
under the Revitalized Agreement, in particular for the
establishment of a united armed force, which again
emphasizes that the parties want to reach an agreement.
In the context of advancing a settlement in South
Sudan, we urge against going overboard on pressuring
the country with sanctions, and especially unilateral
restrictions. The encouraging indicators we are seeing
now have been made possible largely thanks to the
contribution of regional mediators. Not to mention
that at one stage it was arms-embargo activity that was
preventing regional security initiatives in support of
the settlement process from being implemented. We
believe that once the people of South Sudan have been
able to reach agreement on the whole gamut of issues,
we will need to review the sanctions regime with the
aim of adapting it to the realities on the ground.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Allow me to join
others in thanking Special Representative Shearer, not
only for his briefing, but for his work and that of his
entire team on the ground in South Sudan. We really
enjoyed coming to see Mr. Shearer. We were impressed
by what he and his team were doing, and we really want
to thank him.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka very much for her tireless efforts as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan.

19-4138615/17

S/PV.8689

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This is our first Council meeting since the 100-day
extension, but it is not the first time that the parties have
failed to deliver progress. We are over one-third of the
way through the 100-day extension and I believe that the
Council must repeat and reinforce the clear and united
message that we delivered collectively in Juba, that all
parties must seize this opportunity and agree the steps
that are necessary to form an inclusive Government.
Those steps include, of course, efforts to make
progress on cantonment. We also heard from Special
Representative Shearer today about the importance of
food and resources being delivered to those cantonment
sites, as well as training being conducted and genuine
reintegration taking place in order to ensure security
for all in South Sudan.
I also very much want to pay tribute to the efforts
of the Deputy President of South Africa, Mr. David
Mabuza, on the thorny question of States in South
Sudan. That is a crucial issue, one that we perhaps have
to recognize may not be fully resolvable before the 100
days are up, but we do need the parties to commit to
continuing to engage in that process, and I very much
welcome the efforts of the Deputy President of South
Africa in that regard.
We of course welcome the recent meetings and
positive statements that have taken place between
President Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Machar, but I have to
say that so far we have not seen those shift the dial.
I want to stress today the importance of actions and
results, as well as statements and promises. I echo the
need expressed by others to resolve the status of Mr. Riek
Machar. I just do not understand how he does not hold
a South Sudanese passport while he is busy negotiating
to be part of the South Sudanese Government. I hope
that that can be sorted out quickly as a gesture of good
faith and that his status can be resolved by the region.
We strongly welcome the region’s engagement and
leadership to achieve those ends. History has shown
that without external pressure, the parties fail to act. We
therefore urge our partners in the region, particularly
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), to redouble their efforts to ensure progress.
We believe that the release of the IGAD 50-day report
will mark an important moment. The Security Council
must work hand in hand with IGAD — that is key. And
I think that we should consider in our consultations
how we could deepen that cooperation.
16/17

17/12/2019

We also need to look beyond the 100-day extension
and issues around South Sudan’s future. It is deeply
concerning that subnational communal violence remains
at worrying levels across the country. The persistence
of conflict-related sexual violence, as evidenced in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/936), is
extremely worrying. All parties to the conflict must
take immediate action to stop conflict-related sexual
violence. We welcome the focus of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan on this important issue and its
support to efforts to end impunity for such crimes. I
want to strongly support the intervention made by the
representative from Belgium on that point and echo
his concerns about the reappointment of the Gany
County Commissioner.
Humanitarian partners continue to face high
levels of bureaucratic impediments to humanitarian
access and serious insecurity. The urgency, as others
have said, has been only further exacerbated by the
recent flooding — the worst in 30 years — which has
affected almost 1 million people. The United Kingdom
contributed $210 million in 2018 in that regard and we
continue to do all that we can to improve the situation.
In closing, let me stress that the ongoing ceasefire
must continue to hold, and the two leaders must
unequivocally commit to that ceasefire and to peace.
The Council must stand ready to support the parties,
in coordination with IGAD and the African Union, to
support the parties forward on the pathway to peace
and to make the necessary compromises. That cannot
happen unless the best interests of the people of South
Sudan are prioritized over the self-interest of the elite.
There must be consequences for those who do not live
up to their responsibilities to bring about a lasting
peace in South Sudan.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, for his important
briefing. We are also grateful for the information
provided by Ambassador Joanna Wronecka and offer
her our special appreciation for her excellent work
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan.
Peru, which is closely monitoring the renewed peace
process in South Sudan, reiterates its disappointment at
the continued delays in completing the required tasks
with a view to forming of a revitalized transitional
Government of national unity. Those outstanding
19-41386

17/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

issues contribute only to generating uncertainty among
the people of South Sudan and increasing ethnic and
intercommunal violence. We trust that the parties,
aware of their responsibilities to ensure the future of
the country, will fulfil their commitments and make the
necessary progress within the framework established.
In that regard, we stress the urgency of enabling greater
progress in transitional security arrangements. The
joint security mechanism workshop that was convened
in November was a positive step in that regard, and we
hope that it will result in concrete measures to enable
the inauguration of the transitional Government.
We are confident that the recent meeting between
President Kiir and Mr. Machar will contribute to
achieving that objective and to laying the groundwork
for progress on the issue of the number of states and
boundaries. We call on the parties to pursue their
dialogue and identify a process that will enable
those disputes to be resolve progressively, while also
preventing conflict from resurging in different areas of
the country.
We are concerned about the persistence of ethnic and
intercommunal violence and sporadic clashes between
the Government and opposition forces in the Equatorias
region. We reiterate our call on non-signatory groups to
join the commitment to peace in South Sudan, because
dialogue is the only means through which lasting peace
can be achieved. We regret the continued reports of
incidents of human rights violations and abuses, which
have resulted in the deaths of 133 civilians in the past
three months, as the current situation in that territory
is one of impunity. At the same time, we are also

S/PV. 8689

concerned that despite a decrease in political violence,
conflict-related sexual violence has persisted. We hope
that the endorsements of the respective action plans of
various armed groups will be accompanied by concrete
measures to hold the perpetrators of those crimes
accountable for their actions.
We also regret that, despite the decrease in conflict,
the humanitarian situation remains critical. The World
Food Programme has recently warned of a possible
famine in South Sudan that could affect more than
5.5 million people, as a result of the disastrous impacts
of drought and flooding and the fragile economic
situation in South Sudan. Despite that uncertain
scenario, we hope that the collective interest will
prevail and enable a definitive ceasefire, as well as the
allocation of the announced funds for the transparent
and effective implementation of the agreement.
I conclude by expressing my conviction that the
Council will remain united in providing the support
and political follow-up required to cement the peace
process in South Sudan, in close coordination with the
regional leadership carried out by the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
whose actions will play a decisive role in what we
hope will soon be a successful transition period and in
consolidating peace.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussions on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

19-4138617/17
