'A
UNITED

NATIONS
Distr.
GENERAL

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

A/ES-7/1
21 July 1980
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

Seventh emergency special session

CONVENING OF THE SESSION
Note hy the Secretary-General
1.
In a letter dated 1 July 198O addressed to the Secretary-General (see annex),
the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United Nations requested an
emergency special session of the General Assembly to discuss the item entitled
"Question of Palestine".
2.
Upon receipt of the aforementioned letter, the Secretary-General, in a note
dated 2 July I98O, transmitted the text to Member States requesting them, bearing
in mind his responsibilities imder rule 9 (b) of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, to inform him whether they concurred in the request for the
convening of an emergency special session.
3.
In a note dated 21 July, the Secretary-General informed Member States that the
majority of Members had concurred in Senegal’s request and that, accordingly, the
seventh emergencjr special session would open at United Nations Headquarters,
New York, at 10.30 a.m. on Tuesday, 22 July I98O.

h.

The provisional agenda of the session will be issued as document A/ES-T/2.

80-17317

a /;::u y /i

Kiif^lich

Гаге 2

ANNEX
Letter dated 1 July I980 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General

In paragraph 7 of its resolution 3U/6 5 A, adopted on 29 November 1979, the
General Assembly once again urged the Security Coiincil to consider and take,
as soon as possible, a decision on the recommendations of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, contained in
document A/31/35 and endorsed by the Assembly in its resolution 31/20, 32/UO and
33/28 A.
At the repeated urging of the Committee, the Security Council discussed this
matter in the course of seven m.eetings during March and April. A draft resolution,
presented by Tunisia (S/13911), was not adopted owing to a negative vote of one of
the permanent members of the Council. Further efforts have since been pursued but
have failed completely to achieve any concrete results towards the acceptance of
the Committee’s recommendations endorsed by the General Assembly.
In paragraph 8 of resolution 3^^/б5 A, the General Assembly authorized and
requested the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, in the event of the Security Council failing to take a
decision on the Committee's recommendations by 31 March I98O, to consider that
situation and to make the suggestions it deemed appropriate.
In these circiimstances, and in terms of its mandate, the Committee, over which
I have the honour to preside, has considered the situation as required by the
General Assembly in paragraph 8 of its resolution 3Н/6 5 A. Having in mind the
escalating tension brought about by the events that have occurred in the area
during the intervening period, which further aggravate the already existing serious
threat to international peace and security, and the continuing failure of the •
Security Council, because of lack of unanimity of its permanent members, to
exercise its primary responsibility in this respect, the Committee has suggested
that an emergency special session of the General Assembly should be held to discuss
the item entitled "Question of Palestine".
In the light of the foregoing. I, as representative of Senegal, request that
an emergency special session of the General Assembly be held pursuant to
resolution 377 A (v) in order to discuss this very important question.
I shall be very grateful if you will kindly initiate the procedures for the
emergency special session to bo held.

(Signed)

Falilou KAIŒ
