General Auembly-Thirteenth Session

Taking note of the important assistance already given
by France to the Trust Territory of Togoland under
French administration,
Considering the useful and constructive role that the
United Nations and the specialized agencies have played
in the past in assisting various countries in their development plans,
RecaUing the recent establishment of the Special
Fund and of the Economic Commission for Africa,
Considering that requests for assistance to Trust Territories deserve sympathetic.consideration by the United
Nations,
Invites the Secretary-General, the Special Fund, the
Technical Assistance Board and the specialized agencies
to give urgent and sympathetic consideration to any
requests for assistance concer:ning Togoland, submitted
through the Administering Authority.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
127 4 (XIII). Attainment of sell-government or
independence by Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 558 (VI) of 18 January 1952
and subsequent resolutions on the same subject, inviting the Administering Authority of each Trust Territory, inter alia, to estimate the period of time in which
it would attain self-government or independence, and
recommending that the Administering Authorities take
the necessary measures for the attainment of this goal
at an early date,
Having examined part I, chapter V, of the report of
the Trusteeship Council, 11
l. Notes that by the measures already taken or to be
taken by some Administering Authorities in consultation with the United Nations and the peoples of the
Territories concerned, Togoland under French administration, the Cameroons under United Kingdom administration, the Cameroons under French administration, Somaliland under Italian administration and
Western Samoa under New Zealand administration,
are expected to achieve in 1960 the objective of the
Trusteeship System laid down in Article 76 b of the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Invites the Administering Authorities concerned
to formulate, in respect of the remaining Trust Territories, early successive intermediate targets and dates
in the fields of political, economic, social and educational
development of these Territories so as to create, as soon
as possible, the pre-conditions for the attainment of
self-government or independence;
3. Reaffirms its resolutions 558 (VI) of 18 January
1952, 1064 (XI) of 26 February 1957, 1207 (XII)
of 13 December 1957 and other pertinent resolutions
on the same subject, and once again urges the Administering Authorities to implement the terms of those resolutions;
4. Requests the Trusteeship Council to report to the
General Assembly at its fourteenth session on the progress made in implementing the present resolution.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
u Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 4, (A/3822),
vol. J.

1275 (XIII). Effects of the European Economic
Community on the development of certain
Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 1210 (XII) of 13 December 1957,
Noting with concern that the Administering Authorities having thus far submitted no information on the
possible effects of the association with· the European
Economic Community of the Trust" Territories under
their administration,
Considering that the association of Trust Territories
with the European Economic Community may have a
significant impact upon their development towards independence or self-government,
1. Requests again the Administering Authorities to
include in their annual reports information concerning
the effects of the association with the European Economic Community of the Trust Territories under their
administration on the economic development of these ·
Territories and on their development towards independence or self-government;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council to examine this
question at its next session and to report to the General
Assembly at its fourteenth session;
3. Resolves to resume consideration of this question
at its fourteenth session.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1276 (XIII). Dissemination of information on
the United Nations and on the International
Trusteeship System in Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the opinions expressed in its resolutions
556 (VI) of 18 January 1952 and 754 (VIII) of 9 December 1953 that it is essential that the peoples of the
Trust Territories should receive adequate information
concerning the United Nations and the International
Trusteeship System,
Recalling that in resolution 754 (VIII) the General
Assembly, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General
to initiate at the earliest possible date, on the basis of
the suggestions furnished by the Administering Authorities or of his own knowledge of appropriate information channels, or by making use of both of these
sources together, a direct flow of information material
addressed to the general public in Trust Territories,
Noting the report submitted by \he Secretary-General to the Trusteeship Council1 2 under Council resolution 36 (III) of 8 July 1948,
1. Considers that the task of dissemination of information on the United Nations and on the International
Trusteeship System could be substantially facilitated
by the establishment of United Nations information
centres in or near the Trust Territories;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the report of the Committee of Experts on United
Nations Public Information 13 and the decision, if any,
12
Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twh1ly-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 10, document T/1378.
11
Official Records of the Grncral Assem/Jly, Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 55, document A/3928.
