UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26668
30 October 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3301st meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 October 1993, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The question concerning
Haiti", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council continues to insist on full and unconditional
compliance with the Governors Island Agreement and the early return of
President Aristide and full democracy to Haiti, in accordance with relevant
resolutions and statements by the President of the Council. It reaffirms
that the Governors Island Agreement remains fully in force as the only
valid framework for the solution of the crisis in Haiti which continues to
threaten peace and security in the region.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned by the suffering of the
Haitian people which results directly from the refusal by the military
authorities to comply with the Governors Island process.
"The Security Council stresses that the signatories to the Governors
Island Agreement remain obligated to comply in full with its provisions.
The Security Council condemns the fact that General Cedras and the military
authorities have not so far fulfilled their obligations under that
Agreement. It moreover deplores the fact that the Haitian military leaders
have fostered and perpetuated in Haiti a political and security environment
which prevents the President’s return to Haiti as provided for
in paragraph 9 of the Governors Island Agreement.
"The Security Council expresses its support for the invitation by the
Special Envoy of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations and the
Organization of American States to all parties to meet next week solely to
resolve the remaining obstacles to full implementation of the Governors
Island Agreement. Further, it reaffirms its determination to maintain and
effectively enforce sanctions on Haiti until the commitments made on
Governors Island are honoured, and to consider strengthening them, in
accordance with its resolutions 873 (1993) and 875 (1993) and its
Presidential statement of 25 October 1993 (S/26633), if the military
authorities continue to interrupt the democratic transition. In this
regard, it requests the Secretary-General to report urgently to the
Council."
----93-59570 (E)

301093
