S/PRST/2006/14

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 March 2006
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5400th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 March 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its full support for the International
Working Group and endorses its fifth final communiqué of 17 March 2006. It
commends Prime Minister Charles Konan Banny for his initiatives, taken in
cooperation with President Laurent Gbagbo, which gave a new momentum to
the peace process, and reiterates its full support for him. It also welcomes the
efforts of Mr. Antonio Monteiro and encourages the Secretary-General to
appoint a new High Representative for the elections as soon as possible.
“The Security Council welcomes the progress achieved in recent weeks,
in particular the meeting of the entire Cabinet, the establishment of the
Independent Electoral Commission, the organization of exams in the North,
and the preparation of operations of identification of the populations and of
disarmament.
“The Security Council urges Ivorian leaders to fulfil all their
commitments, in particular those made in Yamoussoukro on 28 February 2006,
and to rapidly implement the road map, in good faith and in a spirit of trust, in
order to organize free, fair, open and transparent elections by 31 October 2006.
It underlines the urgency of progress in the identification process, the
establishment of the electoral registers and the commencement of the
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration programme.
“The Security Council calls on donor countries to provide the Prime
Minister with all the necessary support for the full and immediate
implementation of the road map.
“The Security Council, nevertheless, reiterates its grave concern at the
situation in the West. It urges the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) to continue its redeployment in this region. It calls also for the return
of this region to civilian authority.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the persistence of violations of
human rights, the attacks against members of the Government, the obstacles to
the freedom of movement of impartial forces, and the incitements to hatred
and violence in the media. In this regard, it requests the Ivorian authorities to
guarantee, in close liaison with UNOCI, that all steps be taken to preserve the
independence of Radio Télévision Ivoirienne.”

06-28950 (E) 290306

*0628950*
