S/2018/541*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 June 2018
Original: English

Situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2364 (2017), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2018 and requested me to report on a quarterly basis on
its implementation, focusing on progress in taking forward the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali (see S/2015/364 and S/2015/364/Add.1) and the efforts of
MINUSMA to support it. The present report contains updates with regard to major
developments in Mali since my previous report (S/2018/273) and recommendations
for the renewal of the mandate of MINUSMA, taking into account the findings and
recommendations of the independent strategic review, led by Ellen Margrethe Løj,
conducted in the first quarter of 2018.

II. Major political developments
2.
During the period under review, the renewed mo mentum in the peace process
brought about by the Prime Minister, Soume ylou Boubèye Maïga, and the recently
established sanctions regime and the appointment of an independent observer,
contributed to progress in the implementation of the Agreement. Discussi on
continued on the appointments of interim authorities at the district and municipality
levels, and the mixed units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in Kidal and
Timbuktu were established. The return of Malian armed forces to Kidal to join the
mixed units is a significant step. Care must be taken to ensure that the momentum of
the implementation of the road map is maintained throughout the campaigning period
leading up to the presidential elections.
3.
I was able to witness that progress during my visit to the country from 29 to
30 May. I was encouraged by the parties’ determination to work together to advance
the implementation of the Agreement, under the leadership of the Prime Minister,
ahead of the presidential elections in July. However, given the challenges facing the
country, including the expansion of violent extremist and criminal groups, it is critical
that the international community unite in support of Mali and address the crisis
through a multidimensional, coordinated response at the appropriate scale, which
should include supporting Mali in the reconstitution of its armed forces, promoting
development and strengthening resilience, as well as ensuring the Joint Force of the
* Reissued for technical reasons on 12 June 2018.

18-08658* (E)

120618

*1808658*

S/2018/541

Group of Five for the Sahel is provided with sufficient resource s to be an effective
instrument in restoring stability in the Sahel.

A.

Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali
4.
On 22 March, the signatory parties adopted a road map for the implementation
of the timeline agreed at the session of the Agreement Monitoring Committee held on
16 January. The road map identifies priority actions to be undertaken in the short to
medium term for the implementation of the Agreement and for the creation of
conditions conducive to the holding of peaceful and credible presidential elections. It
has led to the establishment of the mixed units of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism in Kidal and Timbuktu. The registration of combatants who are eligible
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme is ongoing. The
integration of combatants of armed groups into the Malian armed forces that was
scheduled to commence on 25 April has been postponed to mid -June, with its
completion anticipated by the end of August.
5.
From 23 to 26 March, the Prime Minister travelled to Kidal, accompanied by
my Special Representative for Mali, as well as to the Gao, Timbuktu and Mopti
regions, to reaffirm the Government’s commitment to improving security and access
to basic social services. The visit was perceived as a positive step in the peace process.
6.
On 23 April, the Agreement Monitoring Committee met in a regular session to
assess progress in the implementation of the road map. Positive developments
included the high-level workshop on security sector reform held from 27 to 29 March,
the allocation of funding for the interim authorities for operations and capital
investments for the year 2018 and the identification of personnel for deployment to
command positions in the Operational Coordination Mechanism sites in Kidal and
Timbuktu. The Committee noted that agreement in principle had been reached on the
provision of equipment, including collective weapons, to the Mechanism sites in Gao,
Kidal and Timbuktu. Furthermore, during the reporting period, the pre-registration of
combatants in preparation for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process and for integration into the Malian defence and security forces continued,
although the process was behind schedule.
7.
On 28 May, the Agreement Monitoring Committee met to discuss the
implementation of the Agreement, and noted, among other things, the positive
progress made in the operationalization of the mixed units of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Kidal and Timbuktu. At the same meeti ng, the
representatives of the independent observer presented its first report to the
Committee, which covered the period from 15 January to 30 April. In the report,
the independent observer called upon the parties to focus on the core tenets of the
Agreement and recommended a clearer communication strategy and the greater
inclusion of civil society.
8.
On 30 May, I participated in a high-level meeting with the signatory parties, the
Prime Minister of Mali, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Algeria and mediation
partners. All participants highlighted the recent progress made on the operationalization
of the security and political provisions of the Agreement. I was encouraged by the
interaction and the renewed commitment between the signatory parties.
State authority and institutional measures
9.
The construction of offices for the Governor and for the interim authorities in
Taoudenni, the capital of the Taoudenni region, began on 5 April. Four water points

2/21

18-08658

S/2018/541

funded through the Peacebuilding Fund, six schools and two youth centres were built
during the reporting period in various districts in the region. In addition, as at
15 April, the Government provided the interim administrations in the five northern
regions with $21.7 million for operations costs and capital investments and to
implement key projects under their respective priority action plans.
10. The number of judicial and prison officials deployed to northern and central
Mali remained unchanged during the reporting period. The deteriorating s ecurity
situation resulted in 6.5 per cent of appointed officials remaining in a jurisdiction
other than their appointed ones.
11. The number of State officials redeployed to the northern and central regions
increased by 11 per cent during the reporting period. As at 30 May, only 33 per cent
of State officials were present at their duty stations in the northern regions and in the
Mopti region. The Governor of Taoudenni, sworn in on 9 April, continued to work
from Timbuktu pending the construction of offices in Taoudenni. The governors of
all the other northern regions remained deployed to their respective duty stations.
12. The United Nations supported the elaboration of integrated security plans for
the prisons in Bamako and Koulikoro and, on 31 March, finalized a project to improve
the security and conditions of detention for suspected terrorists and other high -risk
detainees at the Bamako central prison. The Mission trained 97 prison officers, 3 of
whom were women, in prison management in Bamako and Gao.
Political developments
13. Whereas the Government postponed the regional, district and municipal
elections scheduled for April to 2019, during the reporting period, it also took several
measures to prepare for the presidential elections. On 23 April, the President of Mali,
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, enacted the electoral law that had been amended, inter alia,
to clarify voter identification requirements. On 27 April, the Council of Ministers set
the 29 July as the date on which the electoral college would be convened. Also on
27 April, the electoral registry was declared satisfactory, following an audit by a
committee composed of international and national experts, although the registry only
included 27 per cent of citizens 18 to 23 years of age. On 29 April, 98 political parties,
associations, public figures and activists launched a platform for political change,
opposing the re-election of President Keita. As at 30 May, there are 22 candidates
who have declared their candidature for the presidential elect ions, including the
current President and Soumaila Cissé, the runner-up in the 2013 presidential election
and leader of Union pour la République et la démocratie, the main opposition party.
14. The political opposition and civil society organizations criti cized the
Government for delays in conducting the reforms of the electoral system, claiming
that their late implementation could have an adverse impact on the credibility of the
elections. Opposition parties requested that the result of the elections be ce rtified by
the United Nations, however, because the certification of elections is not included in
the mandate of MINUSMA, that request cannot be fulfilled. My Special
Representative met with Malian officials and members of the political opposition,
signatory armed groups and civil society to emphasize the importance of holding
peaceful and inclusive elections within the time frame set in the Constitution. His
good offices were also instrumental in facilitating the reform of the electoral law and
MINUSMA will continue to provide support for the preparation of the elections,
including technical, logistical and security support, within its existing resources and
areas of deployment. However, the level of mistrust between the Government and
opposition parties, which led to the organization of several demonstrations across
Mali during the reporting period, constitutes a major source of concern ahead of the
presidential election scheduled for 29 July.
18-08658

3/21

S/2018/541

15. On 3 April, the United Nations Development Programme establ ished a new
basket fund to support the electoral processes in Mali in 2018 and 2019. During the
reporting period, MINUSMA provided electoral management bodies with technical,
logistical, advisory and security support, including by introducing new electoral tools
to strengthen the credibility and transparency of the electoral process.
16. The sustained advocacy efforts by MINUSMA and civil society notwithstanding,
little progress was registered in ensuring the meaningful engagement of women in the
peace process. Women’s organizations continue to be supported by the Mission in
designing strategies to increase the representation of women in the peace process and
in reconciliation efforts in central Mali.
Defence and security measures and reforms
17. A high-level workshop on security sector reform, sponsored by MINUSMA, was
held in Bamako from 27 to 29 March; the outcome of the workshop was a revised
draft of the national security sector reform strategy, which will be presented to the
National Council for Security Sector Reform for validation in the first week of June.
The signatory parties continued discussions on integration quotas and on the
configuration of the territorial police.
18. On 11 and 12 April, the Technical Commission on Security met in Bamako under
the chairmanship of the MINUSMA Force Commander. The signatory parties
committed to providing heavy weapons to one company in each of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism bases in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu. Signatory armed groups
provided the list of 51 combatants for the Mechanism site in Kidal on 23 April.
Personnel and members of the command structure began deploying to the Kidal site
on 7 May. On 24 May, the mixed units of the Mechanism in Timbuktu marked their
official establishment in the presence of representatives of the interim authorities,
regional civil and military authorities, armed groups, civil society and MINUSMA.
As at 30 May, a total of 128 combatants were registered at the Kidal site, and 47 at
the Timbuktu site.
19. The pre-registration of eligible combatants for the cantonment and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes and integration into the
Malian defence and security forces, was due to be completed on 28 April. Signatory
parties have requested a one-month extension to complete the process, however,
owing to alleged logistical and security constraints.
20. During the reporting period, MINUSMA supported the implementation of the
laws on military orientation and programming, internal security and the int ernal and
democratic oversight of security institutions, through the provision of capacity building, training, infrastructure rehabilitation, equipment and technical advice.
21. The Mission continued to coordinate operations with the Malian armed forces
at the national and regional levels, in line with the memorandum of understanding
between MINUSMA and the Government. It expanded coordinated activities
throughout the central region, including patrols in Nampala and Léré and civil military cooperation activities. The Mission also shared information with the Malian
defence and security forces, within the limits of its mandate, for the protection of
civilians and for the safety and security of United Nations and associated personnel.
The Mission continued to revise the memorandum of understanding to include
operational and technical aspects of support, in addition to capacity -building.

4/21

18-08658

S/2018/541

B.

Provision of support to the Malian defence and security forces
22. In cooperation with other international partners, MINUSMA continued to
provide technical assistance for the Malian Specialized Judicial Unit against
Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime. On 23 March, the Mission signed an
agreement with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to support jointl y
support the Specialized Judicial Unit through the provision of equipment and training.
23. During the reporting period, the Mission and partners trained 896 members of
the Malian security forces, 45 of whom were women, from Mopti, Timbuktu, Gao and
Bamako on various policing modules and on human rights, and 35 others, 12 of whom
were women, from Timbuktu and Bamako on child protection.
24. On 30 March, the Mission completed a training course for 13 Malian military
engineers in explosive ordnance disposal. The Mission also continued to mentor the
national police improvised explosive device disposal team and rehabilitated four
armouries in the Gao and Timbuktu regions.

C.

Regional developments
25. MINUSMA continued planning its support to the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel and deployed logistics personnel to Joint Force headquarters in
Sévaré to ensure closer coordination. The operationalization of the Joint Force had
incurred some delays. Although States members of the Group of Five have designated
their respective troops for the Joint Force, not all of them have been deployed, and
the deadline for the Joint Force obtaining full operational capability has been
postponed from March to a later date. On 3 May, the United Nations received the first
tranche of funds from the European Union, providing for the Mission ’s support to the
Joint Force in line with Security Council resolution 2391 (2017). Assessments of the
six Joint Force camps on Malian territory in the central sector conducted by
MINUSMA and the Group of Five are still ongoing, with a view to determining the
level of engineering support required for the rehabilitation and fortification of these
camps, and it should be noted that MINUSMA will need significant additional
funding to carry out that construction work.

III. Major security developments
26. During the reporting period, the security situation remained of grave concern.
The Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims, in particular, continued to attack
MINUSMA, the Malian defence and security forces and international forces across
central and northern Mali, with the Mopti and Ségou regions affected the most. The
group’s attack on the MINUSMA and international forces ca mps in Timbuktu on
14 April demonstrated its ability to plan and execute increasingly complex
operations. The precarious security situation was compounded by repeated clashes
between the Dogon and Fulani communities in central Mali, as well as violent
incidents mainly targeting Tuareg communities in the southern Ménaka region. The
trend of the increasing use of improvised explosive devices in the Mopti region was
confirmed at the beginning of the reporting period; such attacks having caused the
death of an unprecedented number of civilians. Armed groups also continued to
threaten local populations against cooperation with security forces.

18-08658

5/21

S/2018/541

A.

Asymmetric and other attacks
27. During the reporting period, armed groups conducted 44 attacks: 18 against the
Malian defence and security forces, 12 against MINUSMA, 3 against MINUSMA
contractors, 8 against signatory armed groups, 1 against Operation Barkhane and 1
against both MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane. The highest number of attacks was
carried out in Mopti (13), followed by Kidal (10), Gao (7), Timbuktu (5), Ségou (5)
and Ménaka (4). The Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims was very active in
the Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu regions and claimed most of the asymmetric attacks
conducted during the reporting period. During the reporting period, 4 peacekeepers
were killed and 24 injured, whereas 4 peacekeepers were killed and 12 injured in the
previous reporting period. Six MINUSMA contractors were killed, compared with
one in the previous reporting period. Ten Operation Barkhane forces were injured,
and two were reportedly killed and three injured in the previous reporting period.
28. Malian forces were heavily targeted, but the number of victims decreased: 5
soldiers were killed and 19 injured, compared with the 45 killed and 80 injured in the
previous reporting period. Attacks against the Malian security and defence forces
were most heavily concentrated in Mopti (11), followed by Ségou (4) and Timbuktu
(3). Moreover, a series of clashes in the Ménaka region between signatory armed
groups and Islamic State in the Greater Sahara resulted in 19 members of the signatory
armed groups being killed and 15 injured, compared with 20 members killed and 12
injured in attacks in the previous reporting period.
29. Since the beginning of 2018, the number of improvised explosive device
incidents almost doubled, compared with the same period in 2017, with 93 incidents
as at 18 May, compared with 55 incidents in 2017. As the increasing threat of
improvised explosive device incidents expands towards more populated areas of
central Mali, civilians are increasingly affected.

B.

Protection of civilians
30. In the centre of Mali, the protective environment continued to deteriorate during
the reporting period, in which at least 43 civilians were killed and 24 injured in
targeted attacks and intercommunity conflicts, and many more were temporarily
displaced. All districts of Mopti region, especially Koro district, as well as Niono and
Macina districts of Ségou region, were affected by instability. On 28 March, only two
days after the visit of the Prime Minister, a woman was injured in an attack on a hotel
in Bandiagara district, where such occurrences of violent incidents had been rare so
far. Communities not previously targeted by radical armed elements also came under
attack, including: Bozo fishermen in Djenné and Ténenkou districts in three separate
incidents in March, and on 14 April, two traders of the Diokaramé ethnic group were
abducted in Mopti district, allegedly for having collaborated with Malian forces.
Malian civilian authorities continued to be targeted, such as on 20 March, when a
local electoral commission official was murdered in Niono district.
31. In response to the deteriorating security situation in the centre of the country,
on 14 April, the Prime Minister instructed that civilians in the central region in
possession of firearms were to be disarmed, including those who held licences.
Furthermore, in early May, two Malian forces helicopters were put on standby in
Mopti, while Malian defence forces patrols were deployed to affected localities of
Koro district. Those positive measures notwithstanding, mounting allegations of
summary executions and abuses by members of the Malian defence and security
forces continued to be reported and to have an impact on their ability to restore
stability. Notably, the implementation of a ban imposed on the use of motorbikes and

6/21

18-08658

S/2018/541

pickup trucks in the Mopti region and parts of the Ségou region led to targeted
operations, in which some cases of excessive use of force and summary executions
were reported, such as in the alleged cases of excessive force that resulted in the
killing of two Fulani herders by the Malian armed forces on 28 April in Ténenkou
district.
32. From 25 to 28 March, MINUSMA conducted Operation Faden, which enabled
a joint civilian team’s missions to five localities in Koro district for the purpose of
improving their situational awareness, including on the rollout of the Government ’s
plan to secure the centre. From 18 to 24 April, Operation Foronto facilitated similar
joint civilian missions to four localities in the Mopti district.
33. A reconciliation mission led by the Ministry of National Reconciliation and
Social Cohesion travelled to the Mopti region from 21 to 26 March. A commission
was established by the Government to follow up on the mission ’s recommendations,
which focused on improving protection, initiating dialogue with radical elements and
revitalizing youth employment.
34. In late April, a series of violent incidents occurred in the Ménaka region, near
the border with the Niger. On 26 and 27 April, two violent incidents in the Aklaz an d
Awakassa settlements resulted in the killing of at least 47 civilians and the
displacement of around 300 others. On 1 May, 17 civilians were reportedly killed in
the locality of Tindinbawen. The victims of those incidents, mostly from the
Dawsahak Tuareg community, were reportedly targeted in an act of reprisal following
operations conducted in the area by a coalition of armed groups. In the same period,
incidents of retaliatory violence against Fulani communities were reported on the
Niger side of the border, resulting in further casualties.

IV. Human rights situation
35. During the reporting period, MINUSMA documented 344 cases of human rights
violations and abuses, involving at least 475 victims, compared with 133 cases and
483 victims in the previous reporting period. There were, inter alia, 239 cases of
extrajudicial execution or other arbitrary killing, 25 cases of abduction or enforced
disappearance, six cases of torture or ill-treatment and 42 cases of unlawful detention.
Members of the Malian defence and security forces were involved in 58 violations.
Signatory groups and non-signatory or splinter groups were responsible for 43 and
105 cases of human rights abuses, respectively. The Group for the Support of Islam
and Muslims and other similar groups were responsible for a total of 138 cases, 90
per cent of which occurred in the Ménaka Mopti and Ségou regions. In addition, two
cases of conflict-related sexual violence in the Gao region were documented.
36. On 19 May, elements of the Malian armed forces under the command of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel reportedly killed at least 12 civilians
during an operation carried out in retaliation for the killing of one of their elements
in Boulikessi, Mopti region. At the request of the Chief of Staff of the Joint Force,
the Mission is providing support to the Joint Force in conducting an in situ
investigation into those incidents. On 9 May, the Prime Minister reiterated that abuses
against the civilian population would not be tolerated by the Government.
37. MINUSMA investigated serious allegations of violations of human rights and
of international humanitarian law in the context of counter-terrorism operations
undertaken by the Malian armed forces in the Mopti and Ségou regions, including
allegations of 44 summary executions and three enforced disappearances in Bimbéré Tama, Diankabou, Dioura, Mondoro, Ouro-Guiré and Sokolo communes. The
Mission issued two public statements expressing concern over the grave human rights

18-08658

7/21

S/2018/541

violations by the Malian armed forces and informed the Government of its readiness
to support investigations.
38. As a result of a cycle of violence in the Mopti region, and after having conducted
an investigation, the Mission concluded that traditional hunters in K oro and Bankass
(Koro district) had burned down three villages and attacked two others, and that
intercommunity conflict in the same area had caused the death of at least 12 people
and the forced displacement of hundreds, affecting at least 30 villages. Th e
Government issued two public statements committing to undertaking criminal
investigations into those allegations.
39. MINUSMA also investigated allegations of grave human rights abuses by the
coalition of the Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad and Groupe d’autodéfense des
Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés in the Niger border area of Ménaka region. The
Mission concluded that at least 143 civilians had been killed by the armed groups,
houses had been burned and hundreds forcibly displaced, including 695 fro m Aklaz
and Awakassa villages.
40. During the reporting period, more than 640 individuals appeared before the
Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission. As at 30 May, the Commission
reported that it had received a total of 8,273 depositions since 3 Jan uary 2017. No
progress was made, however, in the Sanogo trial or the trials of the alleged
perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence in 2012 and 2013.
41. During the reporting period, MINUSMA assessed the level of implementation
of the human rights due diligence policy in Mali to be relatively low, given that about
one fifth of the recommended measures to mitigate the risk of violations had been
implemented by the recipient entities. The measures include the opening of
investigations in Timbuktu in a case of sexual violence and in Bamako in a case of
summary execution, and the dismissal of two members from the Operational
Coordination Mechanism site in Gao.
42. The country task force on monitoring and reporting verified 49 grave violations
against children. Ten children were killed and nine maimed in the Kidal, Mopti, Gao
and Timbuktu regions; seven children were separated from armed groups in the
Ménaka, Mopti, Gao and Timbuktu regions and are now following a reintegration
programme in Bamako and Gao; there were 13 cases of attacks and threats against
schools and hospitals; and 10 cases of denial of humanitarian access.
43. In March and April, the Mission delivered training courses on human rights for
352 members of the Malian armed forces, the gendarmerie and the police force; on
child protection for 35 members of the Malian armed forces; on monitoring and
reporting on grave violations against children in p eriods of armed conflict for 27
national and international partners; and on receiving and refer ring victims of sexual
violence for 14 gender focal points from the national police. From 5 to 11 April, the
Mission and national partners organized a sensitization campaign on HIV/AIDS and
human rights, reaching 320 people, 201 of whom were tested for HIV. In addition,
from 7 to 15 May, they provided a sensitization briefing on HIV prevention and
conflict-related sexual violence to 951 women and girls in Mopti and Timbuktu, 789
of whom were tested for HIV.

V. Humanitarian situation
44. The humanitarian situation continued to worsen, owing to growing insecurity in
the northern and central regions, limited State presence and insufficient funding for
meeting current needs, while concerns over the looming agropastoral and nutrition
crisis deepened.
8/21

18-08658

S/2018/541

45. At the end of March, the humanitarian outlook for the lean season (June through
September) was worse than had been projected in late 2017, owing to the impending
agropastoral and nutrition crisis, with 4.3 million people expected to be food insecure
during the lean season in 2018, compared with 4.1 million projected in late 2017.
Almost 1 million people will require emergency food assistance, a 55 per cent
increase compared with the same period in 2017. The projected number of children
suffering from global acute malnutrition increased from 622,000 to 856,000 between
2017 and 2018. During the reporting period, the United Nations and its partners
supported the Government in providing food assistance to 155,000 people per month.
The humanitarian response plan for 2018, which is aimed at providing lifesaving
assistance to 1.56 million people, had received only 24 per cent of the $263 million
required as at 30 May.
46. During the reporting period, 50 security incidents, mostly involving break -ins
at compounds and vehicle thefts, affected humanitarian actors, compared with 41
cases in the previous reporting period. In response to the expansion of the threat of
improvised explosive device incidents in central Mali, the Mission provided
awareness-raising training to 155 drivers from humanitarian non-governmental
organizations and private companies operating in the Gao and Mopti regions on the
threat of improvised explosive devices.
47. As at 23 May, the Government had registered 60,600 internally displaced
persons, 590,800 returnees and 576 asylum seekers, compared with 47,700 internally
displaced persons, 589,600 returnees and 554 asylum seekers in January 2018.
Although Mali hosts 19,374 refugees from various countries, more than 137, 697
Malian refugees remain in neighbouring countries.
48. As at May 2018, 750 schools remained closed in the Kidal, Gao, Ménaka,
Timbuktu, Mopti and Ségou regions, owing to insecurity, including threats and attacks
from violent extremists, compared with 715 schools in March 2018. As a result,
225,000 children were denied access to education. In response, 50 community
learning centres were created by the United Nations Children’s Fund and its partners
in the Gao and Mopti regions, providing informal education in a safe environment for
up to 2,500 children.

VI. Economic development and cultural preservation
49. During the reporting period, the Mission supported the Government ’s plan for
securing the centre of the country through quick-impact projects and the provision of
institutional support to regional authorities. On 29 March, MINUSMA, together with
the Government and the United Nations country team launched a Peacebuilding Fund
project targeting women and young people in central Mali. The project was developed
in line with the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, and aims at funding
innovative projects for 500 young people, with a view to strengthening social
cohesion in the Ségou and Mopti regions. Another Peacebuilding Fund programme
was launched on 26 April in Dori, Burkina Faso, to promote community security,
social cohesion and resilience in the Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger cross -border
area.
50. MINUSMA and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization continued to raise awareness of the need to safeguard cultural heritage,
to combat the illicit trafficking of cultural goods and to provide support to cultural,
artistic, educational and rehabilitation projects.

18-08658

9/21

S/2018/541

VII. Conduct and discipline
51. During the reporting period, one allegation of sexual abuse was reported to the
Mission, against a former local individual contractor. The case was referred to the
Office of Internal Oversight Services and the national police. One case reported in
January 2018 is pending investigation with the Office. Administrative measures have
been taken, pending the outcome of the investigation. Two allegations received in
2017 are pending investigation by the relevant troop -contributing country and the
Office. MINUSMA continued to implement the three-pronged strategy for combating
sexual exploitation and abuse, through enforcement measures, assistance to victims
and training and outreach activities to inform personnel and the local population about
the United Nations policy of zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse.

VIII. Environment
52. During the reporting period, the Mission focused on systemizing the collection
of environmental management data, to improve performance measurement, and made
progress towards reducing energy inefficiencies by using smart meters for power
generation, LEDs and solar street lighting. The use of recycled water processed
through treatment plants in the Bamako, Gao and Timbuktu supercamps significantly
reduced their water requirements, and solid and biomedical waste continued to be
partly recycled or treated prior to disposal. Contractual services are being sought for
hazardous waste management.

IX. Independent strategic review of the Mission
53. Against the backdrop of the mixed progress and deteriorating conditions in Mali
described above, an independent strategic review of MINUSMA was conducted in
early 2018, at my request. The review team, led by Ms. Løj, was comprised of experts
from various United Nations entities. The review consulted a broad cross -section of
stakeholders and visited Mali, including the Bamako Gao, Kidal and Mopti regions,
from 14 to 25 March.

A.

Findings and recommendations of the independent strategic review
Findings
54. With regard to the political situation, the assessment of the review team was
that, in the three years since the signing of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, it had not resulted in enough meaningful progress on the ground.
Furthermore, the presence of the State had declined compared with the previous year
(20 per cent of sub-prefects were deployed in the north of the country at the commune
level in 2017, compared with 36 per cent in 2016). The review team attributed that
situation to insufficient ownership of the Agreement by the Malian people, trust
deficits between the signatory parties and an uneven political will. The review team
also highlighted a need for a clear connection between parties to the Agreement and
key constituencies of Malian society, including women. It concluded, however, that,
in the absence of an immediate viable alternative or the inclination to determine one,
the Agreement remained a valid framework for engagement with the parties to the
peace process, and that its implementation must be leveraged and accompanied by
broader political efforts by Malian, regional and international actors. Challenging the
Agreement or reopening it would create a dangerous vacuum.

10/21

18-08658

S/2018/541

55. With regard to the security environment, the review team took note of the fact
that it had worsened since the signing of the Agreement. In its assessment, th e review
team found that the violence had evolved into a war of attrition, primarily targeting
State representatives, MINUSMA and international forces, while divisions among
communities had deepened. The review team also noted that the complexity of the
composition of armed groups and the grievances of their members must be taken into
account in finding appropriate responses. In its view, parties had shifted their focus
away from the implementation of the Agreement to the protection of their equities in
the north, having an impact on the progress made in the implementation of defence
and security reforms.
56. The review team found that the threats against civilians were insidious and
sophisticated, in particular in the centre of the country, where intercomm unal tensions
were being instrumentalized and extreme forms of Islamic law imposed, resulting in
serious human rights violations. Compounding the situation was the fact that the
majority of the reported human rights abuses committed by State actors took pl ace in
the context of counter-terrorism operations. The assessment of the review team was
that growing instability in central Mali must be addressed through a multidimensional
approach focusing on conflict resolution and confidence -building measures,
accompanied by the gradual return of a legitimate and accountable State, would bring
long-term stability to the central regions.
57. Therefore, the review team confirmed that the situation in the central regions
was a serious source of concern, with the potential for further spillover if not carefully
addressed. They suggested that there was a tendency to associate the worsening
situation only with the expansion of the influence of terrorism and organized crime
from the north; local dynamics and fundamental causes of instability, such as the
multiplicity of localized conflicts over resources and land, climate change, the
growing population and power struggles, must be taken into account. The review team
observed that, to address the situation, a truly integrated plan that takes into account
the collective of the security, governance, reconciliation and development aspects,
was needed.
58. The review team confirmed that the immediate and regional neighbours to Mali
are an inextricable part of the political dynamics in the country, in particular in the
northern regions, and integral to the solution to the challenges facing the country. On
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the review team considered that its
achievements could be limited, at least initially, if its capacity limitations were not
urgently addressed. They also underlined the need for a clear regional political
framework, including on how to best support the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali by leveraging the influence of the country’s
neighbours on the signatory parties.
59. As the sole entity with a presence across northern and part of central Mali, and
owing to the constraints and delays encountered in carrying out the process envisioned
in Security Council resolution 2295 (2016) for the restoration and extension of State
authority to the central and northern regions, the assessment of the review team was
that MINUSMA had been called upon to undertake a variety of tasks, including
having become a logistics and security enabler for non-United Nations security actors.
The review team was of the view that the proximity of MINUSMA, and its support
role and cooperation with security actors, including counter-terrorism actors, had
contributed to the perception that the Mission was engaging in counter-terrorism
actions. The review team noted that MINUSMA faced a dilemma between the need
to reform and reconstitute the Malian defence and security forces and simultaneously
support the existing forces in addressing the current situation of instability.

18-08658

11/21

S/2018/541

60. The assessment of the review team was that the Mission faced difficulties in
balancing the safety and security of personnel, with operational reac h. According to
the review team, some 70 per cent of the casualties sustained by the Mission had been
in the context of attacks either on the force protection of bases and infrastructure or
during logistics convoys. On average, 80 per cent of the resources of the MINUSMA
force were being employed to provide pockets of security covering a radius of 5 to
20 kilometres, protecting major population centres in the north. The review team
estimated that chronic mobility shortfalls and the operational environment w ould
likely continue to challenge the Mission’s ability to project its presence and
implement its mandate, and therefore called for greater prioritization of tasks.
61. In terms of development and humanitarian efforts, five consecutive years of
growth in the gross domestic product of Mali notwithstanding, the assessment of
the review team was that peace dividends had yet to materialize in the north of the
country. In fact, poverty had increased and basic social services in areas above the
Niger River belt remained largely inaccessible. The closure of 35 per cent of schools
in the northern and central regions, high rate of youth unemployment and perceptions
of injustice had contributed to the population’s vulnerability to radicalization.
Humanitarian needs had been approaching levels similar to those at the peak of the
crisis in 2012. Some 4.3 million people were in need of humanitarian assistance in
2018 to date (up from 3.8 million in 2017), with a looming food security and nutrition
crisis. The number of people facing severe food insecurity had increased by 55 per
cent, relative to the lean season in 2017, and the severity of conditions had deepened.
In addition, over 2 million people continued to be affected by a lack of access to
water, sanitation and hygiene and health services. Absent State institutions and
resources, the United Nations and non-governmental organizations remained the main
provider of basic services.
62. The review team noted the significant role of the informal and illicit economy
and traditional trans-Saharan trade routes in influencing conflict dynamics. It was the
review team’s assessment that control over routes had exacerbated competition and
the shifting of alliances among armed groups and communities, at times resulting in
local arrangements that obviated or superseded the Agreement. A deep understanding
of the political economy, including organized crime networks, was therefore required
in order to define effective strategies to support long -term peace and stability. The
review team noted that, although the Agreement focused on historical disparities, it
also contained governance and economic reforms that had nationwide implications.
Without ignoring the specific needs of the north, which needed to be addressed, the
review team suggested that the Agreement should be part of a comprehensive national
vision for peace, reconciliation and development for all Malians.
63. In that complex environment largely dominated by security actors, the review
team was of the view that the United Nations system in Mali had been challenged in
its efforts to fully leverage the comparative advantages of MINUSMA and specific
agencies, funds and programmes and to deliver as one. The review team took stock
of the limited presence and operational capacity o f the United Nations country team
in conflict-affected areas, and given that limited presence, MINUSMA had therefore
increasingly played a role in project implementation in humanitarian and
development areas, a situation that should be reversed. Furthermor e, the review team
took note of the complicated policy environment, in which multiple national
development plans and coordination mechanisms, and the frequent turnover of key
Government counterparts, had an impact on priority-setting and coordination. That
environment, coupled with dwindling funding for the humanitarian response plan and
development assistance framework had limited the scope of humanitarian and
development impact.

12/21

18-08658

S/2018/541

Recommendations of the independent strategic review: prioritization and
implementation of the Mission mandate
64. It was the review team’s assessment that, although the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali remained the valid framework, it needed to be accompanied
by sustained political momentum and leveraged to promo te trust-building between
the north and south of the country, the centre and the periphery and key constituencies
across Mali, in particular women and young people. MINUSMA had a key role to
play in that respect, and the review team recommended that the Mi ssion’s role should
be more directed towards a broadened political one, including: (a) rallying a common
vision among regional and international actors in support of the peace process and
stabilization; (b) developing a pact for peace between the Governmen t, the Security
Council, the United Nations and international partners, under which assistance would
be associated with clear benchmarks, including regarding progress on good
governance and political reforms; and (c) supporting a national dialogue to foste r
ownership of the Agreement by the Malian people and to strengthen Malian
nationhood beyond State reform.
65. The review team indicated that MINUSMA, with international partners of Mali
and the United Nations country team, should reprioritize its actions to focus on
political tasks, including through the development of a political strategy that focuses
the Mission’s activities towards the implementation of key provisions of the
Agreement, including decentralization, the effective establishment of legitima te State
presence, security sector reform and reconciliation. In central Mali, the focus should
be on conflict prevention and resolution at the local level and contributing to the
protection of civilians through dialogue, community outreach and policing, a s well as
efforts to create a protective environment. The Mission should orient its resources
and efforts according to those priorities. Activities that do not respond to those
priorities and good offices requirements should be staggered in their implement ation
or phased out.
66. As part of the refocusing of the Mission’s role on political issues, the review
team emphasized that the Mission should also support the long-term goal of
addressing governance deficits. They indicated that the redeployment of ref ormed and
reconstituted Malian defence and security forces is crucial to restoring security. Other
governance functions, including the delivery of basic social services and political
participation, in particular through decentralization, at the core of the Agreement are
also be key to building and strengthening the legitimacy of the State in the northern
and central regions.
67. The review team suggested taking a more realistic approach to the objectives
set for the MINUSMA force, given its limitations. To further reinforce its prevention
and conflict resolution efforts, MINUSMA must tailor its approach to the protection
of civilians around community engagement and policing, violence reduction and
institution-building, including with a greater articulation of the work of the different
components of the Mission to that end. In that regard, the MINUSMA force should
direct its efforts towards creating space for the civilian component of the Mission to
deliver on its mandated tasks. More specifically, in the centre of the country, that
recalibrated approach should be part of a multidimensional United Nations strategy
that would include an adequate uniformed presence.
68. Recognizing that addressing instability requires a coherent comprehensive and
integrated approach to tackling all dimensions of insecurity, including the effective
reform of the Malian security institutions, the review team recommended that
supporting security sector reform should feature among the chief political endeavours
of MINUSMA. The Mission should rally international partners around a common
vision for rebuilding the Malian security sector, a task that operationally extends
18-08658

13/21

S/2018/541

beyond the life cycle of a peacekeeping mission. Its role should be that of establishing
a clear link between the political efforts geared at advancing security sector reform
and the operational and technical support being provided to the reconstituted and
reformed Malian forces by international partners of Mali. That should be underpinned
by the active coordination between the various actors involved and seeking innovative
approaches to address the shortcomings of interim security and defence measures.
69. The review team was of the view that the Mission should continue its valuable
monitoring, investigation, advocacy and reporting on the human rights situation and
provision of support to the training of the Malian forces aimed at promoting the full
respect of human rights standards, in particular when conducting counter -terrorism
operations. The review team recommended that the Mission strengthen its
cooperation with the Malian authorities so as to support investigations of and
follow-up to allegations of human rights violations, while enhancing its public human
rights reporting, in particular with regard to the situation in the central regions.
70. The review team stressed the importance of strengthening and enhancing
collaboration between the United Nations country team and MINUSMA in supporting
the restoration of governance functions, recommending the development of an
integrated strategic framework setting the United Nations overall vision and joint
priorities for sustaining peace in Mali, which should be followed by the revision of
the United Nations Development Assistance Framework after the presidential
elections. The review team recommended the development of the Mission ’s
implementation strategy requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2364
(2017) on the basis of those two processes. The review team suggested that
MINUSMA should continue to focus on the political and security components of the
Agreement, recalibrating its programmatic activities and its use of quick-impact
projects to bring them in line with those priorities, whereas the United Nations
country team should take the lead in humanitarian, recovery, development and
peacebuilding efforts. The review team also called upon the United Nations country
team to enhance its presence in the north and centre of the country.
71. The review team recommended that the United Nations establish clear
parameters on service provision to non-United Nations entities. Such parameters
would help to preserve and enhance the Mission’s impartiality and its political space.
Furthermore, accountability mechanisms and access for human rights actors for
timely human rights monitoring should be preconditions for any United Nations
support. The review team emphasized the importance of the Mission continuing and
strengthening its implementation of the human rights due diligence policy. With
regard to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel specifically, the review
team concurred with my earlier recommended that support to the Joint Force be
provided through an assessed contributions-based support package, distinct from
MINUSMA.
72. Against the recommendations above pertaining to the Mission’s mandate, the
review recommends the realignment of United Nations peacekeeping efforts whereby
MINUSMA would refocus on its core political tasks. In that regard, the footprint of
the Mission would be adjusted in Sector North and reassessed across the country to
allocate more resources to the direct implementation of Mission priorities and
to support an increased civilian presence in the centre of the country, with a view to
taking a more balanced strategy there. A tailored approach to the protection of
civilians would be adopted, and its military and police components would be
leveraged to create the maximum space for others to operate. The current overall
uniformed personnel ceiling would remain unchanged, although the military
component would be slightly adjusted through consolidation of base s to create the
space for one additional formed police unit and 10 individual police officers in the
centre. The consolidation of bases would also be aimed at reducing the exposure of
14/21

18-08658

S/2018/541

the Mission, in particular of convoys, to attacks. Taking note of the pr oposed pact for
peace, I suggest that, building on the existing benchmarks and road map, this would
serve as a tool for the periodic review of the footprint of the Mission against the
achievement of core priorities and of overall United Nations engagement.

B.

Mandate renewal
73. The independent strategic review team has accurately portrayed the political and
security dynamics at play in Mali and the operational environment in which
MINUSMA operates.
74. In my view, the recommendations for a shift in focus, prioritization and
implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks would maximize the Mission’s role
in support of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and in amplifying
the peace process. They take into consideration the comparative advantages of the
Mission, notably its good offices, and of the United Nations system as a whole, while
factoring in the constraints posed by the operational theatre in Mali and the difficulties
in generating resources for United Nations efforts. As such, I encourage that they be
taken into account in the Security Council’s deliberations on the Mission’s mandate
renewal, as well as in the strategic planning documents that guide both the Mission ’s
engagement on the ground and its cooperation with other actors. Prioritizing and
staggering the implementation of tasks are key to furthering peace in response to the
specific conditions in Mali, yet it must be borne in mind that reforming institutions
takes time and is the primary responsibility of the people and Government of Mali.
75. I intend to explore ways of broadening the political role played by MINUSMA
in support of the peace process, in line with the recommendation in the strategic
review on the elaboration of a pact for peace. Such an initiative would take into
account the existing benchmarks and road map agreed upon between the signatory
parties and MINUSMA and help to consolidate momentum towards the
implementation of the Agreement by enhancing political dialo gue. It would also
potentially reinvigorate the commitment of international and regional partners in
support of the peace process. Moving forward, and as mentioned during my recent
visit, the Mission’s political role should be further enhanced in support o f the key
political and security reforms that are provided for in the peace agreement, in parallel
to ongoing efforts by the Mission, together with other partners such as the European
Union, to support the redeployment and professionalization of the Malian defence
and security forces.
76. The period leading up to the presidential elections in July and its immediate
aftermath will be critical for sustaining the political momentum surrounding the peace
process and the parties’ engagement in the implementation of the Agreement. In that
context, it should be acknowledged that the signatory parties have shown tangible
signs of their determination to move forward in the implementation of the Agreement,
with some concrete steps taken during the reporting period. F urthermore, and as
acknowledged by the review team, the Agreement can lay the foundation for lasting
peace, provided that sustained political will by the parties allows for building on the
gains secured through the implementation of the key institutional r eforms undertaken.
The Agreement also remains the only viable avenue for a constructive dialogue, and,
as such, it should be leveraged by the parties, MINUSMA and the international
community to build a stronger, more inclusive and sustainable peace process that
would deliver long-awaited peace dividends to the Malian people.
77. In the light of those considerations, it is my view that a reconfiguration of the
posture and focus of MINUSMA, as outlined in the recommendation of the review
team, would be the most appropriate course of action at the present juncture. The

18-08658

15/21

S/2018/541

decision to pursue further adjustments of the footprint of the Mission would be
determined by progress made on good governance and institutional reforms,
measured through the benchmarks of the pact for peace and an assessment of the
practical modalities and operational implications of their implementation.

X. Observations
78. As witnessed during my visit to Mali from 29 to 30 May, in particular in my
meeting with the signatory parties and mediation partners, progress has been made in
recent months on the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, notably the adoption in March of a new road map for its implementation,
which takes stock of the delays accumulated to date and what can concretely be
achieved prior to the presidential elections. I welcome the recent establishment of the
mixed units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism sites in Kidal and Timbuktu,
the pre-registration of combatants, and the visit of the Prime Minister to the northern
regions, including his visit to Kidal. Those efforts demonstrate that progress is
possible if there is political will and dialogue. The signatory parties should capitalize
on those steps to prompt concrete change on the ground.
79. The holding of inclusive, transparent and credible elections will be critical to
securing the gains achieved to date by the parties in the implementation of the
Agreement and to building on them. It is crucial that all parties work together to
ensure that conditions are met for the elections to be conducted in a peaceful
environment. I welcome the electoral reforms undertaken by the Government of Mali
and the demonstration of goodwill by all parties in supporting the electoral process
so far, including through the priority actions included in the road map adopted on
22 March. It will be important for the Government, supported by MINUSMA, to
create conditions conducive to the holding of secure, peaceful and transparent
elections. That includes establishing a meaningful dialogue with the political
opposition and civil society on the electoral process.
80. I am concerned by the continued deterioration of the security situation in central
Mali, characterized by an increase in the complexity of attacks against MINUSMA,
the Malian armed forces and international forces, an unprecedented number of
civilian casualties and a rise in intercommunity clashes. I was informed that security
incidents have increased by 200 per cent during the past year, with over 1 ,000
incidents registered by MINUSMA in the Mopti region and dozens of people killed.
Failure to contain the crisis in the central regions could have a serious impact on the
stabilization of the country as a whole and on social cohesion, and could reverse gains
realized to date. This should be the priority of the Government, in particular with a
view to securing the elections.
81. In that context, I would like to thank the independent strategic review team, led
by Ms. Løj, for its work. Its findings and recommendations will guide the Mission’s
mandate renewal and help to ensure a better alignment of the Mission ’s objectives
and strategic vision with the political and security context in Mali, as well as with the
Mission’s available resources. Although adjusting the mandate might present some
challenges, given that the presidential elections are to be held in one month, it should
also be welcomed by national and regional partners as encouragement to redouble
efforts towards the consolidation of peace. It is also an acknowledgment of our
continued engagement in Mali.
82. The Mission’s mandate renewal must be accompanied, however, by a clear
message that concrete progress in the implementation of the Agreement must be
achieved and accelerated alongside a national dialogue, following up on the
conference of national understanding held in March 2017. In that respect, it is time to
16/21

18-08658

S/2018/541

start a frank and constructive dialogue. I welcome the proposal of the strategic review
team for the Government of Mali, the Security Council, the United Nations and
international partners to develop a pact for peace, taking into account the existing
benchmarks and road map, for which assistance and progress in terms of governance,
political reforms and the implementation of the Agreement are measured against
benchmarks. The pact will also ensure strategic coherence and the complementarity
of actions by partners of Mali towards common objectives. This will guide United
Nations engagement, according to progress made on the political and sec urity
domains, and could lead to further adjustments being made to MINUSMA.
83. Five years after the establishment of MINUSMA and three years after the
signature of the Agreement, Mali is at crossroads. I am concerned by the findings of
the independent strategic review team, which have highlighted the complexity and
fragility of the situation, as well as the challenging operational environment in which
MINUSMA operates. The security situation has deteriorated, and divisions among
communities have deepened, affecting national social cohesion and neighbouring
countries. Some recent progress notwithstanding, if unchanged, in the long term,
keeping the current pace of implementation of the Agreement risks undermining its
credibility and its potential as a tool for lasting peace.
84. MINUSMA continues to face a critical shortfall in equipment, which
significantly limits its ability to implement its mandate. The speedy provision of
military helicopters to the Mission will be instrumental ahead of the upcoming
elections and the start of the rainy season. I encourage Member States to move
forward with the concept of equipment-contributing countries, should the Mission’s
troop- and police-contributing countries not be in a position to provide the required
equipment in accordance with their memorandums of understanding signed with the
United Nations.
85. The context in Mali underscores the importance of having a shared vision of
peacekeeping based on a realistic assessment of what is achievable and needed by the
people. With almost 174 Mission peacekeepers killed, 101 of whom were killed in
hostile action, since the establishment of the Mission, and limited progress made on
the ground, the current situation is not sustainable. Efforts to implement the
recommendations of the report on improving the security of United Nations
peacekeepers, as well as to strengthen the security of MINUSMA premises, are under
way. I commend MINUSMA, international forces and the Malian defence and
security forces for their courageous and effective response to the 14 April terrorist
attack in Timbuktu.
86. The allegations of violations of human rights and international humanitarian law
in the conduct of counter-terrorism operations in central Mali and the Ménaka region
are of concern. MINUSMA stands ready to support the authorities in carrying out
investigations and calls for those responsible for those violations to be held to
account. I urge international and national forces to ensure that military operations are
conducted in accordance with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
87. During my visit to the Mopti region, I was made keenly aware of the depth of
the agropastoral and nutrition crisis, in a context where the number of people in need
of emergency food assistance has doubled over the past year. The dire food situation,
which is likely to further deteriorate absent an early response at the required scale,
requires the urgent mobilization of the international community. I also encourage all
partners to focus their efforts on improving the humanitarian situation and access to
basic social services and creating income-generating opportunities to address the
growing concerns regarding unemployment, marginalization and exclusion, which
continue to fuel recruitment by violent extremist elements.
18-08658

17/21

S/2018/541

88. Continued concerns were expressed during my visit about the spillover of the
insecurity on neighbouring countries. I remain fully supportive of the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel, which remains a fundamental aspect of the
multidimensional response required to address instability in the Sahel. MINUSMA
stands ready to provide operational and logistical support to the Joint Force, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 2391 (2017). I continue to hold the view,
however, that stronger support to the Joint Force, including with predictable and
sustainable financial resources, is critical to ensuring the success of that initiative.
89. I welcome the report of the independent observer, and the observations therein
on the implementation of the Agreement during the period from 15 January to
30 April. The work of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali and the application of the tools available to it,
together with the efforts of the independent observer, in addition to the benchmarks
that would be tied to the pact for peace, will hopefully contribute to increasing
momentum on the implementation of the Agreement, as well as to the broader peace
process and needed institutional and governance reforms. They will also inform an
objective assessment of the progress realized. I call upon the Security Council t o
support my recommendation, as well as the proposed priorities and staggering the
implementation of the Mission’s mandate, as informed by the strategic review.
90. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that the Agreement remains the cornerstone of
the peace process in Mali, its potential to spur national dialogue and governance
reform, with a beneficial impact beyond the northern regions, is undoubted, and
MINUSMA has a key role to play in supporting it. In that regard, I recommend that
the mandate of MINUSMA should be extended for another year, until 30 June 2019,
it being adjusted according to the priority areas and with a configuration as proposed
in the strategic review and outlined in my recommendation above. The Mission ’s
posture would then be kept under regular review in the light of the evolution of the
peace process.
91. I commend my Special Representative, Mahamat Saleh Annadif, and all United
Nations entities operating on the ground, including humanitarian actors who operate
in a very challenging environment, for their service. I am grateful to the international
mediation team, including the lead mediator, Algeria, regional and international
organizations, including the Group of Five for the Sahel, the European Union, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West African States, non-governmental
organizations and all other partners for their support towards the restoration of peace
and stability in Mali.

18/21

18-08658

S/2018/541

Annex I
Military and police strength of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali as at 22 May 2018
Military

Police

Staff officers and in units
Country

Men

Armenia

1

Austria

Women

Individual police officers

Total

3

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

278

278

Women

Total

3

1 373

14

1 387

Belgium

98

7

105

Benin

256

4

260

Bhutan

4

Burkina Faso

Women

Total police

1

Bangladesh

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Men

In formed police units

278

278

18

2

20

139

1

140

157

3

160

15

5

20

133

6

139

148

11

159

4

2

2

1 648

68

1 716

Burundi

1

1

2

Cambodia

277

25

302

Cameroon

2

1

3

16

4

20

16

4

20

Chad

1 440

2

1 442

16

5

21

16

5

21

China

389

14

403

Côte d’Ivoire

156

4

160

19

5

24

19

5

24

Czechia

5

5

Denmark

1

1

Egypt

335

335

El Salvador

94

Estonia

3

3

Ethiopia

1

1

11

3

3

135

135

138

138

105

Finland

5

5

5

1

6

5

1

6

France

24

24

10

2

12

10

2

12

7

0

7

7

0

7

11

10

21

11

10

21

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

10

8

8

8

8

1

1

1

1

Gambia

4

Germany

676

Ghana

165

Guatemala
Guinea

4
18

165

2
858

694
2

11

869

Hungary
Indonesia

11

Italy

1

11

Jordan

10

Kenya

7

1

8

Latvia

8

1

9

Liberia

76

6

82

Lithuania

36

3

39

1

Madagascar
Mauritania

18-08658

7

7

19/21

S/2018/541
Military

Police

Staff officers and in units
Country

Men

Individual police officers

Women

Total

Mexico

1

Nepal

198

2

200

Netherlands

259

13

272

New Zealand

In formed police units

Men

Women

Total

4

2

Men

Women

Total

Total police
Men

Women

Total

6

4

2

6

19

11

30

127

19

146

1

1

1

Niger

856

8

864

19

11

30

Nigeria

71

15

86

2

5

7

Norway

14

1

15

Pakistan

3

3

Portugal

2

2

1

1

1

1

Romania

2

2

6

6

6

6

Senegal

1 041

14

1 055

29

Sierra Leone

12

2

14

Spain

1

1

2

Sri Lanka

207

Sweden

260

28

288

6

5

1

6

4

Togo

900

38

938

13

Tunisia

2

1

3

27

Switzerland

286

29

139

315

315

2

2

7

6

4

4

30

345
2

1

19

303

2

29

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2
29

Yemen

2

2

2

11 845

324 12 169

249

19

290

4

27

2

271

7

284

United States of America

13

1

29

United Kingdom of
Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

20/21

30

14

207

Turkey

Total

1

125

2
8

37

56

305

1 367

69

1 436

1 616

125

1 741

18-08658

S/2018/541

Annex II
Map

18-08658

21/21
