UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/65
8 November 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3452nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 8 November 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the agreement by the parties in the
course of the third round of inter-Tajik talks, held in Islamabad from
20 to 31 October 1994, on the extension until 6 February 1995 of the
Agreement of 17 September 1994 on a Temporary Cease-fire and the Cessation
of Other Hostile Acts on the Tajik-Afghan Border and within the Country for
the Duration of the Talks, as well as signing of the Protocol of the Joint
Commission for the implementation of the Agreement. These agreements were
arrived at through the good offices of the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy and with the assistance of the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, the Russian Federation
and other countries and of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, acting as observers
at the inter-Tajik talks.
"The Council further welcomes the reaffirmed commitment by the parties
to resolve the conflict only through political means and their agreement to
hold the next round of talks in early December 1994 in Moscow.
"The Council emphasizes the importance of full and timely
implementation by the parties of the obligations to which they have
committed themselves including those relating to the exchange of prisoners.
It especially stresses the need for strict observance of the cease-fire and
cessation of all hostile acts.
"The Council invites the parties to make all the efforts necessary to
achieve further substantial progress during the next round of inter-Tajik
talks. It calls upon them to continue to cooperate with the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for this purpose.

94-43718 (E)

081194

/...

S/PRST/1994/65
English
Page 2

"The Council reaffirms its support for the efforts by the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy to facilitate the political
dialogue between the Government of Tajikistan and the Tajik opposition
aimed at achieving national reconciliation. It welcomes the establishment
by the parties of a Joint Commission to monitor the implementation of the
17 September Agreement, and requests the Secretary-General to present
expeditiously his views and recommendations regarding the role that the
United Nations could play in assisting the practical implementation of the
agreements achieved including any implications for the current United
Nations Mission to Tajikistan.
"The Council calls upon the international community, and in
particular, the States of the region to render utmost support to the
consolidation of the progress towards national reconciliation achieved in
the course of the inter-Tajik talks and to abstain from any actions that
could complicate the peace process."

-----
