United Nations

A/RES/57/337

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 July 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 10

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/57/L.79)]

57/337. Prevention of armed conflict
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling Chapter VI and Article 2.3 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples as contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Recognizing that multilateral cooperation under United Nations auspices could
be an effective means to prevent armed conflict and to address its root causes,
Reaffirming its commitment to the principles of the political independence, the
sovereign equality and the territorial integrity of all States,
Guided by the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, annexed to its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the prevention of
armed conflict, 1
Bearing in mind its responsibilities, functions and powers under the Charter of
the United Nations, and thus recalling all its relevant resolutions in matters related
to the question of the prevention of armed conflict,
Recalling all Security Council resolutions relating to the prevention of armed
conflict, and noting all Security Council presidential statements related to this
matter,
Recognizing that the prevention of armed conflict and the pacific settlement of
disputes could be useful tools for the United Nations in order to build a solid
foundation for peace,

_______________
1

02 56359

A/55/985-S/2001/574 and Corr.1.

A/RES/57/337

Alarmed by the human costs and devastating humanitarian, economic,
environmental, political and social consequences of armed conflict, and recognizing
the imperatives, including moral, of the prevention of armed conflict and its benefits
for peace and development, in particular by addressing the root causes of armed
conflict,
Recognizing that peace and development are mutually reinforcing, including in
the prevention of armed conflict,
Recognizing also the importance of humanitarian assistance in ensuring an
effective transition from conflict to peace and in preventing the recurrence of armed
conflict,
Affirming that the fulfilment of the obligation to respect and ensure respect in
all circumstances for the provisions of international humanitarian law, particularly
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, 2 will enhance the prospects for the peaceful resolution of
armed conflict and for the prevention of its occurrence and recurrence,
Affirming also that full respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all is one of the key elements for the prevention of armed conflict,
Recognizing that the root causes of armed conflict are multidimensional in
nature, thus requiring a comprehensive and integrated approach to the prevention of
armed conflict,
Determined to establish a just and lasting peace all over the world in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
and upholding the sovereign equality of all States, respect for their territorial
integrity and political independence, resolution of disputes by peaceful means and in
conformity with the principles of justice and international law, the right of selfdetermination of peoples which remain under colonial domination and foreign
occupation, non-interference in the internal affairs of States, respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, respect for the equal rights of all without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, and international cooperation in
solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian
character,
Welcoming the adoption of the Global Agenda for Dialogue among
Civilizations, 3 and recognizing the continued inter-religious dialogues and the
promotion of religious harmony as contributions to the prevention of armed conflict,
Affirming that the ethnic, cultural and religious identity of minorities, where
they exist, must be protected, and that persons belonging to such minorities should
be treated equally and enjoy their human rights and fundamental freedoms without
discrimination of any kind,
Resolving to take appropriate measures, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, combined with the efforts of Member States, to prevent armed
conflicts,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
the prevention of armed conflict; 1

_______________
2
3

2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
See resolution 56/6.

A/RES/57/337

2.
Emphasizes the importance of a comprehensive and coherent strategy
comprising short-term operational and long-term structural measures for the
prevention of armed conflict, and recognizes the ten principles outlined in the report
of the Secretary-General;
3.
Reaffirms the primary responsibility of Member States for the prevention
of armed conflict, recalls the important role of the United Nations in this regard, and
invites Member States, where appropriate, to adopt national strategies, taking into
account, inter alia, those ten principles, as well as such elements as multilateral and
regional cooperation, mutual benefit, sovereign equality, transparency and
confidence-building measures;
4.
Encourages Member States to utilize regional arrangements or agencies,
where available, for the peaceful settlement of their disputes;
5.
Reiterates its call upon the Member States to settle their disputes by
peaceful means as set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations,
including by the most effective use of the International Court of Justice;
6.
Resolves that all Member States strictly adhere to their obligations as laid
down in the Charter of the United Nations;
7.
Calls upon the parties to any dispute, the continuance of which is likely
to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, to seek a solution
by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement,
resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own
choice in accordance with Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations;
8.
Reaffirms the primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, especially should the parties to
such a dispute fail to settle it by the means indicated in paragraph 7 above in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, and
also notes in this regard the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
International Disputes; 4
9.
Emphasizes that the prevention of armed conflict would be promoted by
continued cooperation among Member States, the United Nations system, the
Bretton Woods institutions and regional and subregional organizations, noting that
the private sector and civil society have supporting roles to play;
10. Reaffirms, in the context of the prevention of armed conflict, the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force and of acts of colonization,
and affirms the need to bring an end to situations of foreign occupation, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and international law;
11. Recognizes the need for mainstreaming and coordinating the prevention
of armed conflict throughout the United Nations system, and calls upon all its
relevant organs, organizations and bodies to consider, in accordance with their
respective mandates, how they could best include a conflict prevention perspective
in their activities, where appropriate, and to inform the General Assembly, pursuant
to resolution 55/281 of 1 August 2001, no later than at its fifty-ninth session, of
progress achieved in this regard;

_______________
4

Resolution 37/10, annex.

3

A/RES/57/337

12. Calls upon Member States and the international community to abide by
the resolve of the Millennium Assembly to make the United Nations more effective
in maintaining peace and security by giving it the resources and tools it needs for
conflict prevention; 5
13. Calls for strengthening the capacity of the United Nations in order to
carry out more effectively its responsibilities for the prevention of armed conflict,
including relevant peace-building and development activities, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit a detailed review of the capacity of the United Nations
system in the context of the report on the implementation of the present resolution;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the
implementation of the present resolution, taking into account, inter alia, the views
expressed by Member States and the organs, agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations system in accordance with resolution 55/281, for consideration no
later than at its fifty-ninth session;
15. Decides to adopt the conclusions and recommendations, based on its
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General, as contained in the annex to the
present resolution;
16. Decides also to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth
session a specific item entitled “Prevention of armed conflict”.
93rd plenary meeting
3 July 2003

Annex
General Assembly conclusions and recommendations on the
prevention of armed conflict
The General Assembly
Role of Member States
1.
Calls upon Member States to achieve the goals embodied in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, 6 including the internationally agreed development
goals, as well as the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits;
2.
Calls in this regard upon Member States and the international community
at large to support poverty eradication measures and the development strategies of
developing countries;
3.
Urges developed countries that have not done so to make concrete efforts
towards the target of providing 0.7 per cent of their gross national product as official
development assistance to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of their
gross national product as official development assistance to least developed
countries, as reconfirmed at the Third United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries, 7 and encourages developing countries to build on progress

_______________
5

See resolution 55/2, para. 9.
See resolution 55/2.
7
See A/CONF.191/11.
6

4

A/RES/57/337

achieved in ensuring that official development assistance is used effectively to help
to achieve development goals and targets;
4.
Encourages greater transparency in armaments by Member States, as
appropriate, including broader and more active participation in the United Nations
instruments relating to arms registers and military expenditures, and calls upon them
strongly to support confidence-building measures in this area;
5.
Calls upon Member States to implement the obligations assumed by them
as States parties to treaties in such areas as arms control, non-proliferation and
disarmament and to strengthen their international verification instruments;
6.
Reaffirms the resolve of the international community to strive for the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction;
7.
Invites Member States that have not already done so to consider, as
appropriate, becoming parties to arms control, non-proliferation and disarmament
treaties;
8.
Urges Member States, as well as relevant United Nations bodies, to take
appropriate measures to fully implement the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects; 8
9.
Urges Member States which have not already done so to consider
ratification, acceptance, approval of or accession to the international human rights
and international humanitarian law instruments, and also other international
instruments relevant to the prevention of armed conflict;
10. Calls upon Member States to comply in good faith with the obligations
assumed by them as States parties to international legal instruments relevant to the
prevention of armed conflict;
11. Notes the entry into force on 1 July 2002 of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court 9 and the subsequent establishment of the International
Criminal Court;
12. Stresses the need to bring to justice the perpetrators of war crimes and
crimes against humanity as a significant contribution towards the promotion of a
culture of prevention;
13. Also stresses the important role that women, in their various capacities,
and with their expertise, training and knowledge, can play with regard to the
prevention of armed conflict, in all its aspects, and calls for the strengthening of that
role in all relevant institutions at the national, regional and international levels;
14. Urges Member States to make the most effective use of existing and new
procedures and methods for the peaceful settlement of their disputes, including, as
appropriate, arbitration, mediation and other treaty-based arrangements, and the
International Court of Justice, to settle their disputes in a peaceful manner and
thereby promote the role of international law in international relations;

_______________
8

See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
9
Official Records of the United Nations Diplomatic Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Establishment
of an International Criminal Court, Rome, 15 June–17 July 1998, vol. I: Final documents (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.I.5), sect. A.

5

A/RES/57/337

15. Emphasizes the need, at all levels of society and among nations, for
strengthening freedom, justice, democracy, tolerance, solidarity, cooperation,
pluralism, cultural diversity, dialogue and understanding as important elements for
preventing armed conflict;
16. Encourages Member States to strengthen national capacities for
addressing structural risk factors, as deemed useful by national Governments, with
the support, as appropriate, of the international community, including the United
Nations system, the Bretton Woods institutions and regional and subregional
organizations;
Role of the General Assembly
17. Expresses its determination to make more effective use of its powers
under Articles 10, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 17 of the Charter of the United Nations for the
prevention of armed conflict;
18.
Nations;

Intends to make fuller use of Article 96 of the Charter of the United

19. Decides to consider ways of enhancing interaction with the other United
Nations organs, especially the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council, and with the Secretary-General in terms of developing and implementing
long- and short-term measures and strategies aimed at preventing armed conflict;
Role of the Security Council
20. Takes note of the provisions contained in Security Council resolution
1366 (2001) of 30 August 2001, in particular the commitment of the Council to take
early and effective action to prevent armed conflict;
21. Encourages the Security Council to give prompt consideration to early
warning or prevention cases brought to its attention by the Secretary-General, and to
use appropriate mechanisms, such as the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, with due regard to relevant regional and
subregional dimensions, in accordance with Article 99 of the Charter of the United
Nations;
22. Further encourages the Security Council to keep under close review
situations of potential armed conflict and to consider seriously cases of potential
armed conflict brought to its attention by a State or the General Assembly or on the
basis of information furnished by the Economic and Social Council;
23. Recognizes that the United Nations can continue to play an important
role in the prevention of armed conflict by promoting conflict resolution and dispute
settlement;
24. Encourages the continued strengthening of the process of the peaceful
settlement of disputes and efforts to make it more effective;
25. Notes the commitment of the Security Council to make wider and
effective use of the procedures and means enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, particularly in Chapter VI, as one of the essential components of its work
to promote and maintain international peace and security;
26. Reaffirms that the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, for which the prevention of armed conflict is
important, is conferred upon the Security Council, and reiterates that, under
6

A/RES/57/337

Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Members of the United Nations
have agreed to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security Council in
accordance with the Charter;
27. Recommends that the Security Council continue to mandate peacekeeping
operations and include, as appropriate, peace-building elements therein, in such a
way as to generate conditions which, to the maximum extent possible, help to avoid
the recurrence of armed conflict;
28. Encourages the Security Council to continue to invite the office of the
United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator and other relevant United Nations
agencies to brief its members on emergency situations which it deems to represent a
threat to international peace and security, and to support the implementation of
protection and assistance activities by relevant United Nations agencies in
accordance with their respective mandates;
29. Notes the willingness of the Security Council to consider, in the context
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, preventive deployments with the
consent and cooperation of the Member States concerned;
30. Encourages the Security Council to give, as appropriate, greater attention
to gender perspectives in all its activities aimed at the prevention of armed conflict;
31. Encourages the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
to strengthen their mutual cooperation and coordination, in accordance with their
respective mandates, for the prevention of armed conflict;
Role of the Economic and Social Council
32. Supports the more active involvement of the Economic and Social
Council with regard to the prevention of armed conflict, taking into account the
relevant recommendations of the Secretary-General and the need to promote socioeconomic measures, including economic growth, in support of poverty eradication
and development, as a core element of Council strategy in that regard;
33. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/1 of 15 July
2002, which envisages the creation of ad hoc advisory groups on African countries
emerging from conflicts, as well as Council decision 2002/304 of 25 October 2002,
by which the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau was created, requests the
Council to present a report on the lessons learned by the ad hoc advisory groups
during its substantive session of 2004, and recommends that such endeavours be
further strengthened, including through measures that promote more effective
responses in cooperation and coordination with the United Nations system as a
whole, the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization;
Role of the Secretary-General
34. Welcomes the intention of the Security Council to engage within the
United Nations system in a focused dialogue on what practical measures the United
Nations system needs to take to promote greater coherence in its activities aimed at
the prevention of armed conflict, and recommends that consideration be given, inter
alia, to identifying the proper framework for the elaboration of system-wide
coherent and action-oriented strategies within the United Nation System, at
Headquarters and in the field, and for rationalizing the funding procedures for the
prevention of armed conflict;

7

A/RES/57/337

35. Recalls, in that context, the need to strengthen the capacity of the United
Nations for early warning, collection of information and analysis, as referred to in
its resolution 47/120 A of 18 December 1992, and notes the relevant conclusions
and recommendations endorsed in its resolution 56/225 of 24 December 2001;
36. Supports the intention of the Secretary-General to improve the use of
means placed at his disposal and within his authority to facilitate the prevention of
armed conflict, including through fact-finding missions and confidence-building
measures;
Interaction between the United Nations and other international actors in the
prevention of armed conflict: role of regional organizations and civil society
Regional organizations
37. Calls for the strengthening of cooperation, where appropriate, between
the United Nations and regional organizations in the field of prevention of armed
conflict, in accordance with their respective mandates, in particular in capacitybuilding and the coordination of their respective activities, and for that purpose
requests the Secretary-General to present concrete proposals for enhancing
Secretariat support of those activities within his comprehensive report;
38. Encourages the continuation of high-level United Nations/regional
organizations meetings, including on the prevention of armed conflict, and requests
the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed accordingly;
Civil society
39. Recognizes the important supporting role of civil society in the
prevention of armed conflict, and invites it to continue to support efforts for the
prevention of armed conflict and to pursue practices that foster a climate of peace,
help to prevent or mitigate crisis situations and contribute to reconciliation.

8
