Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Stressing that the cultural heritage of a people conditions the flowering of its artistic values and its over-all
development, which are tokens of its authenticity,
Convinced that the promotion of national culture can
enhance a people's ability to understand the culture and
civilization of other peoples and thus can have a
favourable impact on intemational co-operation,
l. Affirms that the prompt restitution to a country of
1ts objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces and manuscripts by another country, without charge, is calculated
to strengthen intemaitional co-operation inasmuch as it
constitutes just reparation for damage done;
2. Recognizes in this connexion the special obligations incumbent upon those countries which had access
to such valuable objects, either through particular claims
or on other pretexts, as a result of their rule over or
their occupation of a foreign territory;
3. Calls upon all States concemed to protect and
safeguard the works of art whioh are still in Territories
under their domination;
4. Invites Member States to ratify the Convention on
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit ilmport, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
Property, adopted by the General Gonference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization in 1970;
5. Looks forward to the meeting of the Commibtee
of Experts to Study the Question of the Restitution of
Works of Art., established by the United Nations Educationa], ScientHic and Cultural Organization, to be held
at Cairo early in 1976, aind expresses the hope tha,t the
Committee will adopt adequate measures for the restitution of works of art to countries victirns of expropriatioo;
6. Calls upon those States concerned which have not
already done so to proceed to the restitution of objets
d'art, monume:nts, museum pieces, manuscripts and
documents to their countries of origin, such restitution
being calculated to strengthen intemational understanding and co-operation;
·
7. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and Member States, to submit a report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
progress achieved.
2410th plenary meeting
19 J\{ovember 1975
1

3395 (XXX). Question of Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having co~dered the question of Cyprus,
H aving heard the statements in the debate and taking
note of the report of the Special Political Committee,21
Noting with concern that four rounds of talks between
the representatives of the two communities in pursuance
of Security Council resolution 367 (1975) of 12 March
1975 have not yet led to a mutually acceptable
settlement,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of the crisis in
Cyprus,
Mindful of the need to solve the Cyprus crisás without
further delay by peaceful means in accordance with the
purposes and principies of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms the urgent need for continued efforts for
the effeotive implementation in all its parts of General
· .11 Otlic:ial Records of the Gen~ral A~embly, Thlrtleth Seanon, A.nne:xes, agenda ítem 125, d ~ i i .A/10351.º

5

Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November
1974 endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution
365 (1974) of 13 December 1974 and, to that end,
2. Calls once again upan all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and nonalignment of •the Republic of Cyprus and to refrain
from ali acts and interventions directed against it;
3. Demands the withdrawal without further deliay of
ali foreign armed forces and foreign military presence
and personnel from the Republic of Cyprus, and the
cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs;
4. Calls upon the parties concemed to undertake
urgent measures to facilitate the voluntary retum of ali
refugees to their homes in safety and to settle all other
aspects of the refugee problem;
5. Calls for the immediate resumption in a meaningful and constructive manner of the negotiations between
the represootiatives of the twp communities, under the
auspices of the Secretary-General, to be conducted
freely on an equail. footing with a view to reach~ng a
mutually acceptable agreement based on their fundamental and legitimate rights;
6. Urges all parties to refrain from unilateral actions
in contravention of resolution 3212 (XXIX), including
cbanges in the demographiic struoture of Cyprus;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue bis
role in the negotiations between the representatives of
the two communities;
8. A lso requests the Secretary-General to bring the
P!esent resolution to t_he '.attention of the Security Counctl and to report on 1ts 1mplementation as soon as appropriate and not later than 31 March 1976;
9. Calls upan ali parties to continue to co-operate
fuhly with the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus;
10. Decides to remain seized of this question.
2413th plenary meeting
20 November 1975
3412 (XXX), Co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African
Unity

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its previous resolutions on co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization., of
African Unity, including in particular resolution 3280
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Govemment of the
Organization of African Unity at its twelfth ordinary
session, held at Kampala from 28 July to 1 August
1975,22
.
Taking into account the important statement made
by ithe current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads
of ~tate ·and Govemment of the Organization of African
Umty at the 2370th plenary meeting of ,the General
Assembly on 1 Ootober 1975,
IVoting with satisfaction the continued efforts of the
Organization of African Unity ,and die Unitecl Nations
the specializ.ed agencies and other organizations withi~
the United Nations system to help solve the serious
problems which priincipally affect southem Afrioa,
A ware of the urgent oeed to give increased assistance·
to the victims of coloniallsm, racial discrimination and
112 A/10297, anncx II.

General Aesemhly-·.. ••Thirtieth Se88ion

--·--·-·------~----------------------apartheid as a result of intensificd acts of repression
against the African ~ple,: by the. Go_vern~n~nt ?f
South Africa and the 1llegal rac1st inmonty reg1me m
Southern RhodesÜJ (Zimbabvw),
Conscious of the neod to t.akc effective steps for the
vádest possible dissermi?ation of information relatin_g
to the strngglc of the Afrnca:n poorples~onccmed for thetr
]iberation from coloni,Jlisrn, rnci,,J cli~crimination and
apartheid,
Bearing in mind the pooitivc results achieved in_ the
work of the United l~ations bodies concemed as a dll'ect
cpnsequence of the participation of rnpres~ntatives of
the national liberation movements recogmzed by the
Organization of African Unity in the r~levant proceed·ings of thesc bodies in oo observer oapaClty,
I . T akes note of the rcport of thc Secretary-General
en co-operation between the UnitecJ Nations an? the
Organization of African Unity 2:i . and oon:unends hts efforts in promoüng such co-operiatwn;
2. Expresses its appreciation of the outstanding contribution made by the Organization of African Unity
in the relevant work of the United Nations bodies concemed, including in particular -the ,positive role played
by the Administrative Secreta_ry-<?eneral amJ the ~neral Secretariat of ,the Orgamzat\on of Afncan Umty;
3. Reaffirms the deterrnination of the United
Nations, in co-operatíon with the Organization of Afri-can Unity to intensify its efforts to find a solution to
the pres.e~t grave situ~tiun in southern /'.frica;
·
4. Requests the Sccretary-General to continue to
take the neccssary measures t.o strengtben co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, particrularly with regard
to the provision of assistance to the victims of colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa, and, in this connexton, dmws attentiion to the Assistance Fund for the
Struggle against Colonialism and A va, thád cstablished
by the Organization of Afric;rn Unity;
5. Draws once again the attention of ali United
Nations bodies, in particular the Scourity Council, to
the continued necd to take effective measures to associate dosc,ly the Organjz::iti-on of /\frican Unity reguhrly with all theit work co 1 H.:erning Africa, including
especially the activitie~ of the r'>inrnittee on sanctions
of the Council; 24
6. Invites the speciialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the IJnited Nations system to
continue and intensify their •'(Hiperati,_111 with the
Organization of ¡\frican Urúty;
'
7. Decides to invite as observers, on a regular basis
and in acoordance with earlier practke, representatives
•Jf the national liberation movements reoognized by the
Organization of African Unity to participate iu the
,'.'eleVlalll,t work of the Maiin Committees of the General
/\ssembly and its subsidtl,ary organs concemed, as wcll
as in oonferences,, scmi.nars and other meetings held
under the auspices of the Uniited Nations which relate
l<J their countries, 1<100 reques-ts the Secreitary-General,
in consultation with thc Organization of African Unity,
to ensure that the nece.ssary ?n1angements are made
for 1heir effectíve parfo;ipation i<>,:.ludi.r•p: the requisite
financ1al ,provisions;
23 b/10254

:l•l S<:c11.rity (;:,1mdl ' ·:;::n1_,1ítt,:i- , ,,t.!lM,,,tt~.d 1n pnrsurwr,-e of
25:··~ r ~ ~0,~i ·•
1]'l' · ~ ~l,',<,','i f::~~~ \tf [-:'tt,,utl~t;ru

;:"t:,.~ 0 1utio:1r1

:?.hodesi~~--

11

8. Requests the Secre1Jary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-1irst session a report on
the .implementation of the present resolution and on the
developmcnt of rn-operation between the Organization
of African Unity and the organizations conceme<l within
thc l Jnited Nations system.
2421 st plenary meeting
28 November 1975

.~413 (XXX). Admission of the Republic of
Surinam to memhe1rship in the United
Nations
1'he General Assembly,
Having considered the application for membership of
Council of 1 December 1975 that the Republic of
Surinam should be adrnitted to membership in the
lJni,ted Nations, 25
Having considered the application for rnembership of
the Republic of Surinam.26
Decides to admit the Republic of Surinam to membership iu the Unitcd Natinns.
2428th plenary meeting
4 December 1975

3414 (XXX). The situatim1 in the Middle East
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item cntitled "The situation
in tibe Middle East",
'
t'
Guided by the purposes and principies of the Charter
of the United Nations and resolutions of the United
Nations as well as those principies of international
law which prohibit the occupation or acquisition of
territory by the use of force and which consider any
military occupation, however temporary, or any forcible annexation of such territory, or part thereof,, as an
act of aggression,
Gravely concerned at the continuation of the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories and ilsrael'~ persistent
denial of the -inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people,
Recalling relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, particularly those ooncerning the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian
people and its right to participate in any efforts for
roeace,
Convinced that the early reconvening of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East with the participation
of a:11 the parties concemed, · including the Palestine
Liberation Organization, is essential for the realization
of a just and lasting settlement in the region,
Convinced that the present situation prevailing in the
Middle East continues to constitute a serious threat to
intemational .peace and security, and that urgent measures should be taken in order to ensure Israel's full
compliance with relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council on the questions
of Palestine and the Middle East,
Recognizing that peace is indivisible and that a just
and lasting settlement of the question of the Mi.ddle
East must be based on a oomprehensive solution under thc auspices of the United N at.ions, which takes into
consideration all aspects of the Middle East oonfl.ict,
211 Otlicial Records of the General A.ssembly, Thirtieth Susion, Annexes, agenda item 22, document A/10413.
'16 A/103811-S/1188,¡_ For the printed te11.t, see Of!icial Records
('/ {he S1:cm'lty Cm1t1dl, Thirrfr:th l''.eur, Supplement far Ocf.•·•,,,r, j•J'o11en.1be1 ,m,.i Vec,;¡¡_i(,,.,,. .Hrl'/5.
