A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/S-16/PV. 6
22 January 1990
ENGLISH

Sixteenth special session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM REffiRD OF THE SIXTH MEETING
Held at Headouarters, New York,
on Thursday, 14 December 1989, at 3 p.m.
President:
later:

Mr. HURST
(Vice-President)

(Antigua and Barbuda)

Mr. GARBA
(President)

(Nigeria}

Apartheid and its destructive consequences in southern Africa [7]
(continued)
Closure of the sixteenth special session

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed
in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to oriqinal speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week,
to the Chief, Official Records Edi tinq Section, Department of Conference Services,
room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
89-60033

6468V (E)

A/S-16/PV. 6

EH/bg

2

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hurst (Antigua and Barbuda),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was·called to order at 3.20 p.m.
AGENDA ITEM 7 (continued)
APARTHEID AND I'IS DES'ffiUCTIVE

ffiNSE~ENCES

Mr. NANDOE (Suriname):

IN SOUTHERN AFRICA

It gives our delegation great pleasure to see

Ambassador Garha presiding over this first ever special session of the General
Assembly on apartheid, since we acknowledge his tirelessly devoted efforts in
carrying out his mandate as Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid ann
his commitment to the eradication of the scourge of apartheid.
This special session is taking place amidst a relaxation of tensions in
international relations and progress in the field of peace and international
security.

It is therefore sad to note that in today's changing world we are still

confronted with that heinous system of racism and racial discrimination called
apartheid.
Recent developments in South Africa, such as the allowing of marches, the
encouragement of the repeal of certain laws, the consultation of churchmen and,
last hut not least, the release of eight important prisoners are all positive steps
indicating that domestic and internationlil pressure are at last beginning to have
some effect.

Despite those developments the situation in South Africa remains, in

essence, the sa~.

The timing of the release of the prisoners was partlv tactical,

to drown the call for more sanctions at the Commonwealth Conference in
Kuala Lumpur.

It seems the South African leader even intends to release

Mr. Mandela and get rid of the Separate Amenities Act, the umbrella for what
remains of petty apartheid, but it is not expected that genuine reform will extend
to grand apartheid, which rests upon stronger foundations such as the Group Areas

._.
Act, the various land acts and above all the Population Registration Act.

All

EH/bg

A/S-16/PV.G
3

(Mr. Nandoe, Suriname)
those so-called acts are designed literally to keep the disenfranchised majority of
the South African people in their so-called places.

Furthermore, the state of

emergency is still in force and the African National Congress (ANC) and the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC) and many other organizations remain banned.
The disheartening aspect of the events in South Africa is the historical
inability of the Government to understand that the majority of the people do not
want to - and will not - live with apartheid in any of its forms.

Half-hearted

reforms, such as a tricameral parliament where a handful of blacks play the
politics of collaboration, or the confederal dream of the National Party, where
undoubtedly whites will rule whites in the rich areas and blacks will have autonomy
in their barren homelands and ghettoes, are doomed to failure.
The Government of South Africa can no longer repackage with impunity the
tenets of apartheid by promising the future ending of white domination while at the
same time allowing its security forces to suppress the anti-apartheid opposition.
According to a report of the Committee against Apartheid, more than 20 protestors
died, among them churchmen and elderly women, and more than 1,500 arrests were made
when a defiance campaign was organized against apartheid laws and racially
segregated elections on 6 September this year.

A recent report of the Economic

Commission for Africa reveals that South Africa's military aggression and the
destabilization of its neighbours cost the reqion g10 billion in 1988 alone and
over $60 billion and one and a half million lives in the first nine years of this
decade.
A very frightening aspect regarding the suppression of political opponents has
been highlighted during confessions of former South African policemen, who admitted
that they were part of assassination squads set up within the South African police
which were responsible for assassinations committed by allegedly unknown persons
and that those killings were authorized by the highest security officials.

A/S-16/PV.6

EH/bg

4
(Mr~

Nandoe;·Snriname)

We urge the Government of South Africa to investigate this matter, which was
brought to its attention by the Special Rapporteur on Summary and Arbitrary
Executions on 23 November 1989.
In this respect we would also like to draw attention to the activities of the
White Wolves in South Africa who, according to an article in the Christian
Science Monitor of 7 November, have taken credit for many violent acts.

That

newspaper notes that there has been only one conviction in respect of the more than
60 political assassinations and that most likely the Government has not given these
cases high priority, or has given tacit approval.

In this respect we indeed hope

that the recent decision of the Government to limit military influence in
Government decision-making by replacing the national security management system
will improve the relationship with the opposition parties.

As many representatives have observed, the political and economic sanctions
against South Africa adopted by a number of Member States have contributed to some
changes.

Although the South African economy is based upon gold, diamonds and

strategic minerals, which have been exempted from sanctions and are easily
transported, it has proved vulnerable to external trade sanctions and a related
loss of investor confidence.
As the 1980s come to an end, South Africa confronts an inexorable logic:

a

coercively fragmented and stratified State of 5 million white citizens dominating
some 28 milliion others cannot hope to achieve and sustain healthy economic
development.

It could not do so even if it stopped expending huge sums

administering and defending Namibia, dispatching expeditionary forces, supporting
surrogate armies and monitoring pre-emptive strikes against ANC.

A/S-16/PV. 6
5

EH/bg

(Mr. Nandoe, Suriname)
Sanctions, even if their implementation, monitoring and enforcement have been
unco-ordinated and lax, have had an adverse impact on South Africa's economy and
have, inter alia, contributed to the withdrawal from Namibia.

In order to

accelerate the force of change, the possibility of the broadening and strengthening
of sanctions could be considered.

However, at the same time we are witnessing the

fact that most conflicts are not being resolved by acts of force, violence,
destabilization and aggression but that ultimately negotiations have brought about
solutions even to deep-rooted problems.
The democratic· movement in South Africa is ready to negotiate a peaceful
settlement on the basis of the Harare Declaration, which was endorsed by the summit
Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in Belgrade.
It is up to the South African Government to create the necessary climate so
that genuine and serious negotiations can take place, leading to the dismantling of
apartheid and the creation of a democratic society.

As I said earlier, there have

been changes in South Africa but thus far most of them have been of only a cosmetic
nature.

A/S-16/PV. 6

EMS/4

6

(Mr. Nandoe, Suriname)
We therefore cherish the hope that the process of substantive change, which
the Government can no longer prevent, will convince the Pretoria regime of the
necessity of negotiating a peaceful settlement.

If reason and good sense cannot

Prevail, then sooner or later violence will escalate into a hitter and bloody civil
war.
The destructive consequences of apartheid in South Africa, particularly in
Namibia, are manifold.

In that respect I should like to express my Government's

gratitude for the constructive role of the United Nations and for its contribution
to the outcome of the recent elections in Namibia.

In that context we should also

like to congratulate the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) and the
other political parties of Namibia on their recently elected Constituent Assembly.
We reiterate the view of the Non-Aligned Movement that the role of the United
Nations remains crucial in guaranteeing the terri tor ial integrity and security of
Namibia and in ensuring that the constitutional process reflects the sovereign will
of the Namibian people as reposed in the Constituent Assembly.

It is our fervent

hope that uniust omission of Walvis Bay and the Penguin Islands from the territory
of Namibia will he redressed, since that country will otherwise have no port
outlet, which will make it dependent on others in its trade relations.
Mr. SHIHABI (Saudi Arabia)

(interpretation from Arahic):

country it gives me pleasure to congratulate Ambassador Garha on his

On behalf of my
electio~

the presidency of the General Assembly at this special session on apartheid.
take this opportunity to convey to him our great appreciation.

to
I

We are sure that he

will he able to help the Assembly address the issues that made it necessary to
convene a special session and to adopt measures to deal with them effectively.
As members know, the United Nations was established to lay the foundations of
a post-war world of law and moral values.

The Organization came into being to

A/S-16/PV. 6

EMS/4

7

(Mr. Shihabi, Saudi Ar.abia)
co-ordinate the interests of States and peoples in every area and initiate an era
of global humanitarian ;ustice in which the adverse remnants of the Past all over
the world could be eliminated.
It is almost 45 years since this monumental task beqan and yet there are still
gaps in the moral texture of our world:

humanity and human values are being

flotJted and human relations are being brought down to the level of barbarism.

How

can anyone give himself the right to mistreat others because their colour or creed
is different from his?

This is contrary to divine law and a distortion of human

relationships.
Such discrimination violates the most basic of moral principles, it deals
recklessly with social relationships and flies in the face of the dictates of
reason.

Our commitments under the United Nations Charter should prompt us to adopt

the measures that would force the violators to respect the laws of humanity.
It is indeed tragic that towards the end of the twentieth century we are still
faced with the necessity of debating the sick phenomenon of rae ial discrimination·
Apartheid, that pestilence lodged in South Africa, is a scourge that must be
speedily eradicated.

There is no room in our world today for such a plaque.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia under the leadership of the Custodian of the two
Holy Mosques, King Fahd, stands today wholly in support of the General k~sembly and
ready to work with the Merrber States to bring those who pursue such an abhorrent
policy to their senses.

We would restore to man his dignity.

The South African regime, with its racist policies and arbitrary, odious
practices against the hl"lck inhabitants, is a hideous stain on humanity's
escutcheon.

With that reqime in the same abyss stands its partner in racism, the

Zionist regime in Palestine, that other racist phenomenon which refuses to heed the
call of the twentieth centurv or understand that the time of racial discrimination

EMS/4

A/S-16/PV. 6
8-10
(Mr. Shihabi, Saudi

on the ground of colour or creed is past.

Ar~hia)

Those two collaborating regimes

complement each other, whether covertly or overtly.

They support and buttress each

other in every field, including trade, the manufacture of weapons, the arms trade,
the export of terrorist expertise and materiel, and other areas of collaboration
that enhance the oppressor's ability to persist in his oppression.
The information media have revealed. and official sources have confirmed, the
extent of the ongoing collaboration between the Zionist racist regime in Palestine
and the racist regime in South Africa, the latest aspect of which has been the
manufacture of nuclear weapons and long-range missiles.

As is well known, only

those who are bound by the closest ties and the strongest bonds of common interests
allow anyone else to have a share in such indus tries.

The two regimes realize that

they are swimming against the current of history and the norms of human relations.
They know that they are founded on the worst tenets that exist in human relations niscrimination, racial domination, exploitation and abuse.
The report of the Special Committee against Apartheid states that:
"While, in the 1970!':, Israel was the major supplier of arms and ammunition to
South Africa, during the present decade the relationship turned to a
partnership and joint production of armaments.

Israel has provided South

Africa with military technology needed for its growing armaments industry"·
(A/44/22, Part II, para. 1)
Those regimes that go against human nature and the tide of time are built on
foundations the international community abandoned decades, even centuries, ago.
They refuse to heed the lessons of history.

A/S-16/PV. 6

:EMS/5

11

(Mr. Shihabi, Saudi Arabia)
Today we face an urgent crisis.

The suffering of whole peoples, such as the

South Africans and the Palestinians, is hound to continue if we do not urgently
find a solution to end that suffering.

Given all the experiences of the past, we

have no right to give an unjust and oppressive Government a period of grace in the
hope that it will mend its ways, when we know that it has wasted every opportunity
to remedy the situation.

That Government has been given the chance to put an end

to its crookedness, but it has persisted in its course at the expense of the
security and legitimate rights of a whole people on its native soil.
The massacres, deprivation, starvation, arrests, arbitrary laws, curfews,
demolition of houses, obstruction of business, and deprivation of employment - to
mention only some - will avail if nothing in the face of a people's determination
to regain its freedom.

We support the recommendations of the Special Committee

against Apartheid that the sanctions stipulated in the Charter be imposed.
Africa has been given

e~~ery

South

chance to mend its evil ways but has avoided the issue

through circumvention, deceit and outright rejection.
We call upon all States to hear in mind the suffering of a whole people under
the yoke of oppression and to sympathize with the parents whose children are daily
made the victim of State terror and fair game for State-sponsored armed gangs.
Condoning such regimes creates the impression that they can continue their acts
with impunity.

We must side with the efforts of the front-line States in southern

Africa, which pay dearly for their commitment to the principles of the United
Nations and to human val4es.

Their stahili ty is undermined, their sovereignty is

violated and their right to stand for principles to which the whole of humanitv is
committed is constantly challenged.

A/S-16/PV. 6
12

EMS/5

(Mr. Shihabi, Saudi Arabia)
We are hopeful that the special session will crystallize the position of the
United Nations with regard to the continuing policy of apartheid in South Africa.
We should move on to an advanced stage in containing the policies of apartheid,
bringing apartheid to a quick end and exposing the dangers of the policies of those
who aid and abet it by collaborating with itt those who, in the final analysis,
share the responsibility for the consequences of its evil doings and bear the
results of its crime against mankind.
apartheid:

We know why zionism co-operates with

they are two sides of the same coin and share a single course towards

the realization of their community of interests.
As for those other States which observe in their own countries and in their

relations with their neighbours the civilized s·tr.mdards of twentieth-century
conduct, they have no excuse for co-operating with the racist regime of South
Africa.
The problem is clear, as is our course.

We hope that the special session will

achieve the purpose for which it was convened.
Mr. BAKHTIAR (Pakistan):

I wish at the outset to pay a special tribute

to Ambassador Garba for his personal contribution to the international campaign
against apartheid.

The Special Committee against Apartheid, over which he has

presided with such distinction, has rendered invaluable service in strengthening
international efforts to dismantle that vicious system which has rightly been
declared a crime against humanity.
To us in Pakistan the evil doctrine of apartheid represents the very
antithesis of our faith, Islam.

It was 1,400 years ago that our Prophet Mohammad,

peace be upon him, proclaimed that all men are equal before God regardless of race,
colour or class.

In the eyes of Muslims the world over the evil practice of

apartheid is not only a flagrant violation of the basic rights of man but also a
subversion of our religion.

To join the struggle against apartheid is therefore

EMS/5

A/S-16/PV. 6
13-15
(Mr. Bakhtiar, Pakistan)

our sacred duty.

Equality, fraternity and brotherhood of man are not only

principles of morality, humanity and civilized behaviour but also an article of our
faith.
Four decades have passed since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, but apartheid continues to persist with all its wickedness.

One of

the fundamental principles of the United Nations is equality and freedom for all
without distinction as to race or colour, as enshrined in the 1948 Declaration.
Racial discrimination, however, continues to he practised brazenly in South Africa,
where the black maiority population is kept under the yoke of one of the m::>st evil
and vicious doctrines ever put into practice by man.
The history of apartheid in South Africa, which has been sustained through a
brutal regime of terror and oppression, is well known.
apartheid has proved that under colonial, rae ial and
be no peace or iustice.

The loathsome system of

aparth~id

domination there can

Permanent peace and stability in southern Africa can be

attained only when the evil sys tern of apartheid has been totally demolished·
It is a cause of deep regret that, despite renewed expectations and hopes with
the comir-q to power of a new leadership in South Africa, the institutionalized
system of repression and deprivation of the black majority population in South
Africa continues to prevail, with all its brutality.

The steps taken by

President De Klerk's reqime are merely cosmetic devices of reform designed to keep
the real policy of apartheid intact.
The so-called reforms remind me of a passage from the letter written by the
late Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, after he had heen
sentenced to death during General Zia ul-Haq's military rule, to his daughter
Benazir Bhutto, the present Prime Minister of Pakistan, while qiving her his
instructive assessment of the world situation in June 1978 from his death cell in
Rawalpindi prison.

A/S-16/PV. 6
16

JB/6

(Mr. Bakhtiar, Pakistan)
He wrote that :
"The Western attitude needs to be changed towards Africa.
sensitivity of the black man has be understood.
will not do.

The diplomacy of lip service

The plunder of Africa with both hands must stop.

enough of a concession to sit next to an African in an omnibus.
changed and will keep on changing.
indignity.

The pride and

It is not
Afric~

has

The African people ••• will not tolerate

That is ho.r the Asian situation developed.

That is ho.r the

situation will develop in Africa, but more rapidly and more intensely."
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto went on to say:
"The time for condescension and pompous patronage is over.

The common

man of militant Africa will not crawl and lie prostrate before the foreign
exploiter as did the Ashanti royalty in 1896.

In the emerging dawn, Africa

will overcome the legacies of colonialism and tribalism to build an honourable
and dignified future for its beaten and battered children."
The proponents of the view that the new Government in Pretoria has ushered in
an era of hope and reform point to the recent events in South Africa.

They refer

to the release of Mr. Walter Sisulu and seven other prominent political prisoners
from South African jails1 a meeting with Mr. Nelson Mandela, the holding of huge
anti-apartheid demonstrations, and statements by the spokesman of the regime that
the De Klerk leadership is committed to reform.
The hollowness of that claim is evidenced by the most recent elections, in
which the majority of South Africans was once again denied any voice in the affairs
and political process of its country.

The elections in which 36 million blacks

were denied any franchise by fewer than 5 million whites speaks for itself.
The report of the Special Committee against Apartheid clearly indicates that
there has been no movement in the direction of doing away with the main pillars of
the apartheid system.

The state of emergency has not only continued but has been

A/S-16/PV. 6
17

JB/6

(Mr. Bakhtiar, Pakistan)
further strengthened, the han on the national liberation movements of South Africa
remains, and the continued detention of valiant Nelson Mandela and other political
activists without trial persists.
The black African freedom fighters remain in the shadow of death, as was
evident from General Assembly resolution 44/1, adopted earlier this year, which
calls for the commutation of the death sentences imposed on Manqena Boesman and all
other political prisoners.

The report of the Special Committee categorically

spells out that while the apartheid regime has made pronouncements about the
proposed changes in the political structure of the country, its reform plan falls
far short of the demands of the black majority for full political rights.

It qoes

on to underscore the regime's unwillingness to establish the conditions that would
create the necessary climate for negotiations.
The additional repressive measures by Pretoria in its attempts to eliminate
any peaceful opposition whatsoever to its rule have been hidden behind the
smoke-screen of strict press censorship.

That is a fiJtile attempt to conceal from

the eyes of world scrutiny the massive human rights violations being practised by
the racist minority regime.
The central pillars of apartheid, including the fundamental apartheid laws and
decrees, remain intact.

The 1960 laws banning the African National Congress and

the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania, the Final Security Act of 1962, the Public
Safety Act of 1953, and the legislation on trespassing and housing and work permits
continue under the institutionalized and odious doctrine of apartheid.
those laws have been made more stringent in some respects.

In fact,

The Disclosure of

Foreign Funding Act of 1989, the Alteration of Boundaries of Self-Government in
Free Settlement Areas Act, and the Prevention of Illeqal Squatting Amendment Bill
have all been enacted to further expand the scope of the legislation for

A/S-16/PV. 6
18

JB/6

(Mr. Bakhtiar, Pakistan)
perpetuating the dominance of the white minority over the black majority population
of South Africa.
Those developments clearly demonstrate the fact that there is no evidence
whatsoever to justify the claim that south Africa is gradually moving towards a
free and multiracial society.

Under those circumstances, the international

pressure against South Africa must be forcefully maintained.

The sanctions already

imposed hy the United Nations should be fully implemented by all Member States, and
steps should be taken to impose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against SOuth
Africa until it complies with the well-known demands of the international
community.

Those include the lifting of the state of emerqencv; the unconditional

release of all political prisoners, including Mr. Nelson MandelaJ the lifting of
the ban on all political organizations opposing apartheid J repeal of the draconian
press laws; and the cessation of all political trials and executions.
Mr. Nelson Mandela, the great and valiant fighter against apartheid, has not
only played a historic role in the struggle for freedom and justice in South
Africa, but has become a symbol of the dignity of man the world over.

We salute

that great hero.
The Government and the people of Pakistan have unwaveringly stood by the
oppressed majority people of South Africa in its struggle to regain its basic human
rights and freedoms.

Pakistan is also proud to have contributed to international

efforts to extend practical and material assistance to the victims of apartheid.
We have constantly maintained a comprehensive and stringent boycott of the racist
minority regime for the past 42 years and have scrupulously avoided and eschewed
any links with the Pretoria regime in the diplomatic, political, economic,
commercial, cultural and sports fi eldc;.

A/S-16/PV.6
19-20

JB/6

(Mr~

Bakhtiar; Pakistan)

The people of Pakistan stand behind the people of South Africa in its valiant
struggle.

Our Prime Minister, Mohtarama Benazir Bhutto, has instructed me to

reiterate the unswerving support of the people and Government of Pakistan in the
struggle against the evil of apartheid, which we firmly believe will collapse
sooner than the protagonists of that discredited doctrine believe.
Pakistan is fully supporting the comprehensive Declaration on the Question of
South Africa adopted by the Ad Hoc Committee on South Africa of the Organization of
African Unity at its meeting held in Harare in August 1989.

Pakistan also

reaffirms it commitment to the relevant decisions contained in the Belgrade
Declaration of the ninth summit Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement, which had
endorsed the Harare Declaration.

We urge the immediate implementation of the

decisions contained in those Declarations.
My delegation calls for the adoption, by consensus, of the draft declaration
on apartheid and its destructive consequences in southern Africa.

We urge the

international community to pursue vigorously the programme of action contained in
the declaration.

The regime in Pretoria must realize that, in the march of

civilization towards democracy, universal brotherhood and the equality of man,
there is no place for the vicious system of apartheid.
disappearing age of colonialism.

Racism is a remnant of the

There may still be time for the minority regime

in South Africa to retrace its steps from the fatal course which it seems
determined to pursue.

JB/7

A/S-16/PV. 6
21

(Mr. Bakhtiar, Pakistan)
The wind of deroocracy is blowing throuqh Eastern Europe, La tin America and
elsewhere.

The Berlin Wall, which was a symbol of political oppression and

segregation, hac; cone crashing down.

The nations that welcorre and support the

advent of democracy in Eastern Europe should demonstrate their sincerity bv
supporting the struggle of the peoples of South Africa, Palestine, Kashmir,
Afghanistan and other parts of the third world for a democratic life, free from
terror and exploitation.
The special session of the General Assembly is a landmark in the global
efforts to eliminate the scourage of apartheid and to usher in an era of freedom,
justice and equality in South Africa.

It is the sincere hope of my delegation that

the decisions of this session will qive fresh impetus to those efforts and
strengthen the resolve of the international community to close, for ever, one of
the ugliest chapters in the history of man.
Mr. GII)ZALI (Alqeria)

(interpretation from Arabic):

It gives my

delegation great satisfaction to see a man of Mr. Garba 's calibre, who has so long
been committed to the struggle against apartheid, leading the work of this session
devoted to examining the destructive consequences of apartheid in southern Africa.
All the countries that have expressed their commitment to the cause of combating
apartheid - in particular my country, which shares with his great nation, Nigeria,
grave responsibilities within the Special Committee against Apartheid - are
familiar with his unwavering commitment to the liberation of the South African
people.

At this time, when Africa is preparing to reap the results of its support

of the Namibian people, my country hopes for and indeed expects real improvement in
the prospects of the South African people as a result of the new momentum of
international solidarity, which cannot fail, under his competent leadership, to be
translated into far-reachinq commitments.

A/S-16/PV. 6
22

JB/7

(Mr. Ghozali, Algeria)
At this m::>ment of truth for peace in southern Africa, the international
community is justifiably concerned at the resistance of the apartheid regime to the
tide of history and attendant changes.

The aspirations of peoples to peace,

freedom and justice are being reaffirmed day by day, and there are promising signs
and changes.
As those changes tend to isolate the forces that persist in going in the
opposite direction to international detente, they will certainly help to bring down
the walls of misunderstanding and dismantle the symbols of confrontation.

There is

no doubt that we are all happy to see the trend towards peace, which will certainly
lead to the eradiction of racism.

It is not loqical that racism should be immune

to the effects of the peaceful transformations we are now witnessing.

The people

of South Africa and the other peoples of the region cannot remain hostage to
Pretoria's violence and its policy of aggression.
In an international environment conducive to the reduction of tensions and
efforts aimed at the peaceful solution of regional conflicts, southern Africa must
be enabled to establish genuine peace.

Achievement of that goal of course

necessitates the eradication of the apartheid reqime, the abolition of racial
discrimination and fulfilment of the aspirations of the people of the region to
development and security.

Hence it is the Assembly's duty to see to it that the

apartheid regime is prevented from exploiting the new global climate for its
nefarious purposes or using it to divert the international community's attention
from the main cause of the crisis in the region.

In that context it must he

stressed that, although the exploratory contacts new taking place in the reg ion
have achieved some results, they must be followed up with constant international
pressure.

We must make no mistake as to the motives behind the present reforms.

In addition to their being modest, they were brought about under duress, as it

JB/7

A/S-16/PV. 6
23-25

(Mr. Ghozali, Algeria)
were, by international pressure that became unbearable, to which Pretoria is trying
to respond with a few red herrings.
At this crucial juncture for the prospects of peace in the region, we must not
lower our guard or waver in our determination.

It is not yet time to soften our

stand, even if we see some signs of weakness in South Africa's position.

We should

keep the Namib ian experience in mind and remember how much effort and mohiliza tion
it took for the non-aligned countries, the countries of southern Africa in
particular, to thwart the unending manoeuvrings of South Africa in its attempts to
delay that country's accession to independence.

What is needed now is the same

degree of commitment on our part to overcome the last-ditch stand of South Africa.
The Namibian experience also constantly reminds us that South Africa embarks
on dialogue and negotiation only under strong pressure from armed s truqgle and
political persuasion.

It is such a combination of methods that is expected by the

peoples of the reg ion so that their aspirations to freedom and independence may be
f u 11 y rea 1 i zed •
Given the strong hopes raised by Namibia's imminent accession to independence,
it is only right that the situation in South Africa and its extension throughout
the region once again he given the full attention of the international community.
It is urgently necessary that forceful steps be taken to put an end to the
suffering of the South African people and to hasten the emerqence of a multiracial,
democratic society in that country so that peace, security and stability may reign
throughout the region.

A/S-16/PV. 6
26

RM/8

(Mr. Ghozali, Algeria)
Despite the slight signs of the easing of tens ion which we now perceive in the
region, apartheid is still rampant and is still causing widespread concern.
a regime incapable of questioning its own basic tenets.

It is

The return to power of a

Government in Pretoria that claims a reformist approach cannot hide the political,
economic and social fact of a regime of ins ti tu tionalized rae ial discrimination
that has entrenched itself in power.
The first steps taken by that Government have shown, soon enough, that all it
intends to do is to introduce superficial, cosmetic changes to give the oppressive
system a better image.
step.

The release of a few political prisoners may be a positive

However, that step will take on real meaning only with the unconditional

release of all political prisoners - including Nelson Mandela - who are still
suffering the fierce cruelty of the South African regime.

Similarly, the

"tolerance" of rallies organized by anti-apartheid movements will be meaningful
only if it leads to the lifting of the ban on all political parties and
anti-apartheid movements.
Indeed, what real meaning could there be in such a relaxation of the
repressive laws backed by the ruthless state of emergency that has been in force
for so long?

The peaceful demonstrations and activities of the anti-apartheid

movements are still banned, and the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC)
militants are still being persecuted by special squads.
While using Namibia's forthcoming independence as an indication of its own
good will, the Pretoria regime is in fact trying to prevent the example of Namibia
from spreadirq to South Africa itself.
to eradicate apartheid.

That should convince us of the urgent need

The desperate attempts to find excuses for it ann to

absolve it from its responsibility for the state of insecurity that continues to
prevail in the region cannot be viewed as a valid alternative to its complete

A/S-16/PV.6

RM/8

27

(Mr• Ghozalii Algeria)
abolition.

Here I should note that the climate of instability in the region is

being aggravated by the continued collaboration between South Africa and Israel,
particularly in the nuclear and missile fields.
At Harare, in August, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) once again faced
up to its responsibilities with regard to apartheid.

Encouraged by the climate of

detente in international relations, Heads of State and liberation movements, acting
on behalf of Africa, outlined the necessary, viable and realistic conditions for
the eradication of apartheid and its destructive consequences in the region.
duty to show solidarity with ANC was reaffirmed.

The

The non-aligned countries at

their ninth summit Conference also declared their support for ANC and the
front-line States.

At a time when unity in the ranks and unity of action are

needed, it is essential that the international community as a whole take the most
vigorous action in its power to see to it that Pretoria responds to the aspirations
of the persecuted South African people.
While the people of South Africa have every right to use any means at their
disposal to rid themselves of the regime that is oppressing them, it is up to all
of us to support them in this decisive phase of their struggle for freedom,
progress and justice.

In this regard international sanctions are the proven

deterrent of which the South African regime is most fearful and for which the
oppressed peoples are calling most vigorously.

It is up to those developed

countries which, in view of their extensive trading with South Africa, have the
means to do so, to use their influence to respond to that appeal and stop their
opposition to a real commitment of the Security Council's authority in order to put
an end to apartheid.

IM/8

A/S-16/PV. 6
28
Mr. RANA (Nepal):

I have the honour to convey to the President and,

through him, to the representatives assembled here, greetings from my august
sovereign, His Majesty King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev, and his best wishes for
the success of the sixteenth special session of the United Nations General
Assembly, which is taking place at an important time under the President's very
able guidance.
The far-reaching - and indeed, revolutionary - changes that we are witnessing
around the world today raise hopes for peace and a better international order based
on justice.

There is renewed faith today in the fundamental and universal

principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

We find greater interest in and enhanced prospects for resolving

outstanding regional issues by peaceful means.

The ongoing transition of Namibia

to independence is a remarkable example of this.

Against that background the

policy of apartheid of the Pretoria regime stands out as a stark anachronism.
Indeed, the situation in South Africa poses the most serious test of the ability of
the international community to translate the new vision into reality.
The apartheid system is a flagrant violation of the fundamental and universal
principles of equality of peoples and their right to human dignity irrespective of
colour, race, creed or sex.

It is also the violation of the principle of

government based on consent.

The scourge of racism in South Africa, besides

bringing ruthless repression at home, has also led to the imposition of a brutal
war on the southern African region.

The policy of aggression and destabilization

adopted by the Pretoria regime has resulted in untold loss of life and suffering to
the people of the region and has caused massive destruction of infrastructure and
property.

The front-line States have won the appreciation of the international

community for the enormous sacrifices they have made to serve the cause of justice,
equality and human dignity in South Africa.

A/S-l6/PV.6

RM/8

29-30

(Mr. Rana, Nepal)
Notwithstanding the resort by the racist regime to brute force and despite
massive repression, there is today a resurgence of the anti-apartheid movement in
South Africa.

On behalf of His Majesty's Government of Nepal, I wish to pay a

tribute to the countless men, women and children of South Africa who are waging an
unrelenting struggle, not only to render the apartheid nachinery ineffective but
also to realize the vision of a united, non-racial and democratic society with
equal rights and opportunity for all its people.

Determined and co-ordinated

implementation of the sanctions already in place and further measures to isolate
South Africa politically, economically and socially would greatly strengthen the
struggle of the majority people for justice and equality.

The international

community must not relent in its pressure upon South Africa, for pressure alone can
persuade the racist regime to accept negotiations as the only peaceful way to end
apartheid.

A/S-16/PV. 6
31

RM/9

(Mr. Rana, Nepal)
The anti-apartheid forces both inside and outside South Africa have been
expressing their readiness to engage in serious negotiations with the Pretoria
regi~

to hrinq ahout a peaceful end to apartheid.

If the Lusaka Manifesto carried

. and conveyed that messsage in 1969, the Harare Declaration of the Organization of
African Unity adopted at the highest level in August this year provided the basic
philosophy and framework for a peaceful and negotiated eradication of the apartheid
sys tern.
That important peace initiative provides a unique opportunity and critical
challenge to the De Klerk
South Africa.

regi~

to prove its declared intention to establish a new

Some recent developments, especially the release of eight political

prisoners, are important achievements of the concerted pressure on the regime, from
both within and without.

Those steps are, however, far short of what the

resistance and international community consider the absolute minimum for the
creation of a climate conducive to negotiations.

The South African Government can

begin to demonstrate its willingness to engage in serious negotiations to end
apartheid by releasing unconditionally all political prisoners, including Nelson
Mandela.

It should also simultaneously undertake steps to dismantle all arhi trary

and discriminatory laws.

Such measures will establish South Africa's willingness

to honour the universally recognized norms of human rights, freedoms and civil
liberties.

They will also assure the neighbouring countries of the readiness of

South Africa to respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all States, as also its readiness to pursue a policy of peace, friendship and
nutually beneficial co-operation with all.
A unique combination of circumstances exists today for a new beginning in
South Africa, the beginning of a process of peace that would for ever do away with
racism and minority rule.

The special session offers an opportunity to address

A/S-16/PV. 6
32

RM/9

(Mr. Rana, Nepal)
itself to the achievement of that noble objective.

The only alternative to that

course will be disaster - a tragedy for all South Africans, black and white.

My

delegation therefore urges the international community to take advantage of the new
climate in international relations and to exert pressure on the Pretoria regime to
force it to give up its policy of racism and rigidity and accept the inevitable.
The end of apartheid in South Africa will ensure perma~ent peace and stability in
southern Africa and be another step towards the strengthening of international
peace and security.
Mr. ST. -PHARO (Haiti)

(interpretation from French):

It is no secret that

the delegation of Haiti, pleased at the unanimous election of the President to
guide the forty-fourth session of the General Assembly, takes even greater pleasure
at his unanimous election to the presidency of the sixteenth special session of the
General Assembly, devoted to apartheid and its destructive consequences in southern
Africa.

We greatly admire his involvement in and commitment to the Organization's

crusade against the scourge of apartheid.

We have been by his side in the struggle

we have waged in the Special Committee against Apartheid, of which he is Chairman
and in which he has shown virile courage, exemplary zeal and unparalleled integrity.
The honour done him also reflects upon his country, Nigeria, one of the most
beautiful pearls of the African continent and Alma Mater of the Haitian nation,
which I am pleased to represent at the rostrum of the General Assembly.

His.vast

experience, his outstanding qualities as a man and as an experienced diplomat,
guarantee the success of our delicate task -our common search for a unanimous
voice in which the international community can, through the Organization, tell
Pretoria the party is over.

A/S-16/PV. 6

RM/9

33-35

(Mr. St.-Phard, Haiti)
We are convinced of that because his action is solidly joined with the many
vigorous and untiring efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Peres de Cuellar.
My delegation is therefore extremely pleased to pay a tribute to him as well, from
the bottom of our hearts.
We should now like to highlight a few aspects of the consequences of
apartheid, which has justly been condemned as a cri ~ against humanity.
The word seems to have fallen into disrepute, but we cannot gloss over its
pernicious and harmful manifestations for its victims.

We cannot properly assess

the full extent of its evils without making a survey, however cursory, of its
catastrophic effects, not only for its ho~, South Africa, where it has festered
like a malignant disease for far too many years, but further afield as well, where
it has spread like some random and uncontrollable growth throughout the
geopolitical and geoeconomic zone created by the front-line States that are grouped
around its centre.
The following figures and data are taken from the report, "The destabilization
of South Africa:

the economic cost of the front-line resistance to apartheid",

which was prepared by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa.

From 1980

to 1988, Pretoria's continuing war against the front-line States has produced
1,500,000 dead.

That figure reveals the unthinkable horror of approximately

900,000 children cut down before the age of five.

The report reveals the

displacement of more than 50 per cent of the populations of Mozambique and Angola
at least once in their lives.

It reports that an incalculable number of persons

are wounded, disabled, mutilated, undernourished.

It notes more than USS60 billion

in material destruction and losses of gross domestic product (GOP) - double the
current annual GOP and thrice the gross external resources in the form of grants,
concessional loans, export credits and commercial loans.

EMS/10

A/S-16/PV. 6
36

(Mr. St.-Phard, Haiti)
It is estirrated today that the total cost to the reqion of South Africa's
policy of destabilization and aggression is $10 billion per year, or some
40 per cent of the reg ion's gross domes tic product.
The high mortality among infants and children under five years of age is more
than revolting.

I would think that were Jean-Paul Sartre alive today, he would be

feeling a most intense "Nausea" at this.
Given the tens of millions of blacks in Africa and elsewhere - including
Haiti, once called Saint-Domingue- who have been exterminated over the centuries,
guilty in the eyes of their white oppressors of the congenital sin of excessive
dermal pigmentation, Adolf Hitler, who unleashed a holocaust against his victims,
including our Jewish brethren, for whom he devised a "final solution", seems to
belong to a far longer "honour-roll" of butchers of humanity, whose greed for death
must be cut short without delay.
Countries that refrain from exercising their power on behalf of the blacks of
South Africa or that become allies of the Pretoria regime -even if they do so with
a guilty conscience - by supporting it through their scientific, technological,
financial and diploma tic resources cannot claim, either today in this Hall or
tomorrow before history, that they have no links with the guru of nazism.

To

paraphrase Cicero:

How much

Quousque tandem;· Praetoria, · abutere patientia nostra?

longer will you abuse our patience, Pretoria?
With a little irragination on the part of men and women of good will in this
Christmas season, we can reflect on the past, present and future losses to plans
for development, investment, health, employment, national defence, the servicing of
the infamous external debt, the massively destroyed environment and so forth.

Let

us irragine the scope of the catastrophe that Pretoria continues to inflict on the
region despite the misleading cosmetic measures of recent weeks, which remind us of

A/S-16/PV. 6
37

.EMS/10

(Mr. St.-Phard, Haiti)
the image in Matthew 23:27, where Christ denounces the fallacious nature of the
whited sepulchres:

seemingly beautiful on the outside, but full of rotting bones

and all manner of corruption inside.
Eadem, sed aliter:

Plus ya change, plus c'est la

meme chose.

the same, only different.

What can we say of the human rights of the vast majority of our 2 8 mill ion
South African brothers?

We wonder whether in certain world capitals there is still

a debate about whether they are truly human or merely humanoid:

how else can we

understand the inconsistency and contradictions in many nations that aspire to be
the reposi taries of the Judea-Chris tia1 tradition, which is the source of their
crusade for democracy, founded on the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man
and of the Citizen, of which universal suffrage - one man, one vote - is a firm
pillar.
How can the leaders of those nations, without blinking, continue to lend
Pretoria their precious support and unswerving protection at the signal of their
white brothers in that capital while at the same time living in peace with their
conscience and serving as the resounding heralds of the good news of representative
democracy?
Let me quote Senator J. William Fulbright, who in his latest book The Price of
Empire wrote:
(spoke in English)
"There is no greater human vanity than the helief that one's own values
have universal validity, no greater folly than the attempt to impose the
preference of a single society on an unwilling world".
(continued in French)
I think that applies perfectly to the case of the Pretoria racists.

A/S-16/PV. 6

I!MS/10

38

(Mr. St.-Phard, Haiti)
So long as dehumanizing, or frankly murderous, tyranny prevails in South
Africa, with the support and protection of certain members of the United Nations
family, let them at least have the decency to declare a moratorium on their zealous
preaching of the gospel - whose Old English roots mean "good news" - of democracy.
That, at least, would be good news.

But there is no valid explanation of the

contradiction of wanting democracy at all costs for some, while doing everything
possible along with Pretoria to deprive nearly 30 million souls of that denocracy
simply because they do not like the ebony hue of their skin.
Montesquieu's warning:

I would recall

"There is no nore cruel tyranny than that imposed in the

shadow of laws and with the colours of justice".
"Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.
"Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,

hypocrites~

for ye make clean the

outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion
and excess.
"Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup and
platter, that the outside of them may be clean also".

(The Holy Bible,

Matthew, 23: 24-26)
Could not Christ use those same words today to inveigh against Pretoria and its
diverse accomplices?
We can believe in the superficial changes of the new De Klerk Administration
in South Africa only in response to the implementation by his regime of the sine
qua non conditions that must precede the initiation of the process of negotiations
with the liberation movements such as the African National Congress of South Africa
(ANC) and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC), the representatives of the
mass denocra tic movement and all relevant political groups with the final goal of
the creation of a non-racial, united and democratic Republic of South Africa, a
goal we would all prefer to see achieved by peaceful means.

EMS/10

A/S-16/PV. 6
39-40

(Mr. St.-Phard, Haiti)
In that connection,

my delegation is pleased to endorse the Harare

Declaration of 21 August 1989, in conformity with the common will of the people of
Haiti and of His Excellency Lieutenant-General Prosper Avril, President of the
Military Government of the Republic of Haiti, to reaffirm their full support for
our oppressed brothers and sisters of South Africa until the final victory, a
victory that will bring not a mere change in the nature of the cancer of apartheid,
which is unacceptable since it is impossible, but rather its radical excision,
along with the surrounding diseased tissue.

A/S-16/PV.6
41

EMS/11

(Mr. St.-Phard, Haiti)
As we await the glorious dawn of the day that will soothe their bodies and

ease the distress that is daily renewed and bring the democratic society for which
the victims of apartheid clamour, we can at least say to the militants and the
cynical strategists of that odious system,
Mr. REINO (Portugal)
delegation):

"~ta,

non verba":

"Deeds, not words".

(spoke in Portuguese, English text furnished by the

Allow me on behalf of the Portuguese Government to convey to

Ambassador Garba our sincere congratulations on his assumption of the presidency of
the General Assembly at its special session on apartheid.
This special session has the merit of being devoted to a problem decisive for
the development of the situation in southern Africa:

the question of apartheid.

Portugal, linked by specific historical, cultural and human ties to that region,
cannot but participate in the debate in its own right, although it certainly fully
shares the views expressed on behalf of the European Community.
Portugal firmly condemns aparth~id and believes that its eradication is an
indispensable condition for peace and development in southern Africa.

Only by that

means will it be possible to create in the Republic of South Africa a situation
which can lead to understanding and dialogue and to the regional co-operation
necessary to the economic and social progress of that entire area.
The persistence of a regime based on racial discrimination is untenable, not
only because it is contrary to the principles set out in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights but also because the continuing social injustice provoked by the
system of apartheid constitutes a permanent source of tension.
We cannot accept that skin colour should determine access to work, justice and
education.

The demand of the majority of South Africans for a regime of full

citizenship and equal civic and social rights is legitimate.

Those are the

heartfelt aspirations which Portugal shares and supports without reservation.

A/S-16/PV. f;
42

EMS/11

(Mr. Reino, Portugal)
The attainment of those objectives cannot, however, he dissociated from a
gradual and peaceful process of change in South African society leading to a full
non-racial democracy.

Therefore, Portugal favours the building of a society

without any discrimination, whether based on race, religion or political
convictions.

We believe that all South Africans have the right to participate in

the process of transition to a democratic society.

The expeditious beginning of

negotiations with the participation of all sectors will he necessary for the
achievement of those objectives.
For us, negotiations must imply the identification, through dialogue, of the
means that will make possible the existence of a State truly committed to the rule
of law and rooted in the democratic principle of one man, one vote and in respect
for human rights.

Yet the door should he left open to some hope regarding the new

Administration governing South Africa.

Given the need to create a climate

propitious to dialogue and negotiation, President De Klerk deserves encouragement
so that the required programmes of internal reform can he carried out with
resolution and firmness.
The recent measures taken by the Pretoria Government, such as the announcement
of an intention to abolish the Separate Amenities Act and the freeing of some
political prisoners, justify the expectation that new steps will be taken towards
further reforms and the opening of negotiations.
The freeing of Nelson Mandela and all other political prisoners, the abolition
of restrictions on individual rights and guarantees, the lifting of the state of
emergency and, most of all, the revocation of all legislation based on social
segregation are requirements which Portugal has constantly demanded, not just in
bilateral contacts with the Pretoria Government hut also in the framework of the

A/S-16/PV. 6
43

EMS/11

(Mr. Rei no, Portugal)
political co-operation carried out by the 12 member States of the European
Community and in other international forums within the framework of the United
Nations sys tern.
Conscious of the necessity of inducing the Pretoria Government to follow that
path, Portugal has favoured the means of persuasion and constructive dialogue,
along with the maintenance of some sanctions which in practice have had ~orne
positive effects.

We believe it is undoubtedly necessary to maintain pressure on

the South African Government, but such pressure should not be an end in itself.
Whenever appropriate it should be accompanied by dialogue and signals of
encourgement for the adoption, in a necessarily short period of time, of the
required initiatives.
It should also be stressed that the indiscriminate adoption of economic
sanctions will affect negatively South Africa's neighbours, namely Angola and
Mozambique, which as it is have been the main victims of the destabilization that
has prevailed in southern Africa, as a result, Angola and Mozambique have had to
hear heavy economic, social and political burdens.

For that reason, efforts

towards peace in Angola and Mozambique have to be strongly supported to avoid an
impasse or the perpetuation of the existing instability.

Simultaneously, the

priority of economic reconstruction and development of those two States should not
be contingent upon the initiation of the peace process.

Commitment and the

availability of means will contribute to the irreversible and urgent nature of the
peace process.

The support to be extended will give the negotiators confidence in

the viability of national reconciliation and in the peace and stability of the
entire southern African region.

The dismantling of apartheid must ideally take

place simultaneously with the process of peace in Angola and Mozambique so that a
genuine and lasting spirit of national reconciliation will prevail in the region,
removing once and for all any trace of external interference.

EMS/11

A/S-16/PV. 6
44-45

(Mr. Reino, Portugal)
The eradication of apartheid is today the aspiration and objective of the
African continent, but it is also universal, for it is in keeping with the spirit
of detente prevailing today in the most diverse parts of the globe.

Portugal thus

maintains an attitude of critical expectancy with respect to the developments which
will certainly take place in South Africa shortly.

We are convinced that the

peoples and the countries of the region, as well as the whole of the African
continent, will reap a multitude of benefits as a result of the eradication of
apartheid.
In that context I would emphasize the notable progress achieved in the region
as Namibia marches finally towards independence.

Our congratulations go not only

to the people of Namibia for the democratic civic spirit they recently displayed
during the election process but also to the United Nations, and in particular to
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative and all the participants in the
United Nations Transition Assistance Group, for the stabilizing role they are
playing in that process.

It is appropriate to point out that South Africa and

other neighbouring States, namely Angola, have complied with the relevant
international provisions and obligations.
It is indispensable at this stage for the international community here
represented to continue its endeavours, striving in a constructive, consensual and
collective manner towards the attainment of the objectives we all hope for:

the

eradication of apartheid and the establishment of peace and economic development
for the well-being of the peoples of southern Africa.
Mrs. AGNELLI (Italy):

Allow me first of all to note how appropriate it

is that the work of this special session of the General Assembly devoted to
apartheid and its destructive consequences in southern Africa should be taking
place under the presidency of Ambassador Garba, who represents Nigeria, a countrv
that from the beginning has been in the forefront of the fight against apartheid.

A/S-16/PV. 6
46

JB/12

(Mrs. Agnelli, Italy)
In her presentation on behalf of the member States of the European Community,
the French Minister Delegate for Foreign Affairs, Mrs. Edwige Avice, has already
expressed the position of the TWelve on the issue of apartheid.

I fully share the

thoughts expressed by Mrs. Avice and, on behalf of Italy, I would like to add a few
considerations on a political, juridical, social and humanitarian problem of
exceptional magnitude.
The special session of the General Assembly attests to the vigilant and
in tense attention of the international community to that most serious violation of
human rights.

It proves, moreover, how dramatic and persistent is the

institutionalized system of racial discrimination in South Africa.
Forty years after the proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, for a country not to recognize the equal dignity of its citizens but to
regard instead the discrimination of its people as an accepted standard,
notwithstanding all the international codifications and the trend of world history,
is to knowingly alienate itself from the international community.
The continued existence of such a reality does not mean that the concerted
efforts, political and humanitarian, of our Governments have been in vain.

On the

contrary, those efforts have succeeded in outlining a picture no longer devoid of
perspectives and have made possible the alleviation of the sufferings of the
oppressed populations.
The Italian Government sincerely hopes that the discussion and conclusions of
the current special session will result in significant progress in the same
direction.
Our condemnation of the segregationist system, which denies fundamental rights
to the majority, is firm and unconditional.

It

is accompanied by constant pressure

on the South African authorities to repeal the state of emergency, to liberate all
political prisoners, including Nelson Mandela, and to legalize the opposition

JB/12

A/S-16/PV. 6
47
(Mrs. Agnelli, Italy)

forces, thus creating the premises for the cooduct of a genuine dialogue among all
the components of that society.

Italy's particular resolve and consistent

commi trnent on behalf of the total and negotiated abolition of apartheid was
confirmed by its voting twice, in 1987 and in 1988, in favour of the resolution on
the selective and mandatory sanctions on South Africa introduced in the Security
Council by the African countries.
Our stand for the immediate repeal of apartheid and its replacement by a
system of equal social and political dignity in South Africa is therefore clear.
Equally clear and unequivocal is our condemnation of any form of violence, from
wherever it may come.

We are in fact firmly convinced that violence generates

additional violence, and that it can provide neither a solution nor a means of
legitimization of power.

We have therefore used every opportunity to reconfirm our

wish that South Africa succeed, in a peaceful manner, in putting an end to its
current state of internal strife.
Because of that strife, South Africa cannot aspire to its rightful place in
the international community nor can it contribute to the elimination of tensions
and the achievement of a peaceful and fair readjustment of relations between the
countries of southern Africa.
Italy, whose international conduct is constantly focused on the search for
dialogue, has acknowledged with satisfaction the recent positive signs emanating
from both the South African Government and the opposition movements.

In

particular, it has welcomed the recent liberation of political prisoners and the
willingness shown by the parties to engage in paths of dialogue with more
moderation and enhanced realism.

However, Italy regrets that the Pretoria

Government has not yet adopted the necessary measures for the liberalization of the
political dialogue with the opposi tioo movements and for the denncra tiza tion of
South African political life.

A/S-16/PV.6

JB/12

48

(Mrs. Agnelli, Italy)
Those signs strengthen the intent of the Italian Government to insist in its
initiatives on behalf of an effective evolution, in a democratic way, of the South
African constitutional system.

Those initiatives - to be pursued within the

framework of European political co-operation - are consistent with a constant line
of conduct.

As France's Minister for Co-operation recalled when she spoke on

behalf of the European Community and its member States, that line is substantiated
by the rigorous enforcement of the restrictive measures on South Africa decided
upon by the Twelve.

Those measures include, inter alia, the prohibition of new

investments and the freezing of official contacts and international agreements in
the fields of culture, science and sports.

Furthermore, the Twelve have requested

that the Pretoria Government give proof, by word and deed, of its sincere
determination to engage on the path of negotiations with all true representatives
of the black community.

At the same time, Italy devotes an important share of its

funds for development co-operation to the Southern African Development
Co-ordination Conference and to projects in the southern African countries designed
to alleviate those countries' dependence on South Africa in the fields of commerce,
economy, transportation and telecommunications.
The Italian Government will continue to express in the clearest manner its own
condemnation of an ideology that truly stands against civil conscience, while
striving, together with the partners of the European Community, to induce S~uth
Africa to embark upon a path of fundamental, negotiated change.

We do so because

we feel that without such a change the relations between all the countries of
southern Africa cannot evolve towards the establishment of mutual respect nor could
they be safe from attempts at disruption.
In the broader context of South Africa, two positive developments stand out.
After the New York agreement of last December, a new system of security is emerging
in that area.

Its components are the forthcoming independence of Namibia and the

JB/12

A/S-16/PV. 6
49

(Mrs. Agnelli, Italy)
total withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola.

Just as essential as those

developments are, in our view, the prospects for internal pacification in Angola
and Mozambique.

They are important in their own right and also as premises for the

beginning of the economic development of the region.

It is conceivable that those

processes may even induce a political evolution within South Africa.
From the outset, Italy has given its support to the laborious negotiations
that led to the signing first of the Brazzaville and then of the New York
agreements.

Italy's participation in the United Nations Transition Assistance

Group is symbolic of our support of the action of the United Nations in Namibia.
In that respect, I deem it appropriate to recall here the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

With his unfailing commitment,

Mr. Ahtisaari has made possible the positive completion of the first phase of the
independence process through the holding of free elections in Namibia.
The prospects opened for Angola by the Gbadolite summit on 22 to 23 June of
this year are further positive indicators of a trend that Italy, for its part,
wishes to see consolidated and extended.

The renewal of hostilities in August,

however, has once more resulted in a deplorable spiral of violence inimical to a
prompt reestablishment of peace.
For some time now, we have noted hopeful signs in Mozambique of a renewed
dialogue and of a search for peaceful solutions to the serious problems of that
country.

Italy fervently hopes that the Nairobi negotiations will proceed

positively, thanks to the worthy personal commitment of the African Chiefs of State.
But in order to have a complete and lasting peaceful settlement in southern
Africa, an indispensable condition is - we emphasize - a genuinely demcra tic
evolution in South Africa based on the full participation of all its citizens in
the political process.

JB/12

A/S-16/PV.6
50

(Mrs. Agnelli, Italy)
At a time when confrontation between blocks is receding, giving way to
dialogue and international collaboration, all countries must seize the
opportunities offered by the current juncture.

Within that framework, within that

rapidly evolving society, South Africa cannot refrain from engaging with courage,
imagination and realism on the road of profound renewal.

A/S-16/PV. 6
51

EMS/13

(Mrs. Agnelli, Italy)
We sincerely wish to see these first signs of an evolution confirmed and
consolidated in the immediate future.

We also feel that the day has come for the

South African Government to live up to the expectations of international public
opinion, today solemnly represented at this special session.

By the same token, it

is incumbent on world opinion to follow and stimulate that evolution in the manner
most suitable for thP. general interests of all the peoples of South Africa.

An

eloquent sign of a willingness to assume that responsibility will come, I believe,
with the consensual conclusion of the deliberations of the special session.
The defence of human rights at the international level cannot today he
considered as interference in internal affairs.

Thus it becomes our specific duty

to continue to operate so that the word apartheid wi 11 no longer represent a tragic

reality but rather a crime against humanity belonging to the past, a crime that
must never he repeated.
Let us finally remember that respect for human rights in all their
manifestations is a dynamic process that always leaves room for improvement.

It is

a challenge that implies educating and preparing new generations for a society that
is everywhere multiracial and multicultural, and therefore richer, more fruitful
and peaceful.
Mr. KARIM (Bangladesh):

This special session is well timed.

In our

rapidly changing world one phenomenon - a hideous symbol of inhumanity - has
remained unaltered.

I speak of apartheid in South Africa.

We hope that our

deliberations, under the able guidance of Ambassador Garba, will contribute to our
desired obiective, which is the elimination of apartheid.
We have long been convinced that the international community lacks neither the
will nor the authority to compel Pretoria to heed the voice of reason.
does apartheid persist?

Why, then,

Does that suggest that the issue at hand is intractable?

Those are the questions we must ask ourselves.

A/S-16/PV. 6

EMS/13

52

(Mr. Karim,· Bangladesh)
My delegation does not believe this is an intractable problem.

What we

require now is the sincere commitment of all members of the comity of nations to
act decisively - and I emphasize "all members".

The gravity of the situation in

South Africa can hardly be exaggerated.

Even as we debate, the sufferings of the

people of South Africa continue unabated.

Tb our great dismay, the regime in

Pretoria persists in perpetrating unspeakable brutalities.

What pains us even nore

is that it feels itself adequately secure to act in utter defiance of world public
opinion.
Persuasion and dialogue have so far failed to elicit the desired results.

It

is evident that the regime will not change its policy unless it is forced to do so
by resolute international action.

We believe that only through comprehensive

mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter can effective
pressure for change be brought to bear upon South Africa.

We hear the argument

that sanctions will not work, that they would only add to the suffering of the
black majority.

But no price is too high for freedom and human dignity.

The

oppressed people of South Africa have themselves stressed time and again their
willingness to undergo the hardship it may entail.

The total isolation of the

Pretoria regime, therefore, remains the single most effective measure that would
contribute to the peaceful dismantling of apartheid.
We appeal to all countries to desist from all contacts with South Africa.
There are at least four crucial areas where embargoes are called for.

First, we

must all without exception refrain from supplying South Africa with equipment and
technology that would enhance its military and nuclear capability.

Secondly, the

supply of essential comnodities sud\ as oil and gas must cease forthwith.

Thirdly,

all financial flows into South Africa, whether they be investments, credits or
loans, private or governmental, should be stopped.

And, finally, human

EMS/13

A/S-16/PV.6
53

(Mr. Karim, Bangladesh)
interactions with South Africa, such as sporting contacts or visits, must be
eliminated.
It is encouraging to note that certain Governments and institutions have
already adopted some necessary measures to curtail their political, economic and
social links with Pretoria.

We commend their efforts.

Reports of the Special

Committee against Apartheid amply testify to the fact that sanctions, even though
they fall short of our expectations, are bringing significant pressure to bear on
the apartheid system.

None the less, we are saddened, and even alarmed, at the

ongoing practice by some countries, taking advantage of the economic vacuum created
by others, of undermining the sanctions.

Recently hopes were raised that Mr. De Klerk's Government might effect some
substantive changes.

However, much to our regret, its actions do not appear to go

beyond cosmetic reforms.

So long as these so-called reforms do not respond to the

demand of the black majority for the full realization of its political rights, we
shall have no reason for confidence or complacency.

Apartheid, it has rightly been

said, cannot be reformed, it can only be dismantled.

As a prerequisite to that, we

add our voice to the call for the unconditional and immediate release of all
political prisoners, including Nelson Mandela, the outstanding symbol of free South
Africa, for the immediate lifting of the state of emergency, for a total halt to
all oppressive measures against the black majority, for the cessation of all
political trials and political executions; and for the termination of the policy of
bantustanization.
Pretoria's aggressiveness is not confined by its own frontiers.

Its attempts

to divert international attention from its domestic scenario continue.
Neighbouring States remain under constant threat of military intervention and
economic blackmail.

That state of affairs poses a serious threat

security and stability in southern Africa.

to

peace,

EMS/13

A/S-16/PV.6
54-55
(Mr~

Karim, Bangladesh)

It is no secret that the resources of my country are meagre.

Nevertheless, in

manifesting our solidarity with the people of South Africa, the Government of
Bangladesh has made modest contributions to the various United Nations funds to
help alleviate the sufferings of the people of southern Africa.

EMS/14

A/S-16/PV. 6
56

(Mr. Karim, Bangladesh)
The forthcoming independence of Namibia has once again heightened our
confidence in the efficacy of the United Nations in bringing about the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

We therefore hope and trust that this Assembly will

continue its efforts to help the people of South Africa to establish a united,
dellk)cra tic and non-rae ial society.

In that regard, the Secretary-General's

tireless efforts deserve our full support.
Let me also take this opportunity to commend the Special Committee against
Apartheid for its role in mobilizing and strengthening global public opinion
against the apartheid regime.
We must not delude ourselves into believing that peace in South Africa is
elusive.

Peace would be well at hand in that country if only Pretoria would show

good faith.

The modalities through which the aim is achievable have been

identified.

The Harare Declaration adopted in August 1989 by the Ad Hoc Committee

of the Organization of African Unity sets out the guidelines and a prescription for
the peaceful resolution of the issue.

It has our full support.

We also reaffirm

our commitment to the relevant decisions taken on this issue in all international
forums, including the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the Commonwealth.
Let us here and now rededicate ourselves to the search for a united approach
against apartheid.

IJet us make every concrete effort to bring peace and justice to

South Africa and to the region at large.

Let us remind ourselves that we must not

regard these debates as mere rituals.

The special session has been entrusted with

an onerous and solemn responsibility.

We place great store by the programme of

action this session will adopt.

I assure members that Bangladesh will do

everything possible to achieve that goal.

A/S-16/PV. 6

EMS/14

57

(Mr. Karim, Bangladesh)
It is our fervent prayer that some day soon the legitimate aspirations of the
people of South Africa will be realized.

As I conclude, I should like to pay a

tribute to the memory of the martyred men, women and children of that troubled land
who have laid down their lives so that their compatriots and future generations can
be rescued from the morass of humiliation and injustice.
Mr. KARUKUBIRO-KAMUNANWIRE (Uganda):

Allow me on behalf of the Uganda

delegation to congratulate Ambassador Garba most warmly on his election to the
presidency of the General Assernhly at its sixteenth special session.

Given the

vigour and dispatch with which he has been conducting the work of the forty-fourth
regular session, I am confident that our deliberations will be successful.

It is

fitting that the Assembly's special session on apartheid and its destructive
consequences in southern Africa should be taking place under Mr. Garba's able
leadership.

As Chairman of the Special Commit tee against Apartheid, he has an

intimate knowledge of the subject-matter.

He has been playing a leading role in

the struggle to eradicate apartheid and for the liberation of southern Africa.

The

Assembly will no doubt benefit from his insight as it seeks solutions with a view
to bringing apartheid to an end.
Last year marked the fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

This year was the fiftieth anniversary of the outbreak of the Second

World War, when mankind united to defeat the Nazi regime and thus thwarted i.ts
design to impose a world order in which the notion of the racial superiority of ~
Herrenvolk would hold sway and exercise hegemony.

Since the defeat of the Nazis

and the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 41 years ago, many
countries have won their right to freedom and self-determination.

However, in

South Africa millions live under the criminal regime of apartheid.

That regime

EMS/14

A/S-16/PV.6
58

(Mr. Karukubiro-Kamunanwire, Uganda)
kills people.

Millions of men, women and children in South Africa and neighbouring

countries have been exterminated.
trial.

The regime tortures and detains people without

Many die in prison in inhuman conditions.

The holding of this special session is timely.

The easing of tensions between

East and West and the recent developments in some parts of Europe have created a
euphoria which could lull the international community into a sense of complacency
that all is well throuqhout the world.

No doubt the South African regime would

like to take advantaqe of the situation in order to divert the world's attention.
I wish to underscore the fact that apartheid is firmly rooted in South Africa and
that it therefore continues to pose a threat to the peace and security of the
entire region.

Its destructive consequences in the region, both in human and

material terms, are staggering.

It should be noted that the South African regime,

while opposing international sanctions against itself, has not hesitated to use
them against its neighbours.

From time to time, Botswana has been subjected to

delays of goods being imported into the country and Zimbabwe has often been
threatened with sanctions by the regime.
Contrary to the Nkomati agreement, South Africa continues to support the
RENAMO renegades in their attempt to destabilize Mozambique.

At the international

donors' meeting for Mozambique, an official of the United States State Department
correctly observed that the situation in that country involved
"a systematic and brutal war of terror against innocent civilians throuqh
forced labour, starvation, physical abuse and wanton killing" and that it was
"one of the most brutal holocausts against ordinary human beings since World
War II".

EMS/14

A/S-16/PV. 6
59-60
(Mr. Karukubiro-Kamunanwire, Uganda)

Until their disastrous defeat at Cuito Cuanavale, South African forces were
occupying the southern part of Angola and fighting alongside UNITA against the
legitimate Government of Angola.

We salute the people of Angola and the Cuban

internationalist forces whose victory paved the way for South Africa's retreat from
Angola and the beginning of the implementation of Security Council resolution
435 (1978).
For some time, the United Nations has been grappling with South Africa's
illegal occupation of Namibia.

Intense diplomatic efforts by the United Nations

have supplemented the armed struggle of the South West Africa People's Orqanization
(SWAPO) to put and end to that illegality.

We note with satisfation the progress

registered thus far in the implementation of Security Council resolution
435 (1978).

The racist regime erected one road block after another to prevent a

SWAPO victory.

Despite the obstacles emplaced by South Africa, the people of

Namibia exercised their right to choose their own leadership.
opportunity to salute SWAPO on the occasion of its victory.

I wish to take this
It is, however,

irnpera tive for us to be on guard and ensure that South Africa and its surrogates do
not impede Namibia's smooth transition to independence.
We wish to reiterate our position that Walvis Bay and the Penguin and other
offshore islands constitute an integral part of Namibia.
occupation bf South Africa is, in our view, illegal.

Their continued

The presence of a rac~st

military base in Walvis Bay is clearly designed to compromise the independence of
Namibia and lay the groundwork for its destabilization.

The United Nations and the

international community have a duty to ensure that that does not take place.

RM/15

A/S-16/PV. 6
61

(Mr. Karukubiro-Kamunanwire, Uganda)
We salute and welcome the newly released heroes of the South African
struggle.

Through their unwavering commitment to freedom and social justice, even

behind the gray walls of prison, they inspired their struggle.

As we welcome them

and rejoice at their release, let us be reminded that it is the reality of mass and
armed struggle, coupled with international pressure, that has forced an unwilling
De Klerk to open the prison gates.
struggle inside the country.

What needs to be done now is to intensify the

Externally, the sanctions campaign and boycott

strategy need to be intensified also.

tie call upon the international community to

intensify the struggle for all-round isolation of the racist regime, including the
imposition of all-round economic sanctions.
Whenever confronted with a situation of international isolation the regime has
always made efforts to break out of the situation by appearing to be ready to
introduce reforms.

The so-called reforms have in the past turned out to be

cosmetic changes in tended to beautify apartheid and deceive the international
community.

It will be recalled that last year, in a response to the uprising of

the black majority, the regime went ahead with the discredited municipal
elections.

The General Assembly, in resolution 43/13, appropriately declared those

elections a further attempt to entrench white-minority rule and contrary to the
principles of the Charter.

The General Assembly in resolution 38/11 and the

Security Council in resolution 554 (1984) had already proclaimed the tricameral
Constitution imposed by the racist regime as null and void.

The dismal failure of

the municipal elections is living proof that the oppressed majority cannot accept
being used in manoeuvres intended to legitimize the apartheid constitution.
Some have viewed the assumption of power by Mr. De Klerk in South Africa as a
harbinger of a period of glasnost and, hence, of the democratization of South

A/S-16/PV. 6

RM/15

62

(Mr. Karukubiro-Kamunanwire, Uganda)
Africa.

The permission for demonstrations to take place and the release of some

political prisoners have been cited as indicators of positive change.
of Uganda is not deceived.

The Republic

Both Vorster and Botha at one time or another posed as

reformers in South Africa and as peace-makers in the region.

Their reforms were

merely cosmetic changes intended to disguise the ugly contours of apartheid.
apartheid structure was left more entrenched.

The

In an article entitled, "Moving to

the Next Stage" in the Canadian magazine The Nation of 4 December 1989,
Mr. Gevisser stated:
"Even though the release of some prisoners does make tangible the prospects
for resolution of the crisis, they were released not as free agents but as
commodities in an intricate game of approval-mongering and time-buying.
Mr. De Klerk is caught between the rock of internal resistance and the hard
place of international condemnation.

Mr. De Klerk has been cast by the

world's news media as a visionary, a saviour, etcetera, but the robes don't
fit him."
As we have had occasion to state, Mr. De Klerk has a long way to go before he
can be accepted as an apostle of peaceful change in South Africa.

Despite the

rhetoric of his inaugural speech, in which he promised to execute his mandate for
change over five years, De Klerk remains an adherent of apartheid.

He has a big

instrument of repression at his disposal that has been trained to kill and destroy
for the perpetuation of white-minority rule.

The speech was directed primarily at

the international community and allies of apartheid, from whom he hopes to buy time
with the plea that he needs a chance to deliver on his promises.
We regret that moves are afoot to use the present developments in South Africa
as a cover to undermine the international consensus on sanctions against South
Africa.

The decision by international hanks to strike a deal with South Africa on

the rescheduling of its external debt is not helpful.

We had hoped the

A/S-16/PV. 6

RM/15

63

(Mr. Karukubi ro-Kamunanwire, Uganda)
international banks would heed our call not to reschedule until the regime put in
place fundamental changes for the dismantling of apartheid.

Regrettably, the new

arrangement between South Africa and the international banks relieves it for a
further period of four years from the pressure of using its debt burden as an
instrument for bringing about change.

As Mark Phillips of the University of

Witwatersrand correctly observed:
"If the Government were under less pressure internally and externally,
negotiations could become just another in the long line of strategies that
successive governments have pursued to defend white minority rule."
We therefore call for the imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions.

We

have always regarded as merely self-serving the argument often advanced by others
that sanctions could not be imposed since they would hurt the majority.
Comprehensive mandatory sanctions are the only peaceful avenue left to make the
regime comprehend that the policies of apartheid are unacceptable to the
international community and must therefore be dismantled.
We commend and support the front-line States that have borne the high cost of
defending universal values.

We urge the international community to increase the

assistance to those countries.
Uganda will continue to speak out against countries that collaborate with
South Africa.

We find it absurd that those countries that continue to do business

with the apartheid regime put inordinate pressure on some developing countries to
remain silent on this important subject.

On the question of apartheid Uganda's

view is that there is no fence to sit on.

All of us must stand up and be counted.

The position of Africa is well defined in the 1969 Lusaka Manifesto of the
Organization of African Unity and in the recent Harare Declaration.

A/S-16/PV. 6
64-65

:EM /15

(Mr. Karukubiro-Kamunanwire, Uganda)
We shall work together with the rest of the international comrruni ty in the
search for faster methods to end apartheid in South Africa.

We in UQanda shall

work within the framework of the United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and our own Organization of African Unity in order to create a non-racial
democratic system in South Africa.
The PRESIDENT:

In accordance with General Assembly resolution 477 (V) of

1 November 1950, I now call upon the Acting Chairman of the Observer Delegation of
the League of Arab States, Mr. Hakim Darwaza.

A/S-16/PV.6
66

RM/16

Mr. DARWAZA (Leaque of Arab States)

(interpretation from Arabic):

In

keeping with its firm commitment to support the cause of national lihera tion, the
League of Arab States realizes the importance of the convening of this special
session of the General Assembly at this time to discuss apartheid and its
destructive effects in southern Africa.

The Leaque of Arab States, which supports

all national liberation movements, particularly the na tiona! 1 ibera t ion movement in
South Africa, also realizes that the liberation of a people's homeland is
inextricably linked to the lihera tion of the individual citizen and that the
liberation of the individual citizen cannot he complete without faith in the
equality of all men.

Equality and freedom are the mainstays of human diqni ty.

Throughout its history, the apartheid regime in Pretoria has based itself on
the neqation of equality, the denial of freedom, and the trampling of human
dignity.

As a matter of course, that negative philosophic premise of apartheid has

resulted in practices of op-pression and racial discrimination to which the regime
has resorted, not intermittently but systematically, as part and parcel of the
day-to-day business of apartheid.
While racial or sectarian discrimination, wherever it is practised, in any
country of the world, is a cause for shame and creates a problem, such
discrimination in the case of the Zionist and the apartheid regimes is a matter of
doctrine and a raison d'etre.

HeM else can we explain the strategic alliance

described by His Excellency President Mugabe of Zimbabwe as follows:
(spoke in English)
"Some of the pressures that produced the conditions favouring the Namibian
independence process have already been undermined.
"To begin with, and thanks to Israel'"l shameful collaboration wit~
Pretoria, it n<:M appears that Pretoria has reqa ined its supremacy in the skies

RM/16

A/S-16/PV. 6
67
(Mr. Darwaza)
over southern Africa through its acquisition of the Jericho-type
intermediate-range strategic missiles, which are capable of hitting all our
capitals.

Thus the strategic gains of Cuito Cuanavale have heen negated hy

Israeli support.

Israel has chosen to travel such a low road by propping up

the defences of racism.

Secondly, international hankers have, unfortunately,

relaxed pressure on Pretoria by agreeing to reschedule its foreign debt.
Finally, sorre powerful friends of South Africa are already working hard tn
have existing sanctions measures lifted and are using the powerful media
machines to whitewash apartheid and present every minor adjustment by De Klerk
as if it were a fundamental political reform."

(A/S-16/PV.l, p. 48 et seq.)

(continued in Arabic)
The Pretoria regime has been sending bogus signals designed to persuade public
opinion that it is in the process of "opening up" South African society.
"opening up" is no more than a cover for a dogged racist onslaught.

That sham

Our

Palestinian people has continued to be at the receiving end of the self-same
deceitful machinations, as in the case of the so-called elections with which Israel
tries to cover up its racial discrimination, expansionism, repression and other
practices in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories.
the racist regi rre in South Africa is trying to do.
change in its practices.

That is exactly what

It is touting a so-called

This is iust a smoke-screen designed to hide its true

intentions and give the impression that it is changing practices, while its sole
purpose is to perpetuate its dominance and fragment the unity of the South African
national liberation moverrents.

In a statement in the General Assembly, the

Permament Observer of the League of Arab States said:

A/S-16/PV.6
68

RM/16

(Mr. Darwaza)
(spoke in English)
"It is this structured defiance of every aspect of human destiny and
human equality that characterizes the policies of apartheid, together with its
deliberate contempt for the United Nations and its resolutions and its total
and absolute defiance of international public opinion. Because of this it has
been necessary to impose sanctions on the apartheid regime of South Africa,
for sanctions contribute to lessening and defusing violence and making
oppression and racism costly.

Sanctions are the only language understood by

apartheid and those that hold United Nations resolutions in contempt.

They

have to be pursued, they have to be continuous and they have to bring about
the necessary expeditious results ••.•

That is why we look upon these

developments in South Africa as a matter of moral and ethical commitment, a
commitment to bring about the genuine application of the principles enunciated
in the various United Nations resolutions on apartheid.

It is important to

realize that we in the Arab world have a supportive affinity for the ennobling
struggle of the people of South Africa to bring about their equality,
democracy and freedom in a pluralistic society.

It is in this

light - even though violence might be tempered by certain so-called defusing
reforms - that we should not lose sight of the very institutional contempt of
the apartheid regime for human equality and human decency.

Apartheid is not

only an attack on the people of South Africa, it is an obstacle that blurs the
vision of mankind as it seeks to bring about the convergence of human freedom
and human equality.
'Whenever one deliberately disenfranchises people hecause they are of a
different religion, a different colour or a different race, that in itself
will erode respect for human dignity.

In this age, as we prepare to enter the

A/S-16/PV. 6
69-70

RM/16

(Mr. Darwaza)
next decade, we can no longer allow regimes that seek to distinguish between
men because of their race and religion.

Our attack on apartheid is an attack

on irrationality within every society.

In that respect the Assembly's

deliberation today on apartheid is a matter of deep relevance to the people of
the Arab world and in particular to the people of Palestine because the
technique of non-violence that has been pursued .•• in South Africa has been
used in the struggle of the Palestinian intifadah against Israel's racism and
practices of oppression." (A/44/PV. 62, pP· 62 et seq.)
(continued in Arabic)
The release of national leaders in South Africa is a step towards the total
elimination of rae ial discrimination and !ipartheid.

Without a doubt the

international community is called upon to tighten further the isolation and
ostracism of Pretoria so as to make that regime realize how costly it is to persist
in oppressing the people of South Africa and depriving them of their rights to
equality and freedom.
The League of Arab States, therefore, hopes that this special session will
contribute to the speeding up of the process of liberation and denncra tiza tion of
the society of South Africa.

The racist regime in Pretoria should not be immune

from the punishment that should be meted out to all racist regimes.

R-1/17

A/S-16/PV. 6
71

(Mr. Darwaza)
The Arab League attenos this special session of the General Assembly in the
fervent hope that the historic declaration that will be adopted by consensus will
have the results for which all freedom-loving and peace-loving people so fervently
hope.
The PRESIDENT:

In accordance with the decision taken by the General

Assembly at its lst plenary meeting, on 12 December 1989, I now call upon the
Chairman of the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC), Mr. Johnson Mlambo.
Mr. MLAMBO (Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC)):

First and

foremost, allow me, on behalf of the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC),
heartily to congratulate Ambassador Joseph Garba on his unanimous election as
President of the current session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
Intimately knowing his commitment and ability, we are confident that under his wise
guidance this special session of the General Assembly will further uphold the
legitimate riqhts of all peoples to be free and to exercise their inalienahle right
to self-determination.
Moreover, on behalf of the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania, the custodian of
the genuine aspirations of the oppressed, exploited, disenfranchised and
dispossessed people of Azania, allow me also to thank most sincerely the President
and the members of the United Nations family for convening this important and
timely special session devoted to apartheid and its destructive consequences in
southern Africa.

With the independence of Namibia now on course, it is only

natural that the international community should now specifically focus on the last
bastion of colonialism and racism on the African continent with the sole aim of
eradicating that evil system.
This historic special session is taking place at a time when the oppressed and
dispossessed people have achieved an unprecedented deqree of mobilization and

'EM/17

A/S-16/PV. 6
72

(Mr. Mlambo, PAC)
organization.

Their resolve to struggle for their inalienable and fundamental

rights has never been so high.

Their determination to sacrifice is exemplary.

They have strengthened their methods of struggle and have resolved to employ all
methods of struggle to realize their legitimate quest for national liberation and
self-determination.
Moreover, a plethora of Draconian laws, the so-called state of emergency, the
threat of death sentences under the controversial doctrine of common law, the
incarceration of political prisoners for over a quarter of a century, the mass
detentions without trial, and the official use of hit squads by the racist regime
have all failed to contain, suppress and subdue the Azanian masses.

In reality,

increased oppression has resulted in increased and principled resistance on all
fronts.
On

the other hand the ever-increasing internal resistance and international

isolation and the voluntary and selective sanctions have directly contributed to
the illegal minority racist regime's wallowing in a political quagmire and facing
an unprecedented economic crisis, its myth of military invincibility expo3ed.
Faced with those deepening crises the minority regime is desperately attempting to
extricate itself by introducing peripheral reforms in the hope of co-opting a
section of the oppressed into the system.
proved to be a dismal failure.

Its so-called bantustan policy has

The so-called tricameral parliament system has been

unequivocally rejected by those the regime had hoped to en-opt.
The sole purpose of the reform exercise, therefore, is not to eliminate the
apartheid evil but, rather, to buy time and overcome present sanctions and
political isolation.

In all the utterances made by F.W. De Klerk and his racist

National Party, the five political pillars of apartheid have, conveniently, not
been addressed.

I note with appreciation that several delegations here have

A/S-16/PV. 6

IM/17

73-75

(Mr. Mlambo, PAC)
touched upon those five pillars.

They are, first, the Population Registration Act;

secondly, the Land Acts of 1913 and 1936, on which are based the Group Areas Act
and the fact that 85 per cent of our people are entitled to only 13 per cent of the
land, whereas the white community, which is only about 14 per cent of the total
population, has 87 per cent of the land; thirdly, the Bantu Education Act;
fourthly, the Tricameral Parliament system, which was massively rejected by our
people, whose basis has been declared null and void by the United Nations General
Assembly and Security Council; and, fifthly, the Bantustans.
Until and unless those five political pillars of apartheid are genuinely
addressed and unconditionally removed, it cannot be said that serious moves are
afoot to eradicate the evil system.

The Pan Africanist Congress of Azania has,

moreover, consistently maintained that those five political pillars of apartheid
are non-negotiable and they must go.

We further assert that all those genuinely

demanding the elimination of apartheid must insist that the five political pillars
must go so as to pave the way for fundamental changes in Azania.

A/S-16/PV. 6

JVM/18

76

(Mr. Mlambo, PAC)
On the question of negotiations, the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania, after
consultation with people on the home front, believes that what is currently being
talked about is what will constitute a climate conducive to negotiations.

Some

have suggested that the release of political prisoners, the lifting of the ban on
national liberation movements, the lifting of the state of emergency, the
withdrawal of racist troops from the African townships and the return of the
political exiles, which we have all along demanded, could lead
climate.

to

creation of that

These, in the view of the Pan Africanist Congress, are merely the

reactions of the regi ~ to the legitimate strugqle of the people - they do not
address the core of the problem.
The Pan Africanist Congress of Azania wishes

to

remind this Assembly that this

special session of the General Assembly has been called specifically in order to
eradicate apartheid, not to reform it.

To eradicate it, the political pillars

which support it must be addressed and methods evolved to deal effectively with the
core of the problem.

Any other action would only help to prolong the long and

devastating agony of our people and those in the front-line and neighbou dng
countries.
What is

to

be negotiated is not apartheid but the elimination of apartheid,

and the only effective way of negotia tinq the elimination of apartheid is
the core of the problem.

to

get to

The total elimination of apartheid, which is the

legitimate demand of the people of Azan ia and of the international community, can
be realized only through the adoption of a one-person, one-vote constitution based
on a non-racial election on a common voters roll.

Only such an exercise can lead

to the establishment of a genuine non-racial, democratic society in a free Azania.
I shall nON dwell briefly on the developments inside apartheid South Africa in
recent weeks.

As part of the ongoinq programme of mobilization, the Pan Africanist

Students' Organization (PASO) was formed, and since its formation in October it has

JVM/18

A/S-16/PV.6
77
(Mr. Mlambo, PAC)

been inundated with applications for membership.

Last week delegates from all over

the country assembled in Johannesburg to launch the Pan Africanist Movement (PAM),
which will co-ordinate the political views and demands of the Africanists inside
the country and mobilize the broadest possible front against the racist regime.
Moreover, the Pan Africanist Movement will consolidate the mass organizations
formed to organize the workers, women, youth, students, vocational organizations
and intellectuals.
It was also recently revealed that the racist regime, besides embarking on
ruthless suppression, employed death squads to eliminate political opponents.

The

regime is attempting to dismiss these revelations as unauthorized acts by
over-zealous officers.

The truth is that these death squads have been part and

parcel of the violence of the system against the oppressed masses and not just
isolated individual acts and have been in operation not just for a periorl of
10 years, as has been suggested, hut from the early 1960s.

We in the Pan

Africanist Congress of Azania have been victims of these murder squads.

Those

assassinated by the murrler squads include a promising lawyer, Advocate Kutumela, in
1966; several released political prisoners, stretching from the 1960s right through
the 1970s, members of the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania like Thomas Motloung,
Neville Mncuhe, Mukudubete, Enoch Maphaphu, Philip Chiloane and the Founder
President of PAC, Mangaliso Robert Sobukwe.

Furthermore, it will be recalled that

General van den Bergh, ex-nazi sympathizer and former head of the Bureau of State
Security (BOSS), when testifying during the Muldergate Information scandal, said
that it was official policy physically to eliminate those opposed to them since it
was a life-and-death struggle, a struggle to preserve the apartheid system.
The international community, and in particular the media, should ensure that
the hit squads issue is not covered up or glossed over under the glare of reform.

A/S-16/PV. 6

JVM/18

78-80

(Mr. Mlambo, PAC)
Equally, whilst the regine is attempting to appear reformist, it is at the
same time distracting attention from the plight of those languishing in death
cells.

The regine is threatening to hang the Upington 14, who were charged and

sentenced under the controversial "common purpose" law, like those who were
sentenced and cane to he known as the Sharpeville Six.
gallows in apartheid South Africa must be saved.

These and others facing the

We call on the international

community to intensify the campaign for their unconditional

releas~.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that the core of the problem is the
universally condemned policies and practices of the illegal minority racist regime
in South Africa.

The Azanian people are determined to liberate themselves from

this neo-Nazi regime by employing all means at their disposal, including armed
resistance.

Our brothers and sisters in the front-line and neighbouring States and

in the rest of Africa have suffered in one form or another from their principled
opposition to apartheid.

We fully appreciate their sacrifices and their support.

International political isolation and voluntary and selective sanctions have
affected the racist regime.

We call for the intensification of the isolation and

the imposition of comprehen~ive and mandatory sanctions against that regime.

The

call from this important and historic special session of the General Assembly is
quite clear:

apartheid must go and it must go now.

replaced by a genuine non-racial, democratic system.

It must he immediately
Our people are determiped to

win their national liberation and to exercise their inalienable right to
self-determination in a free and democratic Azania.

JVM/19

A/S-16/PV. 6
81-85

The PRESIDENT:

The meetinq is now suspended in order to allow for the

processing of the report of the Ad Hoc Commit tee of the Whole of the Sixteenth
Special Session.

A/S-16/PV. 6
86

EH/bh

The meeting was suspended at 6 P•m• and resumed at 8 p.m.*
The PRESIDENT:

I shall now call upon those representatives who wish to

speak in exercise of the right of n~ply.
May I remind members of the Assembly that, in accordance with General Assembly
decision 34/401, statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited to
10 minutes for the first intervention and to five minutes for the second, and
should be made hy delegations from their seats.
Mr. GHAREKHAN (India):

It

is with a sense of profound regret that rrry

delegation feels compelled to ask to speak in exercise of the right of reply.

My

delegation had thought that we had all oome here to join our forces in the common
struggle against apartheid 1 therefore we were surprised and shocked when the
representative of Pakistan, in a statement earlier this afternoon, sought to abuse
the forum of this special session to make tendentious and unwarranted references to
Kashmir, outrageously comhining it in one hreath with the struggle against
apartheid.

My

delegation finds that totally unacceptable, the more so because we

have all oome to this special session to ooncentrate our efforts on the elimination
of apartheid.

Such extraneous references can only divert the attention of the

Assembly from the struggle against apartheid and cause harm to our common
endeavour.
As the world knows, the people of Kashmir have repeatedly exercised their
democratic rights.

Such rights, freed from the slightest hint of terror,

exploitation or any form of coercive persuasion, are part of my country's
commitment to the exercise of full democracy, most recently manifested in the ninth
general elections held in November this year, including elections in Kashmir.
Once again I apologize for having had to speak at this stage.

*

Mr. Garba (Nigeria), President, took the Chair.

EH/bh

A/S-16/PV. 6
87-90

Mr. QURESHI (Pakistan):

I also regret having to speak at this stage in

exercise of the right of reply to the representative of India.

Our position on the

question of apartheid is very clear and it has been very clearly reflected in our
statement which was read out today.

As far as the position of Pakistan and that of

the international community with regard to Kashmir is concerned, it is very well
known and requires no further reiteration.
territories.

Jammu and Kashmir are disputed

We have therefore always maintained that this problem needs to be

resolved in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions and in the
spirit of the Simla Agreements of 1972.

EH/td

A/S-16/PV. 6
91

The PRES !DENT:

The Assembly will now turn to the report of the M Hoc

Committee of the Whole of the Sixteenth Special Ses~ion on aqenda item 7, entitled
"Apartheid and its destructive consequences in southern Africa" (A/S-16/4).
I request the Rapporteur of the M Hoc Commit tee of the Whole of the Sixteenth
Special Session, Mr. Gerhard Richter, of the German Democratic Republic, to
introduce the report.
Mr. RICHTER (German Democratic Republic), Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Whole of the Sixteenth Special Session:

I have the honour and

pleasure to introduce the report of the M Hoc Committee of the Whole of the
Sixteenth Special Session of the General Assembly on Apartheid and its destructive
consequences in southern Africa, now before the Assembly in draft form
(A/S-16~C.l/L.l).

The General Assembly also has before it document A/S-16/4 in

that connection.
It will be recalled that the Ad Hoc Committee was established in accordance
with decision 44/408 of the General Assembly at the 1st Plenary meeting of the
sixteenth special session.

Its task was to hear non-governmental organizations as

well as individuals having a special interest in the question of apartheid and its
destructive consequences in southern Africa and to finalize a draft declaration to
be considered by the General Assembly, as we are now doing in today's plenary
meeting.
In this connection, the Ad Hoc Committee devoted two meetings to hearing 19
non-governmental organizations and individuals on the subject.

A list of them is

included in the report of the Ad Hoc Committee.
Two other meetings of the Ad Hoc Commit tee were dedicated to an exchange of
views on the draft declaration, which was earlier introduced to the Committee by
the Acting Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid.
addressed the meetings on the draft declaration.

Eleven delegations

Statements were also made by the

EH/td

A/S-16/PV. 6

92
(Mr. Richter, RapPorteur, Ad Hoc
Commit tee of the Whole of the
Sixteenth Special Session)
representatives of the African National Congress of South Africa and the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania.
Over the last three days the officers of the Ad Hoc Committee have held
intensive consultations with various delegations and qroups of delegations on the
draft declaration.

As the General Assembly now has before it the draft report of

the Ad Hoc Committee, I should like to draw the Assembly's attention to paragraph 6
of the final report, which will read as follows:
"At its 5th meeting on 14 December 1989, the Ad Hoc Committee considered
its report, including the draft Declaration, and adopted that report by
consensus.

At that meeting, the Committee heard statements by the

representatives of the African National Congress of South Africa, the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania, the German Democratic Republic, Haiti, Nigeria,
and France on behalf of the Twelve member States of the European Community.
The Ad Hoc Community authorized its Rapporteur to submit the report direct to
the General Assembly.

In its report, the Ad Hoc Committee recommends to the

General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution contained in paragraph 7
of its report, to which is annexed the Declaration on Apartheid and its
Destructive Consequences in Southern Africa.

The Commit tee also recommends to

the Assembly the adoption of the draft decision contained in paragraph 8 of
its report. "
Finally, on behalf of the officers of the Committee I should like
whole-heartedly to thank Dame Ann Hercus, our Chairman, for her

tln tiring

efforts.

I thank the officers of the Ad Hoc Committee and all those who participated in the
result-oriented negotiations on the draft declaration.

EH/td

A/S-16/PV. 6
93

The PRESIDENT:

If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of

procedure, I shall take it that the Assembly will not discuss the report.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT:

The Assembly will now proceed to take a decision on the

draft resolution and the draft decision recommended in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the
report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Sixteenth Special Session,
contained in document A/S-16/4.
We turn first to the draft resolution recommended in paragraph 7 of the
report.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution

without a vote?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution S-16/1).
The PRES !DENT:

We nCM turn to the draft dec is ion recommended in

paragraph 8 of the report of the Ah Hoc Committee.

May I take it that the Assembly

wishes to adopt that draft decision without a vote?
The draft decision was adopted.
The PRESIDENT:

I shall now call on representatives who wish to explain

their position on the resolution and decision just adopted.

The positions of

delegations regarding the various recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole of the Sixteenth Special Session have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
limited to explanations of position.

Statements will therefore be

May I remind members also that, in accordance

with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. MOORE (United States of America):

The United States is pleased to be

able to join in the consensus adoption of the final Declaration of this special
session.

We have done so because of our clear belief that apartheid must end and

A/S-16/PV. 6

EH/td

94

(Mr. Moore, United States)
that the people of South Africa must, together, find genuine and peaceful solutions
to their problems.
The United States believes that a new era of conciliation, negotiation and
change may be emerging in South Africa.

There have been encouraging signs,

especially since the inauguration of South Africa's new government in September.
President De Klerk has spoken of a "totally changed South Africa ••• free of
domination or oppression in any form".

He has permitted peaceful demonstrations to

take place and he has met with opposition leaders.
Only yesterday, President De Klerk met in his office with Nelson Mandela, who
during his 27 years of incarceration has become the personification of the
anti-apartheid struggle.

We hope and expect that Mr. Mandela will soon be

following in the footsteps of other opposition leaders who were recently released
from prison.
The consensus which has been reached on this final Declaration is especially
meaningful because it meets our concerns -yours, Mr. President, and those of the
United States - that the United Nations be unanimous in sending an unambiguous
signal to the people of South Africa in support of the negotiating process which we
believe may be emerging in that country.
We must not impede that process.

We must give momentum and encouragement to

the efforts now being made by the people of South Africa themselves.

We helie"e

that the final Declaration before this special session of the General Assembly does
precisely that, and for that reason we are happy to join in supporting it.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the Permanent
Representa ti"e of New Zealand for her constructive and facili ta tiw! leadership of
our drafting discussions.

I would also like to pay a tribute to all those who

A/S-l6/PV.6

EH/td

95

(Mr. Moore, United States)
participated in our negotiations for the co-operative spirit which informed our
common efforts.
I would like to make a few points for the record, so that there may he no
misunderstanding of the United States position on the negotiations which must beqin
and on the goal, which is the emergence of a democratic non-racial South Africa.
First of all, it should be clear that we call upon all sides to renounce
violence in pursuit of their goals.

The Declaration rightly emphasizes the need to

encourage the peaceful nature of the negotiations.

Our participation in this

consensus reflects our encouragement of a peaceful process.

A/S-16/PV.6
96

JB/32

(Mr. Moore, United States)
Next, we believe very strongly that it is the responsibility of the people of
South Africa alone to decide what is right for it.

The Declaration explicitly

reaffirms the right of all peoples, including the people of South Africa, to
determine their own destiny, not to have it determined hy others.

Any attempt by

well-meaning outsiders to prescribe specific steps that must be taken or specific
forms that must be followed represents interference in that country's internal
affairs.
Yes, there are some suggestions in this final Declaration.
what friends are for - to give advice from time to time.

That is part of

We believe the

suggestions in the Declaration are by and large helpful and would facilitate the
process of negotiations.

However, they should not be cons trued as any form of

rigid blueprint by this body or by the people of South Africa, which alone will be
engaged in those negotiations.
We do not believe that the list of suggestions herein is hy any means
exhaustive.

There may well be other or different issues to discuss, other par ties

that might be included, and other measures that could be taken in furtherance of
the goal of peaceful negotiations and a transition to a non-racial South Africa.
We do not wish to rule them out if the people of South Africa decides they are
helpful.
We are pleased to note in that regard that the final text of the Declaration
omits elements that had been proposed earlier, such as additional mandatory
sanctions, an international framework for those negotiations or for the transition
process, or the establishment of an interim Government.
inappropriate for that document.

We felt such ideas to be

We view that change in approach as evidence that

the international community recognizes that a new era of peaceful change may bP
dawning in South Africa that deserves our support and encouragement.

A/S-16/PV. 6

JB/32

97

(Mr. Moore, United States)
Finally, we note herein a call for extending assistance requested by the
"Governments of Angola and Mozambique".

We fully endorse the efforts now under way

to bring peace and stability to those two troubled countries.

The question what

assistance is appropriate and should be rendered is, necessarily, a sovereign
decision to be taken by each individual Member of the United Nations.

I must also

note that our support for the Declaration does not constitute any change in the
United States position of not recognizing any Government in Angola at this time.
I have one more brief comment on another, less productive, subject before
closing.

I regret that the Panamanian delegation has sought to diminish the

dignity of our common enterprise by making unfounded allegations against the United
States.
Mr. RICHARDSON (United Kingdom):

I should first like to repeat the

tribute paid a short time ago in the Committee of the Whole by the representative
of France on behalf of the Twelve member States of the European Community to Dame
Ann Hercus, the Chairman of that Committee.

Long and arduous negotiations under

Dame Ann's leadership, in which the Twelve within their framework played their full
part, led to the adoption of our final document.

Without her diplomatic skill,

strength and stamina we would not have achieved consensus.

The Assembly owes her a

great deal.
I

tn His stat~mont on 13 ~ede~ber, Sir Cri~pin Tiakell commented that the
outcome of this special session should be a strong and unanimous signal to all
concerned of the need to sit round the table and solve their difficulties by
negotiation.

He added that we would not achieve that by endorsing the position of

one side or the other, nor by presuming to dictate in advance to the people of
South Africa what the outcome of its negotiations should be.

Rather, our aim

should be to ensure that everything we do or say enhances rather than hinders the

A/S-16/PV. 6

JB/32

98

(Mr. Richardson, United Kingdom)
prospect of negotiations.

We should encourage all those involved

flexibility and a spirit of mutual accommodation.

to

demonstrate

We do not and will not accept

that violence or armed struggle is a legitimate means of seeking change.
The consensus we have reached today demonstrates the extent to which those
objectives have been achieved.

It is indeed a considerable achievement.

We

congratulate all those involved on the positive spirit in which the negotiations on
the final document were conducted.
The final Declaration is a fair summary of the views of those who share the
common goal of a peaceful end
to compromise.

to

the obnoxious sys tern of apartheid.

All have had

But we must recognize that the role of the international community

is limited.

Ultimately, it is for the people of South Africa itself

own future.

It is imperative that that people should be free to do so in a way of

its own choosing.
that.

to

decide its

For the most part, the final Declaration does nothing to hinder

There was nothing to be gained by including in it detailed prescriptions for

the future of South Africa.

Any negotiating process needs a degree of flexibility.

My delegation is particularly pleased to note that the final document is fully

consistent with the negotiating concept of the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group,
which enjoins all sides to enter negotiations and suspend violence on the basis of
simultaneous and matching commitments.

We believe that that concept, the validity

of which was reaffirmed by Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Kuala Lumpur
earlier this year, offers the most promising route towards negotiations and the end
of apartheid.
In joining the consensus, I should like to clarify the position of my
delegation on two specific points.

First, the reference in paragraph 19 (c) of the

final document to a "non-racial voters roll" should not be interpreted in such a
way as to inhibit the people of South Africa themselves - all of them - from

JB/32

A/S-16/PV. 6
99-100

(Mr. Richardson, United Kingdom)
deciding upon any electoral process that is acceptable to it.

Secondly, my

delegation believes that the parties involved must be free to determine when the
climate for negotiation exists.

The call for the repeal of the Internal Security

Act, as in paragraph 22 (d) of the final document, should not be used as an
obstacle to delay the start of negotiations.

The important point is that normal

political activity should be permitted in South Africa.
With that consensus document, the membership of the United Nations has made an
important commitment to peaceful change in South Africa.

We wish all the people of

South Africa well in the difficult task that lies ahead of them.

Where there are

ways in which the international community can contribute to that process, the
British Government will do so to the best of its ability.
The PRESIDENT:

I call on the representative of Liberia, who will speak

on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. JARRETT (Liberia):

This is a historic occasion, as the special

session is the first; ever on the evil policy of apartheid.

The occasion is also

historic because the ·.Assembly has adopted an international consensus on the
elimination .of apartheid and the creation of a denocra tic South Africa through
direct negotiations between the apartheid regime and the genuine representatives of
the South African people.

A/S-16/PV. 6
101

JSM/ad

(Mr. Jarrett, Liberia)
The Group of African States, on whose behalf I am privileged to speak, extends
its profound thanks to you, Mr. President, to the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee
of the Whole, the Permanent Representative of New Zealand, and equally to all those
who worked so very hard, in a spirit of co-operation and compromise, to produce

•

this Declaration.
Of course we in Africa would have wanted more, hnt we are willing to accept
the Declaration on behalf of our oppressed brothers and sisters in South Africa as
a first step in the process towards the attainment of a democratic and non-racial
South Africa.
Mr. PETROVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Russian):

(interpretation from

The Soviet delegation would like to express its deep satisfaction at the

results of the work of the special session.

Agreement has been reached on one of

the most difficult problems in Africa - the elimination of the system of apartheid
in South Africa.

One of the imperatives of today's interdependent world is to

defuse regional conflicts and eliminate hotbeds of tension, and to do so iustly and
comprehensively so as to safeguard the genuine interests and rights of all
countries and peoples freely to choose their paths to national development.
process is not simple.

This

It reauires prudence, responsibility and thoughtfulness of

all States and Governments and loyal co-operation with strict observance of the
fundamental principles of international law.

It is precisely in this context that

we consider the results of this special session.
The final document adopted by consensus represents the fruit of the productive
mutual interaction of all Members of the United Nations who have carried out their
task using the positive trends in world politics to hasten the process of the
establishment of peace and ;ustice in southern Africa.
hard the road has been towards consensus,

ha.~

Representatives know how

much patience, reserve and political

JSM/ad

A/S-16/PV. 6
102
(Mr. Petrovksy, USSR)

realism has been required to reach reasonable compromises.

The Declaration just

adopted is especially valuable because a broad range of States, representing the
entire political spectrum of our Organization, took part in its neqotiation.
We should like to emphasize the contribution of the African and other
non-aligned countries, the flexible, rea lis tic position of the liberation
organizations and the constructive role of the European Community.

We note with

satisfaction the active role in the preparation of the document played by our
delegation and that of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Finally, we should like to draw attention to the report on the preparation of
the Declaration by the representative of New Zealand, Dame Ann Hercus, Chairman of
the Ad Hoc Committee, which indicates the decisiveness and firmness that were
required to bring the work to a successful conclusion.
The Declaration of the sixteenth special session on apartheid can rightly he
considered a victory of commonsense and sober political approaches.

For the first

time in the history of the United Nations, as the precedinq speaker observed, a
document has been adopted on apartheid that reflects the unified opinion of all its
Member States.

I think that we shall not be mistaken if we call this achievement

an important landnark in United Nations efforts to affirm the priority of common
human values in a system of peace, security and co-operation based on the United
Nations Charter.
The international community now has in its hands a real programme of action,
whose implementation will make it possible fully to eradicate what is left of
racism and apartheid on the African continent.

This document is also a serious

challenge to South Africa, which now has a chance to come back to the international
community and adopt swift, decisive measures to dismantle apartheid and meet the
demands in the document.

A/S-16/PV. 6
103

JSM/ad

(Mr. Petrovksy, USSR)
In our opinion, the consensus adoption of the document by the United Nations
is further proof of the effectiveness of the new political thinking, which is
becoming increasingly useful in the resolution of the most complex problems facing
the contemporary world.
The PRESIDENT:

I call on the representative of the African National

Congress of South Africa.
Mr. MAFOLE (African National Congress of South Africa (ANC)):

The ANC

delegation has already had the opportunity to address the .Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole and to express its position on the document before us.
avail myself of the opportunity

to

I speak now only to

place on record the appreciation of the ANC to

the international community represented in this special session.

In particular, we

would like to express our profound gratitude to you, Mr. President, for all the
efforts you have personally exerted in bringing this session to its successful
conclusion.

We should also like to place on record our deepest appreciation to

Dame Ann Hercus, the representative of New Zealand, through whose diplomatic skill
it was possible to bring divergent political positions to a consensus.

Let us also

thank very sincerely the officers of the Ad Hoc Committee, who have made very
strenuous efforts towards reaching a consensus.

Finally, we should like to thank

the Members of the United Nations represented here who made it possible for the
first time for the international community to adopt a consensus position on the
question of South Africa.
Some doubts have been raised about the documentJ in particular it has been
said that this document is not intended to deprive the people of South Africa of
their sovereignty and to dictate to them what kind of positions to adopt and how
their futures should be shaped.

We could not agree more.

The reason we, the

people of South Africa, came to the United Nations regarding this document was not

A/S-16/PV. 6
104-105

JSM/ad

(Mr. Mafole, ANC)
to surrender the sovereignty of the people of South AfricaJ rather it was to ensure
that the international community had some parameters within which to determine the
course of action that the international community should take on the question of
apartheid.

We are happy that the communi tv has been able to draw up such

parameters, and that there is sone general agreement on the principles to guide the
future South Africa to a successful negotiated truce.

We are also very happy that

some agreement has been reached as to the mechanisms that have to be adopted
towards this end.

NS/ASW

A/S-16/PV. 6
106
(Mr. Mafole, ANC)

We should like therefore to say that we are happy with the document that has
been agreed upon here.

We must add that although, as has already been indicated,

the document does not necessarily reflect the views of every delegation and
certainly does not reflect all the views of the African National Congress and the
people of South Africa, nevertheless the people of South Africa are very qrateful
that the United Nations has been able to speak with one voice and will be able to
send a clear signal to Pretoria that the international community can no longer
allow the Pretoria reqime to continue to flout international opinion, to continue
to deny the people of South Africa what is rightfully theirs and to continue to
allow a situation in which democracy and self-determination do not prevail in South
Africa.

We would like to say, therefore, that we are very thankful to the United

Nations and to the international community.
We wish to add that the document that has been signed at this session is a
hiRtoric one, but it i.s iust a document.
be taken after its adoption.

What is important is the action that will

It is therefore against this background that we wish

to urge the members of the international community to ensure that the good
positions that have been reflected in this document will be followed by actions
that will contribute tremendously towards South Africa's obtaining the
long-sought-after objective, which is a non-rae ial and denn cra tic South Africct.
1

Let us not for one minute perpetuate a situation where resolution after
resolution and declaration after declaration are adopted to no avail.

It is our

belief that the fact that this has been arrived at hv consensus will ensure that
the en tire international communi tv gathered here will stand sauarelv behind thP
people of South Africa in ensuring that all the positions that are reflected i.n
this document will he followed through, thus ens11rinq that our condemnation 0f
~artheid

is translated into action.

NS/ASW

A/S-16/PV.6
107
The PRESIDENT:

That concludes our consideration of item 7 and all other

agenda items.
In the last three months I have had many occasions on which I have felt
honoured and proud to preside over the deliberations of the Assembly, but I wish to
say today that whatever burning issues we have had before us, notwithstanding the
differences of opinion that were expressed, I am most proud of what we have all
achieved together today.

The result that we have so arduously and diligently

worked for is a landmark in our lonq fight against apartheid and should serve as an
example for generations to come of the determination that men and women of
conscience can display in their united commitment

to

fight for a principle which we

all hold to be sacred and immutable.
I believe that the Declaration we have just adopted sends a clear signal to
Pretoria that change must now take place.

I also believe - and I know that many nf

the members share this belief - that the stage that has been reached in South
Africa, where the possibility for real and fundamental change exists, has been
reached through the shedding of much blood and the shedding of many tears by our
brothers and sisters inside South Africa and also because we, in the international
community, have been persistent in our efforts to help them effect meaningful
change.

We are, today, sending a loud and clear message to the minority that

wields power in Pretoria that the international community is determined more than
ever determined to see the system of apartheid disappear from the face of the earth.
We have already said in different ways what we said here today, but never have
we said it with the strength derived from the unity that the Assembly has shown
today.

Members of the General Assembly, you have spoken.

It is now our duty, as

the representative of the African National Congress has just stated, to translate
our words into action.

A declaration, however solemn or unanimous, will not in

NS/ASW

A/S-16/PV. 6
108
(The President)

itself help the people of South Africa in their efforts to help create a new
and non-racial society, but it will lend tremendous power to our arguments
henceforth when addressing the proponents of apartheid, whether inside or outside
South Africa.

It is ~ fervent hope that you will put that power to good use and

build upon what we have achieved today, so that, together again in the near future,
we may welcome among us the freely elected and true representatives of a new South
Africa.
Let me conclude by expressing my appreciation to the Permanent Representative
of New Zealand, Her Excellency Dame Ann Hercus, who, as Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Sixteenth Special Session, worked with skill, energy and
perseverance and played a crucial part in producinq the happy results that we have
seen tonight.

I would he remiss in ~ duties if I did not also pay a tribute to

our Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Sotirios Mousouris, and his very able staff in
the Centre aqainst Apartheid for all the work they have done.

I believe that their

dedication and commitment, particularly in the last few days, went far beyond the
call of duty.

I pay a tribute to you all.

Finally, I wish to pay a tribute to all the Members of the United Nations for
speaking once again and for speaking loudly and in unison against the obnoxious
system that is called apartheid.
I invite representatives to stand and observe a minute of silent prayer or
meditation.
The members of the General Ass~mbly observed a minute of silent prayer or
meditation.
CLOSURE OF THE SIXTEENTH S PECIAT... SESSION
The PRESIDENT:

I declare closed the sixteenth special session of

General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 8.40 o.m.

t~e
