S/PV.7272

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7272nd meeting

Wednesday, 24 September 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

President Obama/Mr. Kerry/Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland  . . . .

President Fernández
Mr. Abbott
President Deby Itno
President Bachelet Jeria
Mr. Wang Yi
President Hollande
King Abdullah II
President Grybauskaitė
Mr. Bettel
President Jonathan
President Park Geun-Hye
Mr. Lavrov
President Kagama
Mr. Cameron

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Foreign terrorist fighters
Letter dated 3 September 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/648)

14-54735 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1454735*

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Foreign terrorist fighters
Letter dated 3 September 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of the United States
of America to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2014/648)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Heads of State and Government, the Secretary-General,
the Ministers and other representatives present in
the Security Council Chamber. Their presence today
underscores the importance of the subject matter under
discussion.
Members of the Council have before them a
list of speakers who have requested to participate
in accordance with rules 37 and 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, as well as with previous
practice of the Council in this regard. We propose that
they be invited to participate in this meeting.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/688, which contains the text of a draft resolution
sponsored by Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia,
2/43

24/09/2014

Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu and
Yemen.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/648, which contains a letter dated
3 September 2014 from the Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2178 (2014).
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your country’s presidency of the
Security Council this month. I thank you for your
leadership in convening this Security Council summit.
This is the second time that you have presided over
this Council on a matter with grave implications for
international peace and security.
The world is witnessing a dramatic evolution
in the nature of the terrorist threat. In the last year,
terrorist attacks have killed, maimed and displaced
many thousands of civilians — the vast majority of
them Muslims — from Afghanistan to Somalia to
Nigeria, from Iraq to Libya to Mali. Those attacks
have been carried out by violent extremists who thrive
in conditions of insecurity and injustice, fragility and
failed leadership. Those groups ruthlessly hijack religion
to control territory and vital economic resources. They
brutalize women and girls. They target and slaughter
minorities. They are the enemies of faith.

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

As Muslim leaders around the world have said,
groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) — or Daesh — have nothing to do with Islam,
and they certainly do not represent a State. They should
more fittingly be called the Un-Islamic Non-State. Yet
those groups have become a magnet for foreign terrorist
fighters who are easy prey to simplistic appeals and
siren songs.
The United Nations Al-Qaida/Taliban Monitoring
Team estimates that more than 13,000 foreign terrorist
fighters from over 80 Member States have joined ISIL
and the al-Nusra Front. The growing phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters is a consequence, not a cause,
of the conflict in Syria. A long period of upheaval and,
until recently, unresponsive leadership in Iraq, coupled
with outrageous human rights abuses in Syria, have
created a hothouse of horrors. There can be no genuine
protection of civilians if extremist groups are permitted
to act with impunity and the Syrian Government
continues its assault on its own people.
For more than a year, I have sounded the alarm
about the vicious and unjustifiable actions of those
groups and the danger they pose to Iraq, Syria, the
wider region and international peace and security. We
need a creative and comprehensive political strategy in
Syria and beyond to stem the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters. Terrorists must be defeated, but we must do so
in a way that avoids the deliberate acts of provocation
that they set for us: victimization, further radicalization
and more civilian deaths. Eliminating terrorism requires
international solidarity and a multifaceted approach,
among the many tools we must use. We must also tackle
the underlying conditions that provide violent extremist
groups the opportunity to take root. Immediate security
issues must be addressed.
Over the longer term, the biggest threat to terrorists
is not the power of missiles. It is the politics of inclusion.
It is peaceful societies and respect for human rights.
It is education, jobs and real opportunity. It is leaders
who listen to their people and uphold the rule of law.
Missiles may kill terrorists, but good governance kills
terrorism. Free and independent societies, free from
suffering, oppression and occupation — that is what
will kill terrorism.
I welcome resolution 2178 (2014), which was
just adopted, and its call for strengthening the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. Through the Counter-Terrorism

S/PV.7272

Implementation Task Force, we are stepping up efforts
in support of Member States and regions seriously
affected by terrorism. Through the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, we are working with Member
States to enhance understanding of the foreign terrorist
fighter phenomenon and to develop and implement
policies to combat their flows.
Through our collective efforts, we must ensure that
all counter-terrorism actions and policies are consistent
with international human rights and humanitarian law.
As the custodian of the Charter of the United Nations, I
want to emphasize that all measures must be fully in line
with the goals and values and principles of the United
Nations. I once again welcome the unity of purpose
of the Council on that issue, under the leadership of
President Obama. I hope that that spirit will carry over
to other pressing issues, particularly finally bringing
peace to the people of Syria.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I will now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the United States of America.
In the nearly 70 years of the United Nations, this is
only the sixth time that the Security Council has met at
a level like this. We convene such sessions to address
the most urgent threats to peace and security. I called
this meeting because we must come together as nations
and an international community to confront the real
and growing threat of foreign terrorist fighters.
As I said earlier today, the tactic of terrorism is not
new. So many nations represented here today, including
my own, have seen our citizens killed by terrorists who
target innocents. Today, the people of the world have
been horrified by another brutal murder — of Hervé
Gourdel — by terrorists in Algeria. We stand with
President Hollande and the French people, not only as
they grieve that terrible loss but as they show resolve
against terror and in defence of liberty.
What brings us together today — what is new — is
the unprecedented flow of fighters in recent years to
and from conflict zones, including Afghanistan and
the Horn of Africa, Yemen, Libya and, most recently,
Syria and Iraq. Our intelligence agencies estimate
that more than 15,000 foreign fighters from more than
80 nations have travelled to Syria in recent years. Many
have joined terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida’s
affiliate, the Nusra Front, and the Islamic State of Iraq

14-547353/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and the Levant (ISIL), which now threatens people
across Syria and Iraq. I want to acknowledge and thank
Prime Minister Al-Abadi of Iraq for being here today.
In the Middle East and elsewhere, those terrorists
exacerbate conflicts. They pose an immediate threat
to people in those regions. As we have already seen
in several cases, they may try to return to their home
countries to carry out deadly attacks. In the face of
that threat, many of our nations, working together
and through the United Nations, have increased our
cooperation. Around the world, foreign terrorist
fighters have been arrested, plots have been disrupted
and lives have been saved. Earlier this year, at West
Point, I called for a new partnership to help nations build
their capacity to meet the evolving threat of terrorism,
including foreign terrorist fighters. Preventing those
individuals from reaching Syria and then slipping back
across our borders is a critical element of our strategy
to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.
The historic resolution 2178 (2014) that we have
just adopted enshrines our commitment to meeting
this challenge. It is legally binding. It establishes
new obligations that nations must meet. Specifically,
nations are required to prevent and suppress the
recruiting, organizing, transporting or equipping
of foreign terrorist fighters as well as the financing
of their travel or activities. Nations must prevent the
movement of terrorists or terrorist groups through their
territory and ensure that their domestic laws allow for
the prosecution of those who attempt to do so.
The resolution we have adopted today calls on
nations to help build the capacity of States on the front
lines of this fight, including with the best practices
many of our nations approved yesterday, which the
United States will work to advance through our
counter-terrorism partnerships fund. The resolution
will strengthen cooperation between nations, including
sharing more information about the travel and activities
of foreign terrorist fighters, and it makes clear that
respecting human rights, fundamental freedoms and
the rule of law is not optional — it is an essential part
of successful counter-terrorism efforts. Indeed, history
teaches us that the failure to uphold those rights and
freedoms can actual fuel violent extremism.
Finally, the resolution recognizes that there is
no military solution to the problem of misguided
individuals seeking to join terrorist organizations. It
therefore calls on nations to work together to counter
the violent extremism that can radicalize, recruit and
4/43

24/09/2014

mobilize individuals to engage in terrorism. Potential
recruits must hear the words of former terrorist
fighters who have seen the truth — that groups like
ISIL betray Islam by killing innocent men, women and
children, the majority of whom are Muslim. Often it
is local communities — families, friends, neighbours
and faith leaders — that are best able to identify and
help disillusioned individuals before they succumb to
extremist ideologies and engage in violence. That is
why the Government of the United States is committed
to working with communities in America and around
the world to build partnerships of trust, respect and
cooperation.
Likewise, even as we are unrelenting against
terrorists who threaten our people, we must redouble
our work to address the conditions — the repression, the
lack of opportunity, too often the hopelessness — that
can make some individuals more susceptible than
others to appeals to extremism and violence. This
includes continuing to pursue a political solution in
Syria that allows all Syrians to live in security, dignity
and peace. This is the work that we must do together as
nations. These are the partnerships that we must forge
as an international community. These are the standards
that we now must meet.
Yet even as we are guided by the commitments that
we make here today, let me close by stating the obvious.
Resolutions alone will not be enough. Promises on paper
cannot keep us safe. Lofty rhetoric and good intentions
will not stop a single terrorist attack. The words spoken
here today must be matched and translated into action,
into deeds. There must be concrete action within
nations and between them, not just in the days ahead
but for years to come. For if there was ever a challenge
in our interconnected world that cannot be met by one
nation alone, it is this one — terrorists crossing borders
and threatening to unleash unspeakable violence.
These terrorists believe our countries will be unable
to stop them. The safety of our citizens demands that we
do. I am here today to say that all who are committed to
this urgent work will find a strong and steady partner
in the United States of America.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council. I begin by giving the floor to His
Excellency, Mr. Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, President of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria.

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

President Jonathan: I would like to commence by
appreciating the vision of the President in convening
this timely and crucial meeting. It underpins the longstanding commitment of the United States of America
to the high aims of international peace and security.
Our appreciation also goes to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for the clarity and depth of his briefing.
The people of Nigeria and indeed the entire
peace-loving world were horrified at the gruesome
murder of two American journalists and a British aid
worker by elements linked to the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and, of course, only today, as the
President mentioned, at the incident where a French
citizen was killed, Those murders typify a new phase of
global terrorism marked by executions, acts of brutality
and impunity.
Unfortunately, ISIL is not alone in this despicable
campaign against humanity. Al-Qaida in the Maghreb,
Al-Shabaab in Somalia and Boko Haram share this
common agenda: to unleash terror, mayhem, destruction
and instability around the world. Boko Haram has
perpetrated more heinous, barbaric acts than any other
known terrorist group.
There is no doubt that foreign fighters have added a
troubling dimension to this emerging phase of terrorism.
From targeted attacks by Al-Qaida a few years ago,
we now have mobile bands — thousands of terrorists
sweeping across vast areas, destroying lives and even
attempting to hold territory. This is unacceptable; we
must act now.
Nigeria knows all too well the destructive effects
of terrorist activities. Over the past five years, we have
been, and are still, confronting the threats posed by
Boko Haram to peace and stability, predominantly in
the north-eastern part of our country. The costs are
high. Thousands of innocent people have been killed,
whole communities razed and hundreds of peasants
kidnapped, the most prominent being the mindless
kidnapping of innocent daughters from Chibok
secondary school in Borno state, in north-east Nigeria.
As daunting as the challenge may be, we are facing
it with unrelenting determination, mobilizing all the
resources at our disposal to ensure that the scourge
of terrorism is rooted out of our nation. In addition
to our counter-terrorism efforts, we have evolved
initiatives to alleviate the plight of the populations
of the communities affected. These include a holistic
effort, through the presidential initiative for the north-

S/PV.7272

east, which is aimed at providing immediate relief and
fast-tracking the infrastructure redevelopment of the
region. It also has as a core goal an integrated effort
to achieve the de-radicalization of potential terrorist
recruits.
In partnership with the private sector, we have also
launched a victim-support fund, which has already
raised about $500 million in cash and pledges out of
the expected minimum of $1 billion in direct support of
the victims of acts of terrorism. This is in addition to
the Safe Schools Initiative championed by Mr. Gordon
Brown, former British Prime Minister and current the
United Nations Special Envoy for Global Education.
That initiative is being rigorously supported by
Nigeria’s federal Government.
Let me thank President Obama and the United
States Government for the security governance
initiative following the United States-Africa summit
last August. I believe that the initiative, if expeditiously
implemented, will enhance security on the continent.
We must now capitalize on the commitment and
evident determination of the Security Council to seek
more innovative responses to the threat of terrorism,
and in particular to the growing menace of foreign
fighters. The Council should be concerned about the
existence of sources of the arming and funding of
terrorism. Evidence has shown that Boko Haram, for
instance, is resourced largely from outside our country.
We must also commit to ensuring that countries that
are in the front line of this challenge receive adequate
support from the international community.
The resolution that we have adopted here today is
a critical first step in mobilizing international action.
Only by united action and firm resolve can we check
this urgent threat to humanity and also build the
enduring structures that will resist their re-emergence.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. François Hollande, President of the
French Republic.
President Hollande (spoke in French): I should like
to begin by thanking President Obama and all of the
members of the Security Council for having expressed
their sympathy with the French people concerning the
suffering that they are experiencing. Hervé Gourdel
was a French national engaging in his favourite
pastime — mountaineering — in Algeria when he was
taken hostage on Sunday. His was an appalling murder;
he was beheaded.

14-547355/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

This is not the first time that France has been
affected by terrorist acts. We have never given in.
Every time we have emerged stronger and with
greater solidarity. Other countries, too, have been
affected by this barbarism. Recently two Americans
and a British citizen were executed in the same cruel
manner. Nationality in this respect is irrelevant. All
victims of terrorism deserve respect and deserve that
tribute be paid to them and to their memory. Religion is
immaterial here; all victims are equal, unfortunately, in
the face of the brutality of terrorism.
Terrorism is nothing new; we have been facing it for
years. But it has taken on another dimension; it is now
looking to conquer territory, to set up States, to subjugate
peoples. It is attacking civilian populations — women,
children. It has new names; it is no longer called just
Al-Qaida or Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, but Boko
Haram or Daesh. Daesh is the most recent incarnation
of this terrorist madness. It is a new phenomenon in
the sense that it aims to conquer and also to recruit a
growing number of our citizens, wherever they may
be, into its ranks. It is attracting people, often young
people, of all nationalities, and not just, as it is often
said, those of Muslim origin — even though Islam has
nothing to do with this fight.
None of our countries is safe from this threat.
Distance is irrelevant: there are temptations, and there
is the Internet, meaning that networks can organize.
Every day men, women and even children — whole
families — are leaving their homes to join Daesh’s
fight. That is a threat to our own security. Earlier
President Obama referred to 15,000 foreign fighters.
Among them are 1,000 French nationals or residents
who are now in Syria or Iraq. That figure has gone up
50 per cent since the beginning of the year, and what
is true for France is true for the whole of Europe. Our
response must therefore be comprehensive, rapid and
lasting.
First, we must take measures in each of our
countries. France has in this respect has adapted its
legislation, and a bill is being discussed in Parliament
aiming to prevent, even prohibit, the departure of
individuals when we have serious grounds to believe
that they are travelling for terrorist purposes. There is
also a resolve to call into question terrorism propaganda
on the Internet, and hate sites will be shut down. Finally,
our legislation will aim to fight networks, because these
foreign fighters do not leave alone; they go because they
are part of a network, and other organizations deliver
them to the combat zone.
6/43

24/09/2014

Today marks a milestone with the adoption by the
Security Council of a new Chapter VII resolution. What
we have defined is a global strategy for combating
terrorism, embracing not merely the phenomenon
of foreign fighters but all the paths that lead young
people — sometimes not so young, but often very young
indeed — to go where they have no real reason to go.
We must strengthen our international legal instruments,
and today’s resolution also sends the message that the
entire international community is resolute and united.
We are facing a shared threat and we have a shared,
multiple and military response. We must all take on
our responsibilities in that regard. France has done that
in response to the request of the new Iraqi authorities,
and I welcome the presence here today of the Prime
Minister of Iraq.
Our response must also be political, economic and
humanitarian. But our meeting is also a demonstration
of our willingness to fight every kind of trafficking,
because it is trafficking that finances terrorism, and
these groups have never been so powerful, so wealthy,
so well supplied and armed. So we need a response
capable of fighting not only the influences and the
recruiters but also terrorism’s financial sources.
Finally, we must execute this strategy while
respecting law and liberty. We must do it while
respecting religions, including Islam. We must do it
by fighting the causes of terrorism — despair, poverty,
inequality and everything that breeds fanaticism. We
must do it without displaying weakness of any kind, but
at the same time with the intelligence that democracy
brings. When one is fighting barbarousness, force is not
only necessary, it is legitimate. But at the same time, it
is not enough. We must come up with political solutions
that can cut off the sources supplying those who spread
terrorism, and France will do its full part.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Idriss Deby Itno, President of the
Republic of Chad.
President Deby Itno (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on taking
the initiative to bring us together on the margins of the
general debate of the General Assembly for this highlevel meeting. We also commend the comprehensiveness
of resolution 2178 (2014), just adopted, of which my
country was a sponsor. It represents a new step, one that
will enable us to more effectively combat a phenomenon
that the entire world is confronting today.

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Terrorism and violent extremism are unquestionably
one of the worst scourges of our time. The phenomenon
of foreign fighters, the international jihadists of
the twenty-first century, is spreading and growing
alarmingly; hence the Council’s adoption of resolution
2178 (2014), proposed by the United States of America.
In relating the resolution to the four points that the
concept note of 3 September (S/2014/648) asks us to
consider, I would like to make three observations
concerning the threat presented by foreign fighters,
the situation as it concerns Chad and, finally, violent
extremism and the solutions designed to eradicate it.
This threat is a global one and is constantly evolving,
since foreign fighters, particularly in terrorist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the Al-Nusra Front, come from all over the globe, and
their numbers are growing exponentially. In Africa we
are now dealing with such groups south of the Sahara.
Mali was their first victim; Al-Shabaab is in the Horn
of Africa, while today Boko Haram is operating in
Nigeria and Cameroon. It is currently estimated that
there are several thousand foreign fighters from more
than 80 countries, most of them from the Middle East,
but also from non-Muslim countries, including Western
nations. The majority of them are young people,
recruited through the Internet, among other means,
and especially through social networks. Africa is also
dealing with the problem of foreign fighters. Terrorist
groups such as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb and Al-Shabaab, which have proved highly
dangerous in reсent years, include them in their ranks.
Twenty-two African countries have been the target of
terrorist violence to date.
For that reason, on 2 September in Nairobi, I
chaired a summit of the Peace and Seсurity Council
of the African Union that resulted in some important
decisions about how to deal with the dual phenomenon
of terrorism and violent extremism across the continent.
In that regard, the Peace and Security Council asked
the Commission of the African Union to consider such
measures as, first, strengthening the legal framework
for the fight against terrorism by developing inter-police
cooperation in Africa, introducing an African arrest
warrant for perpetrators and accomplices of terrorist
acts, and establishing a mechanism for blocking sources
of terrorism financing; secondly, creating a special
counter-terrorism fund; and thirdly, establishing
special units at the subregional and regional level. In
that regard, it is essential that Africa’s partners provide

S/PV.7272

it with thorough technical and logistical support so that
those units can carry out their mission effectively.
Despite its huge territory, Chad is working to ensure
security within its borders. Together with neighbouring
countries, we have established joint forces operating
joint patrols in order to deter criminals and bandits of
every kind. Despite the absence of violent extremism
in Chad, the Government, working with the religious
authorities, is deeply involved in preventing terrorism
by conducting awareness campaigns. Beyond our
borders, we are focusing specifically on regional
security, with the Chadian army involved on a number
of fronts, particularly in Mali, where during the past
two weeks we lost 10 of our peacekeepers, who were
killed in a cowardly way, not in combat, in the north
of the country, where we are paying a heavy price with
more than 70 casualties.
If we are to eradicate the phenomenon of foreign
fighters, we must address its underlying causes.
In Africa, the emergence of terrorism and violent
extremism is fuelled by people’s poverty and misery
in general and by youth unemployment in particular.
Indeed, young people are easy prey for the terrorist
groups, which derive significant resources from drug
trafficking and other illicit trade. In order to stem such
practices, which are a dangerous threat to the security of
the continent, it is vital that the international community
support development projects and programmes for
African youth.
The Security Council, whose very purpose is
maintaining international peace and security, is
called on to find ways and means that can enable us
to resolve the armed conflicts that are rocking the
world, especially in Syria and Iraq. Besides the internal
causes of these countries’ conflicts, we have regretfully
seen that outside interference has not only led to
conflict, with incalculable consequences, but also, and
more especially, has prepared fertile ground for the
emergence and development of extremism and violent
terrorism.
The phenomenon of foreign combatants, whether
yesterday in Afghanistan or today in Syria and Iraq,
is sometimes exacerbated by outside interference.
We might wonder why countries such as Syria, Iraq,
Yemen and Libya, to name but a few, were suddenly
transformed into fertile terrain for terrorist groups and
foreign combatants. How did we move from a situation
of relative political stability to the current situation

14-547357/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of war and violence? A process of deep reflection on
those matters at the global level, taking into account
the diversity and complexity of today’s societies,
would help to better identify the root causes of the
threat and to prevent violent extremism. Therefore,
even as we reaffirm the need to wage an unwavering
war against terrorism in all its forms, we would also
recall the importance of preserving the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and the need to ensure that
any recourse to force is solidly rooted in the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
We hope that resolution 2178 (2014) just adopted
and the measures it contains will allow us to respond
to such concerns and to the challenges posed by
terrorism in general and by the phenomenon of foreign
combatants in particular.
The President: I think I speak for the entire Council
in expressing our condolences regarding the loss of the
peacekeepers from Chad. Chad has made enormous
contributions to peacekeeping at considerable sacrifice
and it is greatly appreciated.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Dalia
Grybauskaitė, President of the Republic of Lithuania.
President Grybauskaitė: During the past month
we have witnessed shocking developments in the world,
including virtually open warfare in various parts of the
planet. It is sad, but we must speak not only of simple
military actions but also of a collision of ideologies
and sometimes even of civilizations. The Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is led by an ideology of
hatred and madness that includes ethnic and religious
cleansing and disrespect for all minorities and different
people.
Today we are dealing with a phenomenon that
crosses State boundaries and even destroys States.
Moreover, fighters from other countries are becoming
ever more involved. Unfortunately, foreign terrorist
fighters can be found not only in ISIL. Recently,
Europe has also faced violations of State borders, broad
civilian casualties and the destruction of democratic
institutions. If we want to stop that global trend, we
must truly act together.
Today, in adopting resolution 2178 (2014), we have
not only condemned foreign terrorist fighters, but also
called upon all States to take measures to stop them.
Additionally, we must understand that to keep ISIL’s
ideology from spreading even further, we must ensure
viable Iraqi State institutions, tackle the humanitarian
8/43

24/09/2014

situation and help regional States to fight terrorism
themselves.
Finally, Lithuania reaffirms its full commitment
to support all efforts in the fight against terrorism
throughout the world.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Cristina Fernández, President of the
Argentine Republic.
President Fernández (spoke in Spanish): I have
come with several certainties and several doubts to
participate in this meeting of the Council. I came of
course to vote in favour of resolution 2178 (2014),
which we have just discussed, but also to decisively
and definitively condemn terrorism. My country, the
Argentine Republic, and the United States of America
are the only two countries on the American continent
to have been the object of savage terrorist attacks. In
1992, the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires was blown
up, and in 1994 we had the bombing of the Argentine
Jewish Mutual Association (AMIA) headquarters.
That leads me to raise a number of questions.
With everything that is taking place, this phenomenon
that has just appeared, the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS), was unknown last year. In 1994, it
was said in my country and the world that Hizbullah
had been responsible for bombing AMIA, yet today
Hizbullah is a political party in Lebanon. In 2006, a
special prosecutorial unit was created at the initiative
of former President Néstor Kirchner to investigate the
1994 attack. I repeat, the 1994 attack. In other words,
this year marks 20 years since the AMIA attack and the
perpetrators still have not been brought to justice.
After the investigation was conducted, the trial
judge decided to indict eight Iranian citizens who live in
Tehran. After that, between 2007 and 2012, first former
President Néstor Kirchner and then I repeatedly asked
the Islamic Republic of Iran, at every meeting of the
United Nations, to allow us to question the accused. We
even offered alternatives sites, as in the Lockerbie case,
such as a third country where they could be questioned.
Finally, in 2012, the Iranian chancery proposed a bilateral
meeting, and in 2013 a memorandum of understanding
was drawn up to establish judicial cooperation between
both countries on the condition that the Iranian citizens
could be questioned directly by our judge, because
there is no provision in the Argentine legal system for
trial in absentia. The accused must be questioned and
tried in conformity with our Constitution and with

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

respect for their basic rights. Once that agreement had
been signed, community organizations that had always
insisted that we reach an agreement with the Islamic
Republic of Iran accused us of collaborating with the
Iranians. That led me to wonder whether, when they
sought our help in securing the cooperation of the
Iranian State, they really wanted our assistance or were
looking for a casus belli.
The same holds true in this country, where the
so-called vulture funds undertook an extraordinary
lobbying effort before the American Congress. That
can be verified on the web, where the vulture funds
posted photographs of me and Mr. Ahmadinejad, the
President of a so-called Islamist terrorist State until last
year, and condemned us for signing a memorandum of
understanding on legal cooperation.
With surprise — not disgust, because nothing that
leads to dialogue can be bad — we learned that, over
the weekend, the Secretary of State of this country met
with his Iranian counterpart in a well-known hotel in
this city to discuss the problem of ISIS and to see what
level of cooperation or progress could be made on the
nuclear issue. Now we know that ISIS is Sunni and those
who govern Iran are Shia. And suddenly I observe a far
friendlier discourse between the two countries, one of
which had been, as recently as last year, accusing us of
consorting with terrorists.
There is nothing wrong with dialogue. We welcome
it. Dialogue among nations is always good. But I still
have certain questions regarding the 1994 attack
and the Al-Qaida attack on the Twin Towers, which
was conceived and carried out by Osama bin Laden,
who did not exactly appear like a mushroom after
rain. Osama Bin Laden was trained by the Taliban to
confront Russia during the Cold War. As I like to say,
Afghanistan is the one country from which no one but
Alexander the Great has gotten out alive. Later there
was the emergence of the famous Arab Spring, in
which everyone was apparently a freedom fighter and
following which new democracies were going to arise.
As it turns out, many of those freedom fighters were
fundamentalists who had received military training,
and who today are fighting under ISIS and recruiting
young people.
I should like to highlight for the Council that I
also have been threatened by ISIS personally, and my
country’s law-enforcement authorities are investigating.
I do not really believe that ISIS is very concerned
about the President of the Argentine Republic — I

S/PV.7272

honestly believe that. The reasons they have given for
threatening me are because of my friendship with Pope
Francis and the fact that I recognize and advocate for
two States, the State of Palestine and the State of Israel,
living peaceably side by side.
I have jotted down some questions that have
occurred to me. In the midst of all this, along came
Saddam Hussein with chemical weapons in Iraq, and a
war was waged against him. We were eventually rid of
Saddam Hussein, but then the situation in Iraq became
increasingly complicated. It seems the world is itself
getting more and more complicated. Although under
the scenario we faced last year it seemed that the most
important thing was Iran and its nuclear threat, that
now seems not to be the case — with ISIS seemingly
having taken its place. We do not know who buys the oil
from these new terrorists, nor who sells them weapons
or trains them. But they obviously have financial
resources. They have weapons. They have means of
dissemination that are really cinematographic. That
leads me to wonder about what is happening, and
basically about what we must do to effectively combat
terrorism. As to a military response, no one doubts that
one has to defend oneself in the face of aggression.
But it is also clear that the way in which we have been
fighting terrorism has been inadequate. The situation is
becoming more complicated all the time, and there are
ever more increasingly violent and powerful groups.
Logic dictates that if I were looking into a given
methodology to address a problem and, rather than
disappearing or diminishing, the problem grew and
became worse, then I at least would need to revise my
approach because something was not working well. I
am not saying that I have the revealed truth about what
we need to do, nor that I have any absolute certainty
about how we have to do it. What I do know, however, is
that there is an old saying in my country: “The only thing
that one cannot do with cannibals is to eat them up”.
It seems to me that it is more important that we
understand that in the logic of terrorism the aim is to
achieve a reaction equivalent in violence and in attack to
justify this continuous blood debt: for every one killed,
they kill two, for every two, three, and for every three,
four. Moreover, this is taking place in the context of
the Middle East, where the State of Palestine is still not
recognized, where we have seen the disproportionate
use of force against the civilian population in Palestine
and where we have not seen fall any of the leaders who
launched rockets at the other side. On the contrary, we

14-547359/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

have seen innocent children, women and the elderly
die. That continues to increasingly fuel these groups.
Frankly speaking, beyond resolution 2178 (2014),
which we agree with, voted for and want to help
implement, I think it would be false and cynical of me
to tell the Council that we have the right methods. I
think the situation in the Middle East absolutely tends
towards becoming more complicated.
Last November in St. Petersburg — less than a
year ago — as a member of the Group of 20 we were
contemplating the possibility that the great enemy was
in fact the Government of Syria, and that those who
were fighting Syria were freedom fighters. We have now
found out that many of those same freedom fighters are
now part of ISIS. Who was it, then, who were nurturing
the opposition, giving them weapons and resources as
freedom fighters? I therefore think we — and certainly
those who have much more information available to
them than I do as President of Argentina — need to
reconsider a lot of things.
Members will know that my country does not
produce or sell weapons. We have to buy oil, as we lack
energy resources — although we have a large deposit
that in the future will turn us into major producers.
I do not know whether that is a good thing or not, as
countries that do have oil and gas also seem to have
major problems. But the truth is that we are a country
that does not produce weapons, we are a country that
buys energy, and we are a country that does not have
all the intelligence that the great Powers have. But I
often think that, in addition to having information, it
is necessary to understand what is happening in each
society and in each population, to try to see what the
most appropriate tools are to seriously combat terrorism.
It would not be unusual at all if in the coming year
ISIS disappeared and some other group with another
strange name and with still more virulent and violent
propensities came into being — and, ultimately, we did
nothing but expound on it.
In conclusion, I believe that respect for human
rights is a key issue in this struggle. I say that from
the perspective of a country that suffered from a
genocidal dictatorship unprecedented in history. But
also unprecedented was the justice carried out. There
was no need for a Nuremberg tribunal or to judge the
dictators at the Court in The Hague. Argentina’s own
judicial system tried and convicted those who had
been responsible — including for the deaths of French
citizens, such as the French nuns, and the Swedish
10/43

24/09/2014

women who were also disappeared. I therefore think
we have some precedent to be able to talk about the
need for this struggle to be carried out within a legal
framework that includes respect for human rights, so
that we do not continue feeding the beast in a perpetual
cycle.
The President: I would just observe that this
meeting will need to end at 5 p.m., and we have a long
list of speakers, including members of the Council. I
would ask speakers to remain respectful of the time
constraints.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Paul
Kagame, President of the Republic of Rwanda.
President Kagame: I would like to thank you,
President Obama, for calling and presiding over this
very important meeting.
For decades terrorism has been, and continues to
be, a reality in Africa and across the world. In some
regions, it has even been getting worse. Another
reality is that we can and must defeat those violent
extremists and terrorists through concrete actions and
cooperation. This week we commemorated the attack
on the Westgate Mall in Nairobi, which claimed dozens
of lives.
Resolution 2178 (2014), which we have just adopted,
is therefore an unfortunate necessity. Additional
measures to disrupt terrorist travel and financing
are important, and we will continue to do our part.
Above and beyond that, wherever atrocities are being
committed, the first priority is to halt them. Only then
can efforts to address the root causes be effective.
Terrorism is not caused by religion, ethnicity or even
poverty, but by misguided politics and false beliefs. In
order to build resilience to extremist narratives, people,
especially youth, must feel that they have a stake in
their country. We therefore fully endorse the call for a
broad-based approach to combating violent extremism.
In Rwanda, we still face acts of terrorism driven
by the ideology of genocide. When necessary, we
have responded with force, but more importantly, we
have remained committed to building inclusive and
accountable institutions and systems. In particular, it
is essential that those who renounce violence can be
accommodated. The Rwandan demobilization and
reintegration programme, carried out in partnership
with the United Nations and the World Bank, has
provided tens of thousands with a pathway out of
extremism.
14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Resolution 2178 (2014) reflects a consensus that
terrorism is an urgent problem for the entire world.
We stand ready to work together to make sure that we
address that challenge with others.
The President: I now give the floor to His Majesty
King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, King of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan.
King Abdullah: First, let me thank President Obama
for his leadership on this issue. Jordan can be counted
on to play its part. We need to shut down the sources
of extremist support and push back and defeat such
groups. That demands a coalition of the determined, one
that can combat the threat with consistency and resolve.
Allow me to salute the partnership that is gearing up.
Three principles are important as we proceed. The
first is global reach and commitment. The threat is
not only in Syria and Iraq, but also in Sinai, Nigeria,
Libya, Yemen, Mali, the Horn of Africa and more. It is
not an Arab or Muslim fight any more. It affects every
delegate here and beyond. It is the fight of our times.
Success requires a united struggle backed up by strong
resources. Success also requires a holistic approach.
Transnational terror grows on the back of crises,
grievances and sectarian conflict. Winning hearts and
minds requires a strong stand against marginalization,
poverty and exclusion. In parallel with security
measures there must be diplomacy, development, job
creation, education and more.
A second key principle is immediate action. The
new breed of extremism is recruiting world-wide
through social media and covert partnerships. The
more resource-rich territory they hold, the more selfperpetuating they become. Time is of the essence. We
have started taking action, and the coalition must see
this through. The third requirement is transparency.
These groups rely on international transactions and
support for their survival.
There has to be a policy of zero tolerance towards
any country, organization or individual that facilitates,
supports or finances terror groups, provides weapons or
promotes propaganda, whether through media outlets
or by misusing religious clerics to incite and help
recruit fighters for such terrorist groups. Compliance
must also be absolute. Countries cannot comply in one
theatre while shifting their policy in another. Senior
figures in every religion and country must speak out
against intolerance and distortion. I and others have
made clear that the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria and
related ideologies are in no way related to Islam.

S/PV.7272

Nor should we permit any form of Islamophobia.
Jordan has taken the lead in inter-faith initiatives, and
we are working on introducing a Security Council
resolution that will address the systematic targeting of
religious communities. The world must also act as one
to help solve global injustices. We cannot underestimate
the recruitment power emanating from a sense of
exclusion from the enjoyment of basic human rights.
First and foremost, we must have a just resolution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
A united global voice is equally vital in supporting
an inclusive political solution in Syria. In Iraq, we are
encouraged to see a solid start for an inclusive new
Government that will fight terrorist efforts to exploit
sectarianism. Finally, I hope there will be a global
call to action to support countries like my own at the
forefront of the fight. Jordan is a critical lynchpin of
stability. Our borders stand secure with terror threats on
two fronts. Just this week we foiled yet another terrorist
operation against our country, and of course we remain
a major shock absorber for massive refugee flights from
Syria. But we are bearing those critical responsibilities
under enormous economic pressures. Global support
will play a key role in keeping our country resilient
and moving forward. Jordan also seeks a renewed push
to get promised refugee assistance flowing for all host
countries and communities, as well as inside Syria
itself.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Michelle Bachelet Jeria, President of
the Republic of Chile.
President Bachelet Jeria (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the United States for its initiative in organizing this
Security Council debate on foreign terrorist fighters.
This growing and alarming phenomenon is linked to
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security — terrorism, a phenomenon that cannot
be associated with any religion, nationality, ethnicity
or civilization.
Because of the atrocities committed by terrorist
groups, such as Boko Haram, the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front,
which include in their ranks a large number of foreign
terrorist fighters, we must take both urgent and
preventative measures in the long term to deal with this
international threat. The participation of such fighters
on an unprecedented scale is aggravating the conflicts,
the humanitarian, social and economic crises and
human rights violations.

14-5473511/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The response of the Members of the United Nations,
and in particular the members of the Security Council,
must be timely and effective, devising suitable strategies
and mechanisms to prevent foreign terrorist fighters
from leaving their countries, crossing their borders and
preventing their access to financial resources for their
activities. The adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) today
responds to that need.
It is vital that we act on many fronts at the same
time. The role of international cooperation at all levels
is decisive. Without it, any strictly national effort will
be in vain. Actions are also required at the regional
and global levels between our various financial and
intelligence services, as well as good practices in
preventing terrorism. We also feel that international
cooperation is key to preventing impunity for those
responsible for terrorist acts. In that regard, we call
on Member States to strengthen the mechanisms for
cooperation. We also support the work being done
by the Security Council Sanctions Committees and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and we urge those
committees to continue working closely with all
Member States.
The democratic development of our countries
requires us to deal with terrorist threats decisively and
to be alert to new manifestations of this phenomenon.
In order to ensure permanent and legitimate
achievements we must deal with the problem in all its
social complexity, taking into account the three United
Nations pillars, peace and international security,
sustainable development and the strict respect for
human rights. Only in that way we will achieve lasting
and legitimate results, which will be fully supported by
our societies.
The counter-terrorism measures adopted by States
must rigorously respect the rule of law and comply with
the obligations derived from human rights law, refugee
and international humanitarian law and the Charter
of the United Nations. We need to apply timely and
effective coercive measures carried out in accordance
with international law, but that is not enough. As many
previous speakers have said, the underlying causes
must also be addressed. The most effective tools
include strengthening democratic culture, education,
eliminating inequalities and working with the most
disadvantaged groups of society — in other words,
greater integration and inclusion in our societies. That
is undoubtedly a long-term task, on which we must
embark without delay.

12/43

24/09/2014

Chile has ratified the 14 international agreements
that make up the United Nations legal framework for
efforts to combat terrorism. We have supported key
Security Council resolutions on that topic. In addition,
our country has reaffirmed its commitment to the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, supporting
efforts to combat and to prevent that scourge, because
we believe that no grounds or situation can excuse or
justify acts of terrorism.
We must deal with situations that are conducive to
the spread of terrorism, including unresolved protracted
conflicts, the absence of the rule of law, human rights
violations, discrimination on national, religious or
ethnic grounds, political exclusion, social and economic
marginalization and a lack of good governance.
Chile is and will continue to be a safe and stable
country. But we have also faced isolated acts of terrorism
that we will defeat, because we will act with decision
and because the entire united society condemns and
opposes such acts. Our longing for peace, progress
and democracy are infinitely stronger than the acts of
small groups that do not understand the fundamental
meaning of democratic coexistence or the transcendent
and universal value of human life.
In conclusion, I would like to express my country’s
solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their
families, in particular women and children. Chile will
continue to support the fight against international
terrorism and to promote the human rights of all
individuals, thereby contributing to the peace, stability
and development of our peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Park Geun-Hye, President of the
Republic of Korea.
President Park Geun-Hye: We are here today
to tap into our collective wisdom as we take on an
emerging challenge to peace and security in our world.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
terrorist fighters from around the globe are endangering
Iraq. That is not simply a threat to one country or one
region. It affects us all. Today’s meeting, coming as it
does soon after President Obama’s ISIL strategy and
the most recent action, could not have come at a better
time. The events of 9/11 brought the fight against
terrorism to the top of the global agenda — a cause that
the Council has been key to advancing.
For Koreans, ISIL’s brutal slaughter of innocent
people is an appalling reminder of a similar fate that
14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

befell one of our own citizens 10 years ago. There
can never be any excuse for trampling the norms of
humanity and for the random killing of women and
children. They go against what Islam stands for, what
civilization stands for, and what humanity stands for.
Foreign terrorist fighters serve as their minions. They
slip across borders to spread terror. They are a scourge
to humankind.
Today’s milestone resolution 2178 (2014) highlights
the need for greater cooperation to better roll back
the threat. That includes information-sharing,
border control, tackling violent extremism and law
enforcement. Korea will thoroughly implement such
measures. Those involved will be brought sternly to
justice and their funding blocked.
Nor can we neglect the more fundamental approach
of dealing with conditions that are conducive to
terrorism. Eliminating poverty and ensuring sustainable
development are essential if we are to address the root
causes of terrorism. Korea is a partner in this campaign.
We are increasing our official development assistance
to the least developed countries and are providing
humanitarian aid to countries threatened by ISIL and
foreign fighters.
We must go further. We must remain ever vigilant
against cyberterrorism and nuclear terrorism and the
utter chaos and destruction that they could unleash. All
too often cyberspace is used to finance, recruit for and
incite radical violence. We must prevent cyberspace
from becoming not only the target of terror but also a
tool of terror.
Nuclear terrorism, however unthinkable, is also
a possibility. The post-9/11 world has already seen
terrorist groups seeking nuclear materials. That is why
international efforts to prevent nuclear terrorism must
be stepped up. In that regard, I wish to acknowledge
President Obama’s leadership in proposing a summit on
nuclear security five years ago in this very Chamber
(see S/PV.6191). Today, the global regime for nuclear
security is becoming stronger, thanks to summit
meetings in Washington, Seoul and The Hague.
In the same vein, may this meeting today help
to rally our collective resolve, and may it kick-start
concrete international actions against the new scourge
of foreign fighters. The fight against faceless and
nameless terrorists without borders will not be easy.
But we also know that terrorizing human dignity
and humankind is a strategy that is doomed to fail.

S/PV.7272

Seven decades ago, the founders of the United Nations
defeated the totalitarian threat and envisioned a world
of peace that puts humanity first.
The Council is a guardian of our rights and dignity
as humans. It must meet head on the challenge of violent
extremism and the foreign fighters who spread it. In the
effort to stem the threat, it will always find in Korea a
committed partner.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. David Cameron, Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Mr. Cameron (United Kingdom): The conflict in
Iraq and Syria is shocking the world with its barbarity.
The cruelty that is being meted out — beheadings,
eyes being gouged out, rape — is horrific. It is literally
medieval in its character. The appalling murder of the
French citizen Hervé Gourdel is the latest horror. The
French President and people have our fullest sympathy.
But one of the most disturbing aspects is how this
conflict is sucking in our own young people from
modern, prosperous societies, and the threat to our
security from foreign fighters is far greater today than
it has ever been in previous conflicts.
I pay tribute to President Obama for his personal
leadership on this critical issue. It is one that affects us
all. The overall figures have been given, but let me say
that from my own country, 500 of those fanatics have
gone to Syria and Iraq. The shocking murders of James
Foley, Stephen Sotloff and David Haines by a fighter
with an apparent British accent underlines the sinister
and direct nature of the threat. The British people are
sickened that a British citizen could be involved in
murdering people in this way, including a fellow British
citizen who had gone to Syria to help people. It is the
very opposite of what our peaceful and tolerant country
stands for. We therefore need a response that involves
every part of the Government and society and every
country involved in the broadest possible international
coalition.
There are no easy answers or quick fixes, and I
believe that we will be dealing with the effects of this
threat for years, because, as has been said, this is not
just about the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). It is about Al-Shabaab. It is about Boko Haram.
It is about Al-Qaida. Everywhere there is conflict and
everywhere there is poor governance, the poisonous
narrative of Islamist extremism has taken hold.
However, I believe there are three things we can do.

14-5473513/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

First, we must reinforce our counter-terrorist
efforts to prevent attacks and hunt down those who are
planning them. For our part, in the United Kingdom, we
are introducing new powers to strengthen our ability
to seize passports and stop suspects from travelling; to
allow us temporarily to prevent some British nationals
from getting back into the country; to ensure that
airlines comply with our no-fly lists and security
screening arrangements; and to enable our police
and security services to apply for stronger location
constraints on those remaining in the United Kingdom
but who pose a risk.
Secondly, and I believe crucially, we must defeat
the poisonous ideology of extremism that is the root
cause of this terrorist threat. Yes, there are the websites
and the preachers of violence and violent extremism,
and of course those must be taken down. However, as
the evidence emerges about the backgrounds of those
convicted of terrorist offences, it is clear that many of
them were initially influenced by preachers who claim
not to encourage violence, but whose world view can be
used as a justification for it.
We know what this world view is: the peddling
of lies that the attacks of 11 September were a Jewish
plot or the 7 July London attacks were staged; the idea
that Muslims are persecuted all over the world as a
deliberate act of Western policy; and the concept of an
inevitable clash of civilizations. We must be clear that
to defeat the ideology of extremism, we need to deal
with all forms of extremism, not just violent extremism.
That means banning preachers of hate from coming to
our countries. It means proscribing organizations that
incite terrorism against people at home and abroad.
It means stopping extremists, whether violent or
non-violent, from inciting hatred and intolerance in
our schools, in our universities and even sometimes
in our prisons. In other words, it means firm, decisive
action to protect and uphold the values of our free and
democratic societies.
As has been said, we need to provide an alternative
narrative, particularly for these young people. I was
particularly struck by what the Secretary-General
said: that missiles can kill terrorists but governance
can kill terrorism. We have to say again and again that
this has nothing to do with the religion of Islam, which
is a religion of peace. We need Muslim country after
Muslim country and Muslim leader after Muslim leader
to speak out, as the King of Jordan did so clearly today,
condemning the people who say they speak in the name
of Islam when they do no such thing.
14/43

24/09/2014

Thirdly and finally, in addition to the action we
each take individually in our own countries, we must
do much more, working together, to defeat this threat.
The defeat of ISIL will only come about if we use all
of the weapons at our disposal. Yes, we should impose
sanctions against ISIL and Jabhat al-Nusra, and I
believe we should do more, but we must use our aid to
feed and help the afflicted. We must use our diplomacy
and political settlements to strengthen the countries of
the region. We need Governments that represent all of
their people and, yes, deal with their grievances.
The United Kingdom is committed to meeting this
challenge. Only a coherent, coordinated response can
tackle what is truly a global and indiscriminate threat.
It is one part of a comprehensive strategy we have to
dismantle and destroy ISIL. Our strategy must work
in tandem with Arab States, always in support of local
people, in line with our legal obligations and as part of
a plan that involves our aid, our diplomacy and, yes, our
military. We need to act, and we need to act now.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Tony Abbott, Prime Minister of the
Commonwealth of Australia.
Mr. Abbott (Australia): While I am happy to be
here at your urging, Mr. President, it is the weightiest
of matters that brings us together today.
Right now, thousands of misguided people from
around the world are joining terrorist groups in Syria
and Iraq because they claim Islam is under threat and
because they are excited by the prospect of battle, but
whatever they think or say, those terrorists are not
fighting for God or for religious faith. At the heart of
every terrorist group is an infatuation with death. What
else can explain the beheadings, crucifixions, mass
executions, rapes and sexual slavery in every town
and city that has fallen to the terrorist movement now
entrenched in eastern Syria and northern Iraq?
A terrorist movement calling itself the Islamic
State insults Islam and mocks the duties of a legitimate
State towards its citizens. To use this term is to dignify
a death cult — a death cult that, in declaring itself a
caliphate, has declared war on the world. Countries do
need to work together to defeat it, because approximately
80 countries have citizens fighting with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and every country is
a potential target.
Last week, an Australian operative in Syria
instructed his local network to conduct demonstration
14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

killings, and this week, an Australian terror suspect
savagely attacked two policemen. It is hard to imagine
that citizens of a pluralist democracy could have
succumbed to such delusions, yet clearly they have.
The Australian Government will be utterly unflinching
towards anything that threatens our future as a free,
fair and multicultural society, a beacon of hope and
exemplar of unity in diversity. Already, more than 60
Australians are fighting with ISIL and Jabhat al-Nusra.
More than 60 Australians have had their passports
suspended to prevent them from joining terrorist groups
in the Middle East. Our laws are changing to ensure
that foreign fighters returning home can be arrested,
prosecuted and jailed for a very long time indeed.
However, we are not just dealing with potential
terrorists at home. We are tackling their inspiration
abroad. Our combat aircraft and special forces are now
in the Middle East preparing to join the international
coalition to disrupt and degrade ISIL at the request of
the Iraqi Government. I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the leadership you have shown in assembling a
broad coalition. The participation of Middle Eastern
countries in this week’s strike on ISIL in Syria is the
clearest possible demonstration that the West cannot
solve this problem alone and will not have to.
Our goal is not to change people, but to protect
them. It is not to change Governments, but to combat
terrorism. Governments that do not commit genocide
against their own people nor permit terrorism against
ours — that is all we seek. Even in what seem to be
darkening times, there are grounds for hope. The
ISIL horror has generated all-but-universal revulsion.
Muslim leaders, from Prime Minister Najib Razak of
Malaysia and President Yudhoyono of Indonesia to the
Grand Mufti of Australia have declared that the ISIL
movement is against God, against Islam and against
our common humanity. Perhaps the realization is now
dawning for all peoples, all cultures and all faiths that
it can never be right to kill in the name of God. That
would be a moral victory far surpassing any military
success.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Xavier Bettel, Prime Minister of the
Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
Mr. Bettel (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): At
the outset, as our colleague, the President of France,
stated, we offer our most sincere condolences for what
happened today. We express our condolences to all of
the families and victims, regardless of their nationality,

S/PV.7272

who have been attacked by terrorists using religion to
justify their barbarous acts. I would echo what the Prime
Ministers of the United Kingdom and Australia and the
King of Jordan just said: using religion to commit such
barbarous acts is the worst thing one can do.
I would also like to thank, you, Sir, for having
taken the initiative of convening this Security
Council debate. We take this opportunity to recall the
commitment undertaken by my country, Luxembourg,
to counter the threat of foreign terrorist fighters. That
threat has gotten worse over the past few months, and is
of concern to us all, as the Secretary-General explained
just a little while ago.
I think the speakers before me described the
problem well. For Europe and for my own country, the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters is a matter of growing
concern. At present, it is estimated that thousands of
foreign fighters have joined terrorist groups, such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the Nusra
Front and Al-Qaida and its affiliates, particularly in
Syria and in Iraq. When they return to their countries
of origin, those terrorist fighters continue to present a
danger. The arrests of numerous fighters in the Middle
East and in Europe, the recent atrocities committed in
Arsal in Lebanon and the terrorist attack perpetrated
against the Jewish Museum of Brussels on 24 May are
examples that attest to the fact that the threat is real.
There is no magic formula for combatting this
threat. Since we are all affected by it, it is obvious
that we must all act together. The response of the
international community and the Security Council
needs to be commensurate with the challenge. In that
regard, I welcome resolution 2178 (2014), which we have
just adopted unanimously on the initiative of the United
States, and which Luxembourg has been honoured to
co-sponsor.
As for the actions we should undertake, I see three
priorities. First, we must intensify our efforts to prevent
radicalization, which could lead to terrorism, and to
counter violent extremism. Why and how does a young
person with a clean record yesterday become a terrorist
tomorrow? In Europe, a Radicalisation Awareness
Network has been put in place by the European
Commission, following an approach based on support
to local communities. The Network connects those
who are in direct contact with targeted individuals or
vulnerable groups in order to facilitate an exchange of
experiences and best practices. The Network is part
of the preventive component of the European Union’s

14-5473515/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

counter-terrorism strategy and should be strengthened.
That is a long-term effort that we intend to pursue, in
particular when Luxembourg assumes the presidency
of the Council of the European Union during the second
half of 2015.
Secondly, we must make every effort to prevent
those who want to leave to fight with terrorist groups
from travelling to conflict zones. To that end, we
need to strengthen the exchange of information and
cooperation among Member States. The European
Union is actively working on that. We also need to
put in place sufficiently robust legislation to ensure
that foreign terrorist fighters can be effectively
prosecuted and brought to justice upon their return. In
Luxembourg, the incitement to commit a terrorist act,
terrorist recruitment, the creation of a terrorist group
and terrorist training constitute criminal offences.
My Government is already working on updating the
criminal code in order to fully take into account the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters, in accordance with
the provisions of the resolution we have just adopted.
Thirdly, we must redouble our efforts to cut off
the sources of financing of foreign terrorist fighters.
As an international financial centre, Luxembourg
is aware of its special responsibilities in that regard.
My country has adopted a full and consistent arsenal
of legislative and regulatory measures in the fight
against money laundering and terrorist financing,
and it is paying particular attention to their effective
implementation. Those measures fully take into
account the recommendations of the Financial Action
Task Force.
I would like to conclude by stressing an essential
point. Respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law need to be an integral
part of our counter-terrorism strategy if we want it to
achieve its aim. All the measures we take to counter
the threat of foreign terrorist fighters must respect
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. Otherwise, we
shall only heighten the sense of injustice and impunity,
which fuels radicalization and the spread of terrorism.
(spoke in English)
This morning, before the General Assembly, you,
Mr. President, asked the world to join in the fight
against the Islamic state in Iraq and the Levant. Faced
with those killers, who have no regard for our human
values and do not hesitate to recruit children for their

16/43

24/09/2014

dark cause, we must be steadfast in upholding the values
upon which the United Nations was founded.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Terrorism, which has been strengthened ideologically
and logistically and through its ties to transnational
organized crime, is fuelled by drug trafficking, seized
oil fields and extremist ideas, including those based on
religion and ethnicity. Terrorism penetrates the fabric
of regional conflicts.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the
Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups have long
existed in the Middle East. They have acquired
additional capacity for their criminal activities in the
context of weakening of State institutions owing to
foreign support. With their increased power, extremist
groups jeopardize the future of entire States, as is
clearly seen in the examples of Iraq, Syria and Libya,
which are under attack, as well as Lebanon, Yemen,
Mali and the Central African Republic.
Russia has consistently advocated the expansion
of international cooperation to curb terrorism in all
its forms and abandoning double standards and the
dividing of terrorists into good and bad terrorists. It is
essential that all States faithfully implement the Security
Council resolutions and decisions that call for ending
the incitement to terrorism, cutting off all channels
of illegal oil trafficking, adopting sanctions against
the Taliban and Al-Qaida and preventing the transfer
of weapons from Libya. We supported resolution 2170
(2014) aimed at ratcheting up the sanctions pressure on
terrorists operating in Syria and Iraq.
Those examples reaffirm the Council’s ability to
agree on fundamentally important issues and to take
decisions on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations. After the intervention in Iraq, the bombing of
Libya and the providing of foreign support to extremists
opposed to Al-Assad in Syria, the problem of foreign
terrorist fighters has been seriously exacerbated. They
are also fighting in the ranks of terrorist organizations
of many countries in the Middle East, Africa and the
Afghanistan/Pakistan boundary area. In that regard, we
need a comprehensive approach that would encompass
the financial, administrative, social and ideological
components of the issue and that would ensure respect
for the sovereignty of all States. We support the initiative

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7272

of the United States presidency of the Security Council
in sponsoring resolution 2178 (2014) aimed at stamping
out foreign terrorist fighter activity.

incident took place. We wish to express our condolences
to France for the French victim and show our solidarity
with France.

At the same time, we would like to caution against
the temptation to narrow our perception of the problem,
because the Islamic State, with its inhuman ideology
and revolting executions of journalists, is not by any
means the only threat to the region. There is a need to
comprehensively consider the problem of terrorism in
all its dimensions, in the Middle East and North Africa.
We propose the convening, under the auspices of the
United Nations, a forum of representatives of countries
of the region, the African Union, the League of Arab
States, the five permanent members of the Security
Council and other stakeholders. The forum’s agenda
should also address long-standing conflicts, the most
important of which is the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is
specifically the failure to resolve the Palestinian issue
for many decades, that is, according to a widely-held
viewpoint, one of the primary reasons terrorists receive
moral support and are able to continuously recruit new
members into their ranks. We call for an analysis of
the deep-rooted causes of the region’s problems and for
avoiding responding solely to their symptoms.

At the moment, we are witnessing a resurgence of
terrorism that deserves serious international attention
and vigilance. Wars breed anger. Killings yield hatred.
Conflicts in the Middle East attract terrorists and
extremists into the region from all over the world,
like a magnet, to join in the fighting. Once they return
home, they will pose a serious threat to the security and
stability of many countries, regions and indeed the world
as a whole. In this era of rising interconnectedness,
terrorist financing has become easier and more covert.
International corridors have taken shape for terrorists
and extremists to move around across the world.

We stand ready to cooperate on an equitable basis,
beginning with an honest joint analysis of how this
problem developed and how we can work our way out
of this chaos.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the People’s Republic of China.
Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the convening, on the initiative of the United
States, of this Security Council summit on terrorism
and the adoption today of resolution 2178 (2014). The
resolution, which reflects the common will of the
international community, should be implemented
effectively and in a comprehensive and balanced
manner.
Terrorists defy the fundamental human rights and
challenge the foundations of human civilization. As
such, they are humankind’s common enemy. Al-Qaida
launched, 13 years ago, on 11 September, attacks in
this very city. That incident shocked the entire world
and claimed over 3,000 innocent lives. Since the end
of 2013, terrorists have instigated, orchestrated and
carried out numerous violent attacks inside China and
caused numerous casualties. Today, a new terrorist

In the meantime, social media have become a
battlefield for terrorist and extremist groups to spread
their ideology, a tool to plot terrorist attacks and a
platform to recruit terrorists. With the progress of
information technologies, some young people are
susceptible to extremist ideas and demagogy by terrorist
forces. We must stay alert, for terrorist organizations
and extremist ideologies are competing with us for our
future generations. It is indeed a battle bearing on the
future of our world.
With terrorism raising its ugly head once again, we
must adhere to the practices that have proven effective
and abide by international law and norms governing
international relations. First, we must ensure sound
coordination. The United Nations and the Security
Council have to play the leading role in a global war
on terrorism. That is the only way to maintain unity,
achieve effective coordination and take concerted
actions.
Secondly, we must adopt a multipronged approach.
The global war on terrorism should be fought in an
integrated manner, adopting measures in the political,
security, economic, financial, intelligence and
ideological fields, inter alia, with a view to addressing
both the symptoms and root causes of terrorism,
especially removing its root causes and breeding
grounds. Military actions must comply with the Charter
of the United Nations and relevant Security Council
resolutions.
Thirdly, we must follow a consistent standard.
Any act of terrorism in whatever form, whenever and
wherever it is committed, and whomever or whatever it
is targeted against, must be fought. No double standards

14-5473517/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

should be adopted. Still less should terrorism be
identified with any particular ethnic group or religion.
Faced with the new trends and new developments in
terrorism, we must come up with new thinking and
new steps in response. In that regard, China wishes to
propose the following.
First, we should step up information-gathering and
sharing. Full scope should be given to the advantages
of the United Nations and relevant international
institutions on such matters as establishing a counterterrorism database and information exchange platform
so as to step up sharing of information resources and
intelligence analysis.
Secondly, we should strengthen counter-terrorism
on the Internet. Resolute measures should be taken to
stop the use of social media to spread extremist ideas,
especially the release of audio and video materials of
violence and terror. Internet companies and operators
should exercise self-discipline. To that end, it is
imperative to formulate as soon as possible a code of
conduct for the global cyberindustry. China will host
a symposium on countering cyberterrorism within the
framework of the Global Counterterrorism Forum in
Beijing later this year.
Thirdly, we must block the channels of terrorist
movement and financing of terrorism. All countries,
particularly those adjacent to ongoing conflicts, ought
to fulfil international obligations for effective border
control. We must enhance cooperation in financial
regulation, crack down on such illegal activities as
underground banking, and block terrorist financing.
Fourthly, we should promote deradicalization.
While taking actions in accordance with law to
crack down on and outlaw venues and personnel that
are engaged in, advocating and spreading extremist
ideology, we should protect normal religious activities,
promote public awareness and give greater play to the
role of local communities, thus injecting more positive
energy into society. The United Nations should sum
up useful experiences without delay and promote best
practices from around the world.
The countries of the Middle East are on the front
line of the war on terrorism. It is extremely important
for those countries to work in unity and coordination
and put aside their differences. China firmly supports
the countries of the region in their efforts to counter
terrorism. We support Iraq in enhancing its counterterrorism capacity-building and we stand ready to

18/43

24/09/2014

strengthen our cooperation with the various parties,
in such areas as intelligence sharing and personnel
training. In this context, we will provide ¥60 million of
emergency humanitarian assistance to Iraq, including
to its Kurdish region.
Confronted with terrorist threats, all countries
have found their destinies bound together. We have
no choice but to work together to address the common
threat. China has always resolutely opposed all forms of
terrorism and will continue to stand firm and participate
in international cooperation against terrorism. In the
face of justice and unity, terrorism has no place to hide
and it will be thoroughly defeated.
The President: There are two matters I want to
mention before we go to our next speaker. First, I said
earlier that we had 101 sponsors for resolution 2178
(2014). I have just received an update that we now
have 104 sponsors. I think that it is worth noting the
overwhelming interest and support on this issue.
Consistent with our earlier agreement and past
precedent, as I mentioned, we have opened this forum
to leaders of countries that are not currently on the
Council, but obviously have an extraordinary, deep
interest, not only in the problem that we are discussing
today — the issue of foreign fighters — but also are
critical to our ability to solve the problem. I would
therefore now welcome and give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Haider Al-Abadi, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Iraq.
Mr. Al-Abadi (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this high-level meeting, which
reflects the attention you are giving to the question of
terrorism, and for inviting Iraq to participate. I also
wish to thank you personally for the support you have
provided to Iraq as it strives to confront terrorism.
Iraq stands today in the vanguard of the fight
against terrorism and against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), which has attacked my country
and displaced thousands of our citizens in Mosul, in the
north, occupied our territory, killed hundreds of Iraqi
citizens on sectarian grounds in Tal Afar and other
places, and targeted religious minorities including the
Shabak, Yazidis, Christians and others. Those areas
have suffered from sectarian and religious cleansing
that has changed their demographics and destroyed their
cultural and religious heritage. Moreover, car bombs
are exploding in the streets of Baghdad, Babylon, Tuz
Khurmatu and various other cities and towns in Iraq,
targeting and killing dozens of people every day.
14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7272

ISIL, which is a combination and mixture of
extremists and the remains of the Al-Ba’ath fascist party,
falsely claims allegiance to Islam. It is actually causing
more damage to Islam by adopting specific sectarian
rhetoric while threatening all sects and religious groups
in Iraq. Furthermore, the organization is not an Iraqi
organization; it is a transnational organization that
derives its strength from the following sources.

must prevent ISIL from using technology to promote
its ideology, including through the Internet, and from
spreading its horrifying propaganda throughout the
media.

First, it exploits Takfiri religious philosophy as
ideological cover that foments hatred for the Other and
takes pleasure in bloodshed and beheadings. Secondly,
financial networks present in several States provide
great financial liquidity, as well as from oil smuggling
networks in Iraq and the cities and territories under its
control. Thirdly, it enjoys the support of recruitment
networks throughout the world that draw in members
and facilitate recruits’ entry into Iraq. Fourthly, media
and propaganda networks spread news about the socalled success of the organization, which helps to recruit
members. Fifthly, it derives strength from the remains
of the Al-Ba’ath fascist party and the supporters of
former president Saddam.

Iraq has been successful in halting the progress
of ISIL with the help of our heroic security forces
and our courageous people, who have responded to
the call of the religious and spiritual leaders in Najaf
and the political leadership. Iraq has also succeeded in
achieving a peaceful transition of power and the creation
of a national alliance according to a specific time table;
this is a priority in the combat against terrorism.

Because the threat posed by the organization is
not limited to Iraq, international support is required to
confront it. We will not allow regional or international
disagreements to affect the priority and primacy of
the threat or to break up the international alliance
against terrorism. I reaffirm that in Iraq our only
allegiance is to Iraq and its people. While we express
our gratitude to all the States that have stood beside
us in the military, humanitarian and political fields,
locally and internationally, we also affirm that the
defeat of terrorism in Iraq is the cornerstone for its
defeat throughout the world. We therefore call on the
Security Council and all peace-loving nations to do the
following.
First, they must provide all forms of support and
assistance, military and security assistance to the
Government of Iraq in order to enable it to defeat
terrorism and protect the unity, independence and
sovereignty of Iraq with respect to its land, air and water,
and, secondly, they must block all sources of financing
and financial networks, including the purchase of oil
from areas under the control of ISIL.
The third goal is stopping extremists from entering
Iraq and putting an end to all forms of logistical
support, including the pursuit of and the dismantling
and criminalization of recruitment networks that bring
in terrorists from throughout the world. Fourthly, they

Fifthly, support is required from the entire world for
refugees and for the reconstruction of cities destroyed
by ISIL, whether through occupation or through the use
of car bombs that explode in cities and neighbourhoods.

Our Government looks forward not only to an
urgent effort to end the terrorist threat but also to
constructive relations with all countries of the world,
especially in the region of Iraq, with the neighbouring
States that stand together with us in this confrontation.
This relationship will be based on political and military
cooperation and common interests.
The President: We recognize that Iraq is on the
front lines of the fight against extremism and terrorism,
and we are heartened by the numerous countries that
have pledged assistance and aid to Iraq in support of
this fight.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan, President of the Republic of Turkey.
Turkey, obviously, has been deeply affected by both the
flow of foreigh fighters and the displacement that has
resulted from the conflict in neighbouring States, and
so we thank the President for being here today.
President Erdoğan (spoke in Turkish; interpretation
provided by the delegation): I should like to start
by thanking my friend Barack for enabling such an
important discussion to take place at the highest level.
The issue of foreign terrorist fighters is no doubt a very
important issue, one that is the reflection and a symptom
of a bigger problem. The collapse of State structures
in our southern neighbourhood and the resulting
atmosphere of chaos and instability has created today
a field of operations for terrorist organizations and,
unfortunately, the region has become a magnet for
terrorist fighters.
Turkey, given the emergence of instability in Syria,
has repeatedly issued all necessary warnings to the

14-5473519/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international community about this threat. The inertia
of the international community, despite the policies of
violence towards the Syrian population by the regime,
has prepared the ground for Al-Qaida to re-emerge in
Syria and grow stronger under the name of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), with the support of
the regime.
The spread of the ISIL threat towards Iraq is
the result of conditions on the ground and has been
nurtured by the earlier sectarian policies of the previous
Government.
Under these circumstances, the international
community has to work together, because all problems
can be overcome if it does. We have to take a
comprehensive, realistic, long-term approach in order
to overcome this threat. Turkey has been taking a
leading role in this direction and has been working to
prevent the flow of foreign fighters towards the region
for quite a long time.
But this fight cannot be carried out solely by
Turkey. The threat of foreign terrorist fighters starts the
moment such individuals depart from their countries
of origin. Thus the combat against those individuals
should start in the source countries, and our initial goal
is therefore to prevent their entry into Turkey. For a long
time we have been calling on the countries concerned to
cooperate with us on this issue. Unfortunately, a timely
reaction has not been shown on this issue either; with the
deterioration of the situation, we have finally witnessed
in recent times an increased flow of information from
the source countries. Thanks to this, and within the
scope of our struggle against foreign terrorist fighters,
around 6,300 individuals have been included in the
no-entry list and close to 1,000 foreigners have been
deported. We have also established risk-analysis groups
at the airports.
I should like to stress once again that we can stop
this flow of foreign terrorist fighters only if our friends
and partners who await our cooperation themselves
show a spirit of cooperation. Another important issue
we must touch upon is that neither exploitation of these
measures by Islamophobic circles or damage to our
common civilized values should be allowed.
Turkey has suffered for years from the scourge of
terrorism, which has claimed the lives of thousands
of its children. We are among the best-placed to know
the pain that terrorism brings and therefore would be
among the first to try to ensure that we can prevent

20/43

24/09/2014

young people throughout the world from falling into
the hands of terrorists. With that understanding, in 2011
Turkey, together with the United States, launched the
Global Counterterrorism Forum.
Turkey is taking all possible national, regional
and international steps to counter this threat and is
committed to taking enhanced measures in this regard.
ISIL is a terrorist organization with blood on its
hands. Since the very beginning, our Government has
taken all necessary legal measures in this respect. In
our fight against terrorism, all measures necessitated
by our national interests will be taken with due regard
for regional stability and humanitarian needs. There
is tremendous pressure on Turkey’s borders; since
the beginning of the conflict in Syria we have taken
in 1,300,000 Syrians from every ethnic and sectarian
group. Only last week, more than 140,000 Syrian
Kurdish refugees fleeing ISIL found shelter in our
country, and we are also temporarily housing 70,000
Yazidis from Iraq.
Despite our sacrifices and our expectation of
solidarity, we have not received the kind of support
that we have been looking for from the international
community and have also been the target of unjust
criticism in this context. This is really very sad for
us. Turkey’s determination in this regard cannot be
questioned; the international community is going
through a historical test of sincerity. If we go deep to the
roots of the conflict and ensure the desired solidarity
and cooperation, we can get results.
Our goal should be to create an atmosphere of
peace, democracy and stability in which millions of our
Syrian brothers can safely return home and our Iraqi
brothers can feel that they are part of Iraq. That should
continue to be our goal, and Turkey will continue to
carry out its efforts in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to His Highness
Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, Amir of the State
of Qatar.
Sheikh Al-Thani (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
thank President Obama for convening this important
meeting, whose significance, I hope, will strengthen
our collective effort in combating the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters, and in fact all manifestations
of international terrorism, the reason for our meeting
today.
The international community agrees with the
diagnosis of terrorism. It is an imminent threat and
14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

we must therefore make combating it a priority. The
peoples of our region have unfortunately paid a heavy
price because of this phenomenon. Innocent citizens and
civil institutions have been targeted and terror reigns for
political reasons. As I said this morning in the General
Assembly (see A/69/PV.6), there is no civilization in
the modern era that has not had to confront terrorism,
whether right-wing, left-wing or religious. It would be
a fatal mistake to tie this type of political violence to a
single culture, religion or nationality, whatever it might
be. It also goes without saying that the transnational
nature of terrorism and its use of modern technologies
and communications are contributing to the spread of
this scourge. That makes it essentially impossible to
respond without international solidarity. In Qatar we
consider ourselves an integral part of an international
alliance against terrorism. We will tackle it nationally
and globally by joining with international efforts.
We have no choice but to respond at a security
level, and even with an emergency military response,
given the imminent threat posed by the terrorist groups
that recruit and transport combatants across borders.
The current state of alert, however, should not make
us forget the origins and motives of this phenomenon.
Terrorism should in fact be a rare, exceptional
occurrence; it is possible for terrorist groups to control
entire populations and areas of certain countries only
when the State is absent, creating a political vacuum,
or when the State has become an instrument of murder
and repression that leaves no room for dialogue,
political efforts, gradual reforms or civil change. There
are regimes of terror that are killing their own people,
and if our efforts to eradicate terrorism are to bear
fruit, we will have to restore such States, which should
be unifying frameworks that do not deal in repression
and can help us to fight terrorism. We cannot wait for
more people to be killed. We cannot defeat terrorism
unless the societies that have been affected by it react
to the bloody repression such as what we are witnessing
in Syria and Iraq, particularly when it targets people
because their religion is different.
In that regard, we would make the following points.
Past experience has shown that military action alone
cannot solve such problems. We must work within a
framework of political solutions that can open the door
to a better future. Violence breeds violence, and we
must therefore take a political path. Secondly, if the
political dimensions of a solution are to gain public
support, it must be credible and avoid double standards.
When civilians are targeted, the response must be the

S/PV.7272

same, regardless of who is perpetrating that violence.
We cannot stand by while thousands are killed. There
is always some explanation or justification for this, but
I fear that such explanations give the impression of a
double standard. Thirdly, fighting terrorism does not
give anyone carte blanche to take measures that are
outside the rule of law. Civilians must not be victimized
yet again.
In conclusion, we affirm our support for all efforts
based on an international consensus designed to put
an end to this scourge, whatever its motivations or the
excuses made for it.
The President: Unfortunately, I am being called
to participate in another United Nations forum, so my
able Secretary of State, John Kerry, will take over the
presidency of the meeting.
I would like to say to my friends the leaders of
Kenya, Bulgaria and Moldova, as well as my good
friend Stephen Harper of Canada, and other Heads of
State, that we heartily welcome their commitment and
participation in this meeting. I also thank the entire
Security Council for the seriousness with which we
have tackled this problem. I would like to note that it is
very rare to see the United Nations achieve the kind of
consensus we see represented in today’s resolution 2178
(2014). If we look at all the statements that have been
made today, several themes stand out.
First, the brand of violent, extreme terrorism that
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant represents is
something that all of us in the civilized world must
reject. Secondly, in addition to dealing with such
terrorism’s challenges militarily, we are going to have
to change hearts and minds, and that will require a wide
range of strategies. Today’s resolution commits each of
us to finding tools to counter the radicalization that
can lead to the recruitment of young people who we
obviously want to take a better path in life.
I want to reaffirm that the United States will not
be committed simply to a military approach. We are
also deeply committed to working with every single
country that is prepared to cooperate in making sure
that the scourge of terrorism and the use of foreign
fighters for perverted ambitions are thwarted. We are
going to make sure that we reach out to everyone here
individually to find out how we can be helpful and
cooperate with them.
I will, however, repeat what I said at the outset of
this meeting. Resolutions alone will not be enough.

14-5473521/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Lofty rhetoric and good intentions are not enough. We
are going to have to translate words into deeds. But
given the seriousness with which all of us have made
our presentations here today, I am confident that we
can in fact succeed; that we can drain the sources of
the type of extreme radicalization we have been seeing;
that, as a consequence, and with the help of political
solutions to conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa, we can arrive at a situation in which all of our
young people, rather than resorting to violence and
suicide bombings, can be confident about getting a
good education, seeking opportunity, raising families
and living in peace. I would like to thank everyone here
for their outstanding contributions to this important
and historic effort.
Mr. Kerry took the Chair.
The President: I would like to express my
appreciation to the Heads of State and Government and
Ministers who have waited very patiently to take part
in this meeting. We should emphasize how important
it is that all of these statements become part of the
record. It has been an important record to build, and
we look forward to all the speakers still to come. I will
be here for a portion of that, at which point I have to
go to a meeting of the Friends of Syria Core Group,
and Ambassador Samantha Power will take the Chair.
But, as I say, we are very anxious to receive all the
statements orally; this is a very important record of
the seriousness with which each country takes these
responsibilities.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Rossen
Plevneliev, President of the Republic of Bulgaria.
President Plevneliev: We ask you, Secretary
Kerry, to please extend our warm regards and special
thanks to President Obama for his extraordinary
leadership in bringing about, organizing and presiding
over today’s historic event. We would also like to
extend our condolences to our friends and the people
of France on the murder of their citizen at the hands of
brutal terrorists.
Resolution 2178 (2014), of which Bulgaria was
a sponsor and which this highly respected body just
adopted, represents the international community’s
decisive stance towards the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters. The resolution further develops
the United Nations counter-terrorism framework and
highlights the need for strengthened legal measures at
both the national and international levels.

22/43

24/09/2014

Foreign terrorist fighters pose a very serious
threat not only to their countries and regions, but
also regionally and globally. Therefore, determined
action is required. No country, including my own, is
immune, and international cooperation and exchange of
operative information, as prescribed by the resolution
just adopted, is more than necessary. Terrorist attacks
happen everywhere. The terrorist attack of July 2012
at the airport in Sarafovo is yet another example of
the spread of the recruitment of foreign fighters for
terrorism, and for committing acts of murder and brutal
violence. We have seen the ugly face of terrorism in my
country.
The foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon cannot
be attributed to any one religion, ethnicity or region.
In that regard, the Bulgarian religious community
has taken a firm and united position exemplified by a
declaration condemning in the strongest possible terms
the activities of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). That declaration was adopted by the Bulgarian
General Mufti and supported by the National Council
of Religious Communities in Bulgaria. I am so proud
to be President of a country where different religious
groups live peacefully together and where they have
acted immediately and decisively together.
Combating radicalization and extremism requires
urgent preventive measures, such as support for
institution-building, respect for human rights, social
inclusion and cohesion, and cooperation with regional
and global partners. With today’s resolution, the
international community has provided for a longerterm and strategic international response to this
phenomenon. As a result, all States must now ensure the
implementation of an appropriate legal and institutional
counter-terrorism architecture, at both the national and
global levels, and must ensure that it be systematically
strengthened and improved. The Bulgarian Government
will follow suit and will urgently propose national
legislative measures to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the
Republic of Kenya.
President Kenyatta: Last weekend, Kenya
commemorated the heinous attack on the Westgate
Mall, which left 67 people, of 13 nationalities, dead.
Half the terrorists who executed that attack were
foreigners drawn from the ranks that have come to fight
alongside Al-Shabaab. Tragically, the pool of foreign

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

fighters is also being filled from our children in Kenya
and the region.
The alarming rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) is also driven by the phenomenon of
foreign fighters. It awakens us to the speed at which
terrorist organizations can evolve. No doubt, a greater
risk lies in the fighters returning to their homelands
or finding new operating spaces in which to carry out
their terrorist attacks. Such is the threat that we face
from foreign fighters and operatives, who in the past
have killed hundreds of our citizens.
Our conviction is that strong, enforceable
action must be taken to tackle terror groups and the
phenomenon of foreign fighters. That belief is informed
by our experience that terrorist groups are continuously
evolving into new forms in response to opportunity.
For instance, the closer collaboration of Al-Shabaab
with Al-Qaida has led to strengthened links with other
Al-Qaida affiliates, allowing for increased movement
of foreign fighters and weapons. It has also renewed
their strategic and communication capabilities.
The risk is growing, and we are all in its path. We
are geographically close to Al-Shabaab’s Somali camps.
Our status as a democracy, which terrorists associate
with the West, also makes us a target. Our deepening
democracy and our growing prosperity are anathema to
terrorists.
The fragile security environment in Somalia
continues to afford Al-Shabaab a safe haven in which
to operate. In cooperation with other regional countries
within the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
as well as with the Somali National Army, Kenya has
continued to undertake campaigns that are degrading
Al-Shabaab’s capability. We wish to underscore that
sufficient support to the ongoing AMISOM operations
and stabilization efforts is integral to securing Somalia
and denying the fighters operational space. In the light
of that imperative, we strongly urge expanded support
for AMISOM, particularly in facilitating ready access
to force multipliers in the form of air and maritime
support.
Even as we take the battle to the existing terrorists,
we need to expand our focus on the radicalization of
youth. That is the pipeline for global terrorism. We must
call attention to the enablers of that process, especially
those providing financing at the grassroots level, where
radicalization is taking place. Those efforts must take
place within a wider strategy that brings in all States.

S/PV.7272

The East African countries are also deepening security
cooperation in concrete ways, alongside our economic
integration agenda. We in Kenya and East Africa have
taken up our responsibilities in the global war against
terrorists and stand ready to partner with anyone and
all parties willing to eradicate that menace.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Gjorge Ivanov, President of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
President Ivanov (spoke in Macedonian;
interpretation provided by the delegation): The
countries of South-Eastern Europe are facing a serious
threat. The Balkan region is the first part of Europe
on the bloody map of the so-called Islamic caliphate. I
have to say with concern that the Balkans are already
becoming a base for the recruitment and radicalization
of new foreign fighters for global jihad. The foreign
fighters from the Balkans in the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant and Jabhat Al-Nusra are grouped into
ethno-national platoons to export jihadist ideology
back to their home countries and thus serve the wider
goals of jihadism. No one can tell with certainty the
exact number of foreign fighters from the Balkans
involved in military operations in Iraq and Syria. Their
number is constantly increasing and we can no longer
count them. Among them are jihadists ready to carry
out military operations for defensive and offensive
jihad. Their interaction with foreign fighters creates
a multinational structure that poses risks and danger.
They have an external network of supporters in the
West. They have the capability to plan, support and
carry out attacks against the West ands its interests.
Some have been there for three years; others are joining
them now. Some are there to stay, but some are likely
to return to the Balkans. When they come back, they
will bring along their hatred of diversity and their
devastating ideology, which will infect our vulnerable
societies and States.
For the time being, the Balkan region is not an
operational base for international terrorist networks.
However, we should be aware that this is not a temporary
but a permanent threat we must be prepared for. We
must not rule out as impossible the sick scenarios and
verbal threats from foreign fighters for the creation of
a so-called Balkan caliphate. We are under a constant
threat for which neither our region nor our countries are
prepared. This is the diagnosis of the disease we face,
but is there a remedy? I am confident that the remedy
consists of three essential steps.

14-5473523/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

First, the legal blockade of the Republic of
Macedonia’s rightfully deserved membership in NATO
is also a serious blockade against peace, security and
stability in the Balkans. At the beginning, we were
blocked in the United Nations because of the name of
our country. We are now blocked out of NATO and the
European Union not just because of our name but also
because of the identity and language of our citizens.
The blockade is a result of a breach of resolutions 817
(1993) and 845 (1993); a violation of the 1995 Interim
Accord that was deposited with the United Nations; and
a violation of the 5 December 2011 judgment handed
down by the International Court of Justice, one of the
principal organs of the United Nations. It is for those
reasons that we have not been able to find a mutually
acceptable solution in the past 21 years. But it is also
for those reasons that there exists an atmosphere of
insecurity and instability in our region. The Security
Council can and must contribute to peace, security and
stability in the Balkans. I urge and expect the Council to
be persistent in demanding unconditional respect for its
resolutions. I expect the Council to be involved in view
of ensuring respect for the verdict of the International
Court of Justice in the Macedonia case.
Secondly, we should accelerate the integration of the
Republic of Macedonia and the other Balkan countries
into the European Union. By postponing enlargement,
the Union is creating a vacuum in what historically has
been the poorest geopolitical space. And we all know
that such vacuums are eventually filled. The European
Union must not forget that the Balkans is part of
Europe and that by postponing enlargement it creates
a problem on its own territory. It is necessary that all
of the Western Balkan countries be integrated into the
European Union as soon as possible.
Thirdly, we believe it is necessary to establish a
regional counter-terrorism centre in the countries
of the Western Balkans to work on identifying and
assessing terrorism threats and to ensure operational
coordination with a single centre that would monitor
terrorist threats and targets at the regional level. The
centre would also ensure operational cooperation
on intelligence on terrorist groups, their networks,
locations, capacities and intentions. That would serve
to provide early warning, prevention and coordination
of activities among law enforcement and intelligence
services.
There is no longer any excuse for blocking the
initiative on European Union and Euro-Atlantic
integration. Our region is vulnerable, and so is
24/43

24/09/2014

Europe. It is necessary to strengthen institutions in all
Western Balkan countries by funding programmes for
deradicalization and counter-radicalization in order to
ensure early prevention and the deployment of counter
measures through programmes and action plans. We do
not have the capacity to respond and address this threat
by ourselves. We have limited financial capacity. We
therefore need partners to build capacity and to counter
violent extremism. We can deprive terrorist groups of
the one resource that is most precious to them — new
recruits — by reducing sympathy and support for
extremism. We must be responsible. We must help each
other. The stability and security of each State is an
important link in the whole region.
The President: It is now my pleasure to give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Stephen Harper, Prime
Minister of Canada.
Mr. Harper (Canada) (spoke in French): I am
pleased for the leadership demonstrated by the Security
Council. We also thank you, Secretary Kerry, as well
as President Obama, for convening this meeting and
inviting other countries as well.
The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters is a
source of great concern. The conflict in Syria and in
Iraq is increasingly alarming people around the world,
including Canada.
(spoke in English)
The presence of a large number of foreign fighters
in Syria and Iraq is not only aggravating and an
already dangerous regional security situation, for us
it involves the risks that individuals may return home
with knowledge and experience gained in terrorist
activities to motivate and recruit others and potentially
to conduct attacks.
Canada is taking action on this. In 2013, we brought
forward the Combating Terrorism Act, which created
new criminal offences in connection with leaving
or attempting to leave Canada for terrorist purposes.
Recent amendments to the Citizenship Act will also
enable us to revoke citizenship from dual citizens and
to deny it to permanent residents who are convicted
of terrorism offences. We are also using existing tools
to take appropriate actions to counter foreign fighter
threats, including passport revocation, the listing
of terrorist entities under the Criminal Code and
supporting capacity-building initiatives abroad. As we
go forward, we are examining how to strengthen all of
these and other tools. Of course, terrorism and crime for

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

terrorist purposes cannot, as has been recognized in the
Council, be prevented by security and law enforcement
alone.
(spoke in French)
It is also essential to support prevention efforts
to fight violent extremism before certain individuals
become foreign fighters.
(spoke in English)
I should mention that in Canada our security
and intelligence agencies work well, and work most
particularly well with our Muslim communities, in
identifying such threats. It is also important that we
track and squeeze off terrorist financing wherever
possible.
Canada is pleased to have been a sponsor of
resolution 2187 (2014) today and to support efforts to
improve the international response to the foreign fighter
phenomenon. We will also continue to work with the
Government of the United States, the Government
of Iraq and our other friends and allies on a range of
humanitarian, political and military assistance to those
fighting this phenomenon in the region.
The President: As I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mark Rutte, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands, I want to express my apologies to
the other Prime Ministers and to my good friend His
Excellency Mr. Benkirane, the Head of Government
of Morocco, for the fact that I have been called to a
meeting on Syria. Ambassador Power sits as a member
of the President’s Cabinet, and I am privileged to turn
the Chair over to her. We are extremely grateful for
everybody’s participation and strong statements.
With pleasure, I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mark Rutte, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
Mr. Rutte (Netherlands): The direct threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters concerns us all. Both our
international and our national security are at risk. As
a country of origin for such fighters, the Netherlands
raised its terrorism level to the second highest level
18 months ago. Our national security is directly affected
by this issue. But most alarming of all is the situation in
the conflict zones themselves.
Ms. Power took the Chair.
Innocent civilians are victims of merciless violence.
The threat is serious, and it calls for a serious response.

S/PV.7272

This is a duty that rests on us, the international
community. That is also the reason why today the
Dutch Government decided to increase its support
to the international effort to stop the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant by providing military means. We
will provide F-16s to join the fight against ISIL, and
furthermore, we will provide military training and
advice. In total, we will deploy 380 men and women.
Last year, in the framework of the Global
Counterterrorism Forum, the Netherlands and
Morocco launched a joint initiative to formulate good
practices in tackling the problem of foreign terrorist
fighters. Yesterday, at the Forum ministerial meeting,
we presented the outcome — a comprehensive set of
guidelines focused on every aspect of the foreign
fighter threat. Those recommendations cover not
only counter-terrorism responses, but also preventive
efforts. As co-leader of the Forum’s working group on
foreign terrorist fighters, the Netherlands will promote
the adoption of those good practices, and we are open
to working actively with all United Nations Member
States and United Nations partners on this important
issue.
The United Nations sanctions regime is essential
to addressing the problem of foreign terrorist fighters.
Sanctions are an important instrument for depriving
terrorist organisations and fighters of their sources
of finance, and sanctions could be tightened further.
These sanctions, however, must be implemented and
monitored properly, or they will not be effective in
practice. I believe that at the United Nations level we
should examine whether the monitoring and technical
assistance provided to Member States can be enhanced.
It is vital that the international community act jointly
on this issue. Resolution 2178 (2014), co-sponsored
by the Netherlands and adopted today, sends a strong
signal that we stand shoulder to shoulder to confront
the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Abdelilah Benkirane, Prime Minister
of the Kingdom of Morocco.
Mr. Benkirane (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is not
new. Regions such as Afghanistan and North Africa
have been witness to it. It has recently taken a new
dimension, particularly in the context of the Syrian and
Iraqi crises.
This phenomenon, which began as a local,
contained threat, has today become a danger for the

14-5473525/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

countries of origin, transit, residence, destination and
return. Therefore this high-level meeting of the Security
Council on threats caused by terrorist acts and foreign
terrorist fighters comes at just the right moment in
terms of the local, regional and international initiatives
aimed at adopting practical measures to deal with the
phenomenon in the framework of the United Nations
system. The international community has become
united in order to provide a unified, decisive response
to deal with the repercussions of this threat.
Awareness of the dangers and risks of this
development cannot be limited to a security approach.
That is seen very clearly in the Security Council
resolutions adopted in August, the meetings in Jeddah
and Paris and the resolutions of the League of Arab
States dealing with this phenomenon. It is actually a
much more complex issue, and managing it requires a
strategy that takes into account the varying phases of
extremism, polarization, recruitment and the fighting
itself, as well as the reintegration of those people.
This phenomenon has developed in regions that
previously had not experienced it at all. It cannot be
attributed to just a specific religion or nationality of any
kind. Therefore we need to disseminate principles of
tolerance and openness. This is where the Commander
of the Believers, His Majesty King Mohammed VI, is
working together with his fraternal Arab States and the
African States.
Morocco is prepared to take part and share its
best practices and experiences, developed within the
framework of its national, multidimensional strategy
to counter terrorism. We have seen tangible results
in terms of the effectiveness of cooperation with the
States with which we are working. Morocco continues
to be a victim of foreign terrorist fighter groups and is
continuing to take practical measures to deal with the
threat, relying on its comprehensive national counterterrorism strategy. We believe that the dismantling of
recruitment cells in order to deal with the transfer of
fighters to conflict regions is the direct outcome of
the efforts of the Moroccan authorities. Last week the
Government of Morocco adopted a new bill to ratchet
up our national efforts to deal with the threat posed
by those fighters, within the framework of an holistic
approach that is aimed at strengthening the legal and
institutional framework.
As part of the implementation of our early and
ongoing commitment to supporting international
efforts to deal with terrorism, particularly its latest
26/43

24/09/2014

manifestations, we have undertaken major efforts to take
part in bilateral, regional and interregional cooperation.
This is complementary to the international efforts
being made to address this phenomenon. The Kingdom
of Morocco and the Netherlands, aware of the dangers
and threats posed by terrorism, launched an initiative
within the framework of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, through which we were able to hold several
meetings in the United Arab Emirates, The Hague and
Marrakech. The outcomes were seen yesterday, when
we issued the Hague-Marrakech Memorandum on
Good Practices for a More Effective Response to the
Foreign Terrorist Fighters Phenomenon, particularly in
the legal and security areas.
Today’s resolution 2178 (2014) notes this effort of
Morocco and the Netherlands in the framework of the
Forum, and encourages us to continue our cooperation,
particularly by bringing together experts. In December
in Marrakech, we will hold the first meeting of the
working group that was established as part of this
Forum. This will be followed by many more meetings.
We hope that we will be able to benefit from the support
of all.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Ema Solberg, Prime Minister of
Norway.
Ms. Solberg (Norway): The unprecedented
brutality of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and its terrible territorial ambitions pose a threat
to all around this table. We must work together to
eradicate the roots that allow such extremist groups to
exist. It is crucial to mobilize local communities, civil
society and Governments in the fight against terrorism.
I see three main tasks ahead. First, terrorism must
be fought in Iraq and in the wider region. Secondly,
we need even closer international cooperation in the
fight against terror, and thirdly, radicalization must be
fought at home in our own countries.
I thank President Obama for his leadership and
initiative.
The dramatic events unfolding in the Middle
East and North Africa show the dangers of not giving
people a stake in the governing of their country. When
conflicts are left unchecked, civil wars may spill across
borders. The influx of foreign fighters is worsening an
already fragile situation in the countries concerned. We
strongly condemn the criminal terrorist acts committed
by citizens of Europe and of other countries. We will
14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

take strong measures to prevent them from travelling
to conflict zones.
The Norwegian Government has drawn up a
strategy for the deradicalization, rehabilitation and
reintegration of foreign fighters returning home.
We have an whole-of-government approach within a
national action plan that involves all levels of society.
Terrorism and related acts are already criminalized
under Norwegian law. In July, we submitted a bill on
measures to stem the flow of foreign fighters to areas
in conflict. We must also stop the financial flows to
such groups. Relevant legislation needs to be in place.
Information must be shared effectively. We must also
address the underlying problems that breed extremism
and terrorism. Let us work patiently to increase
understanding and tolerance among the groups.
We must all take a firm stand against hate speech.
I was very encouraged to see large crowds of all
backgrounds on the streets of Oslo recently. They were
following the call to march against extremism. Their
concrete message was formulated by one of the young
Muslim organizers saying: “ISIL is not my Islam.”
Norway takes part in international cooperation
and capacity-building efforts to prevent radicalization
and violent extremism. We support the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the Global
Counterterrorism Forum. Grave violations of human
rights can foster terrorism. Measures against terrorism
and the protection and promotion of human rights and
the rule of law are mutually reinforcing.
Norway co-sponsored resolution 2178 (2014),
adopted by the Council today. The broad representation
is a manifestation of the unity and urgency expressed
here. Today, we are sending a clear signal from this
Chamber that we must all do our part.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Kamla Persad-Bissessar, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago.
Mrs. Persad-Bissessar (Trinidad and Tobago):
During the past two hours and 45 minutes we have
been expressing our commitment to the fight against
terrorism. However, I would ask my colleasgues to
take one moment to stand in silence as we express
our condolences to all those who have lost their lives,
property or families because of those terrorists.
Trinidad and Tobago took the decision to co-sponsor
resolution 2178 (2014) on the basis of our commitment

S/PV.7272

to assist the international community in bringing relief
to all those people in various parts of the world who
have seen the destruction of their communities, the
murder of their families, the rape of their women and
the orphaning of thousands of children at the hands of
terrorists. We recognize that no State, whether large or
small, developed or developing, is immune from the
scourge of terrorism. Many people will recall that more
than two decades ago, Trinidad and Tobago was able to
successfully combat the attempts of a terrorist group
to overthrow the democratically elected Government of
that time.
This global scourge has witnessed an unprecedented
rise in recent times. It has resulted in new levels
of barbarism that have shocked the conscience of
members of the international community. Terrorism
threatens the foundation of the rule of law and
undermines the inviolability of the right to life and the
other fundamental rights and freedoms enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the various
national and international human rights instruments.
As a firm believer in the ability of the United
Nations to contribute to the resolution of international
problems such as terrorism, Trinidad and Tobago has
studied the text of the resolution. We find that despite
some imperfections, it provides a useful platform for
the launch of greater international cooperation in the
battle against terrorism, which is universally accepted
as a crime against humanity.
Cooperation at the global level in the fight
against terrorism is critical for small States, such
as my country. While my Government has expended
tremendous financial resources and has trained a
cadre of military and law enforcement officials in an
effort to protect our citizens and to secure our borders
and industrial installations against terrorist acts, I
am mindful of the need to strengthen our capacity to
counter violent extremism, which could undermine
our democracy and our way of life. In keeping with the
relevant provisions of this historic resolution, Trinidad
and Tobago would therefore seek to take advantage of
mechanisms for cooperation with other Member States,
whether bilaterally, multilaterally or in the context of
other arrangements, in order to improve our ability to
counter terrorism in various areas.
Her Excellency the President of Argentina
mentioned concerns about capacity. While Argentina is
a large State, we are a small nation, and many of us may
not have the same capacity as larger States have. The

14-5473527/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

representative of Argentina said that her country did
not produce weapons — we do not either — and that it
had to buy energy. Fortunately, we have energy. We are
a very tiny nation of 1.3 million people. The capacity to
comply with such obligations therefore gives us reason
to pause.
We point out such concerns in saying that we
wholeheartedly support the resolution. We especially
pay attention to the provision that States may be able
to comply to varying degrees, depending on their
capacity. Therefore, as we commit to implementing
the resolution, we seek partnership arrangements
within the family of the United Nations for some of
the following: conducting criminal investigations or
proceedings relating to the financing or support of
terrorists acts, obtaining evidence for the prosecution
of terrorists, exchange of information to monitor the
transit of foreign terrorist fighters, and other measures
to bring to justice those intent on committing terrorism,
whether they be foreign fighters or home grown.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that
my country has already taken many legislative and
adminsitative steps in the fight against terrorism,
because we were victim to terrorist acts in 1990. We
have in place an anti-terror law. We already have border
controls with respect to the finger-printing of persons
entering the country. We have areas dealing with the
financial intelligence unit regulations and compliance
with the Financial Action Task Force, which addresses
the whole issue of the financing of terrorism, as well as
many other administrative and legislative mechanisms.
We will need the support of our partners in this United
Nations family to be able to fully comply with and
implement the resolution.
It is our hope that, in acting with one voice on this
matter, all members of the Security Council, especially
the permanent members, will show the same spirit of
unity and seek to tackle the myriad issues facing the
international community so that the promise of the
Charter of the United Nations will be fully realized
as we approach the seventieth anniversary of the
establishment of this institution.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Herman Van Rompuy, President of the
European Council.
Mr. Van Rompuy (European Union): Let me start
by thanking President Obama and all members of the
Security Council for holding this meeting.

28/43

24/09/2014

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
poses a dreadful threat to security not only in Syria
and Iraq. Beyond the Middle East, ISIL is also a grave
threat to us all. We must respond jointly by undertaking
direct actions to destroy ISIL’s military and economic
capability, by increasing our support to affected
countries and by stopping foreign fighters from joining
ISIL. No doubt, ISIL will portray whatever we do as a
fight against Islam, but this is a common fight against
cruelty and barbarism. That is why public statements
by Islamic leaders are so important.
As we gather here today, United Nations States
Members are joining forces to fight ISIL. Its positions
are under international attack. The League of Arab
States has spoken clearly, and many of its members
are taking part in those actions, with the United States
and European countries. Last month, the European
Council — our assembly of 28 Presidents and Prime
Ministers — backed the decision by individual member
States to provide military material to Iraq. In line with
the measures now endorsed by the Security Council,
we then also agreed to use existing sanctions regimes
more effectively. We will work to block ISIL’s financial
flows and weapon flows and cut off illegal oil revenue.
We must also strive to strengthen the resilience of
affected countries and the immediate region. Violent
dynamics are spreading instability in all directions,
into North Africa and the Sahel. The new Iraqi
Government needs to rally the support of all Iraqis.
Efforts to find a political solution to the conflict in
Syria must continue. European Union Governments
are ready to assist countries in the region with border
and aviation security and counter-terrorism capacity.
We will continue to provide humanitarian assistance to
the affected populations and to help countries provide
shelter to refugees.
However, the crackdown must also take place
in our own countries. We cannot allow citizens from
Europe, Africa or Asia to feed ISIL’s ranks. Foreign
fighters also represent a dangerous threat back home.
In Brussels, my own hometown, at the Jewish Museum,
three innocent people were murdered earlier this year
by a returning jihadist. Plots are being foiled.
We must renew our efforts to prevent radicalization
and extremism in our cities. We must cooperate better
in sharing intelligence, police and judiciary information
to track down terrorists. In that context, the European
Union is accelerating work on its Passenger Name
Record. It is about detecting and disrupting suspicious
14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

travel. Foreign terrorist fighters will be investigated,
prosecuted and convicted.
The European Union welcomes today’s resolution
2178 (2014), which calls on United Nations States
Members to make it a criminal offence to travel abroad
for terrorist purposes.
We know this will be a major endeavour. The
strategic defeat of ISIL requires determination, longterm engagement and unity from all of us. The European
Union and its member States are ready to play their part.

S/PV.7272

double standards and growing inequality. We must take
on board the lessons of our previous interventions in
various areas around the world. We must ask ourselves
how have we helped populations after our military
interventions, especially those populations who have
lived through previous interventions that were extremely
violent. Did we deploy the necessary measures to foster
their prosperity, education and balanced peace?

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Elio di Rupo, Prime Minister of the
Kingdom of Belgium.

The fight against terrorism is also a fight for
values. It is a fight that concerns the entire international
community. We therefore welcome, and I welcome on
behalf of my country, the resolution adopted today in
the Council (resolution 2178 (2014)), which we fully
support and which we joined in sponsoring.

Mr. Di Rupo (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank President Obama and all
the members of the Security Council.

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs for the Republic of Serbia.

My country, Belgium, grasped very early on the
scope of the threat posed by the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters and the need to have a collective
response to it. That is why my Government began to
enhance exchanges among the countries most concerned
in the European Union and made contact with countries
outside of Europe, in particular in the Middle East, on
this issue.

Mr. Dačić (Serbia): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council to
discuss the threat to international peace and security
posed by foreign terrorist fighters, which is an issue of
the utmost regional and global importance. In addition,
I would like to express my special appreciation to
President Obama for presiding over the Council’s
business earlier today and for providing thrust and
gravitas to the message that we aim to send.

In Belgium itself, specific preventive measures were
taken, as were measures to pursue those responsible for
the threat. The attack against the Jewish Museum in
Brussels, as just mentioned by Mr. Van Rompuy, which
took place 24 May and during the course of which four
people were brazenly killed in cold blood, strengthened
our resolve.
The tools to fight the scourge of radicalism exist. We
must make full use of our national intelligence services,
Europol, INTERPOL, the Schengen instruments and
the bodies and entities of the United Nations. Some
priorities include punishing — without faltering — acts
of terrorism, those who enable terrorism in any way
and those who spread hate; protecting our populations
and those who could be seduced or have been seduced
by these murderous ideologies and who can be cured
of it; ensuring those who cannot or will not be cured
can cause no harm; and, finally, entrenching and
strengthening our democratic values, the rule of law,
tolerance and non-discrimination.
Along with decisively suppressing any acts of
terrorism, we must also attack some of the root causes
of extremism: instances of oppression, injustice,

Serbia, one of the sponsors of resolution 2178
(2014), welcomes the adoption of this resolution on
foreign terrorist fighters, which, we are convinced,
will go a long way in addressing terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations as the most serious threat to
international peace and security. We believe that the
resolution and our discussion today will strengthen
cooperation among all Member States in the fight
against terrorism and extremism.
Terrorist threats have intensified in the past decade,
and extremist activities of any kind and in any place
find fertile soil in unstable political situations and a
lack of socioeconomic opportunities. The problem of
terrorism is complex and calls for the coordination
of activities and the allocation of equal attention to
all its aspects, both at the national and international
levels. The root causes of terrorism are manifold and
widespread. They include religious fanaticism; social
exclusion, especially of ethnic and religious minorities;
uneven access to education and the lack of job and
economic opportunities.

14-5473529/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The fight against terrorism will be hard and long,
and military measures alone will not be sufficient.
A multidimensional approach is needed, and we,
therefore, welcome the adoption of the resolution today.
Banning the recruitment and transport of potential
foreign fighters by national laws, controlling money
and arms flows and engaging local communities in
addressing extremism are just some of the multifaceted
measures that the resolution provides for.
Serbia, too, has faced the problem of foreign
fighters. At the end of the 1990s, extremist fighters
joined secessionists in the southern Serbian province
of Kosovo. Today, radical preachers, in increasing
numbers, preach faith in the Raška region in southwestern Serbia and in Kosovo in religious centres
financed from abroad and recruit young people to fight
alleged religious wars. Persistent efforts are being
made by my country to confront the threat of terrorism.
Money laundering and the financing of terrorism have
long been sanctioned, and the criminal code is now
being amended to provide for harsh prison punishment
of foreign fighters, their recruiters and financiers.
In conclusion, let me also reiterate the readiness of
my country to step up cooperation with all countries
in the region and beyond and coordinate our activities
accordingly.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Sartaj Aziz, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Adviser to the Prime Minister on National
Security and Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan.
Mr. Aziz (Pakistan): Allow me to begin by
thanking the President for taking the laudable initiative
to convene and preside over this important meeting of
the Security Council. This Council meeting sharply
focuses attention on foreign terrorist fighters, an
emergent and dangerous dimension of terrorism. We
fully support resolution 2178 (2014), which has been
adopted today. The Council decisions are timely for
mobilizing international political will, as the threat by
foreign terrorist fighters multiplies rapidly.
Terrorism is the scourge of humankind. We
condemn it in all its forms and manifestations. The
international community’s fight against terrorism is
critical for the maintenance of world peace and security.
This is not a war of one or two nations or one or two
regions; it stretches across the globe. We all realize that

30/43

24/09/2014

the war has become much more complex and dynamic.
The enemy is ubiquitous and lethal.
Over the past several years, Pakistan has paid
a heavy price in blood and resources in the war
against terrorism. More than 50,000 people, including
thousands of our security forces, have become victims
of terrorism. Our resolve to fight terrorism is strong.
Right now, as I speak, we are conducting the fierce
Operation Zarb-e-Azb in North Waziristan of our tribal
areas to take out terrorists and block the sources of their
funding. We know from experience that to advance
their nefarious agendas terrorist groups devises
sophisticate strategies, use modern technologies and
extract weaknesses in governing infrastructure. To
oppose this hydra-headed monster, our responses
must be quick, comprehensive and commensurate. At
the same time, our actions need to be compliant with
international humanitarian law and our cooperation
rooted in the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
Pakistan believes that foreign terrorist fighters
have no stake in the peace and stability of the region
they operate in. They thrive on lawlessness and resist
every effort towards peace and reconciliation. Often
they become the core around which radical and violent
extremism flourishes. The international community
needs to counter this threat in a comprehensive and
effective manner, including by resolving the conflicts
that breed them. The creation and existence of
foreign terrorist fighters is as much a function of the
environment as it is of security. As we fight them, we
should also focus on a preventive approach to stem their
growth.
It is evident that collective will and collaborative
efforts are required to counter the threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters. All States need to take
stringent counter measures at national levels. At
the same time, collaborative measures are essential
because of the transnational nature of this threat. In this
context, the sharing of information and expertise and
building the relevant capacities of States upon request
are, therefore, very important.
Pakistan, as always, is ready to contribute to the
international efforts to counter the threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters. We also look forward to a
broader discourse and engagement with a view to refine
our approaches to deal with this transregional threat.

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Algeria.
Mr. Lamamra (Algeria): I would like to express
my deep appreciation to President Obama and to you,
Madam President, personally for the initiative to hold a
summit meeting of the Security Council, with an open
debate, on the crucial issue of foreign terrorist fighters.
This phenomenon is not new to Algeria. Having
harshly endured and steadfastly confronted it in the
1990s, we have pioneered in the call for an international
comprehensive approach to tackle terrorism. We
rightfully foresaw the harm and dire consequences that
the unleashed complacent policies would eventually
cause to all societies. This phenomenon knows no
boundary, country or religion. It is a kind of world
business whose stocks are always faster and easier to
trade between criminals, whose overgrowing profit is
counted in bloodshed, insecurity and the global threat
it poses.
We take the floor at a time when my country has
just welcomed the safe return of two of our diplomats,
who were kept in harsh captivity for nearly three years
after being kidnapped in Gao, Mali, but also at a time of
sadness and mourning after the murder and death of two
others, who we will never forget. This very morning we
have received the news of the cowardly assassination
in Algeria of a French national, Pierre Hervé Gourdel.
We express our deep condolences and sympathy to the
family and friends of the victim, as well as to the French
Government. We assure them all that we will spare no
effort in making sure that the perpetrators are brought
to justice. Algeria will never, ever, bend to terrorism
and justice will be done. Our commitment to fight this
scourge will grow even stronger.
We could not but welcome today’s meeting, and
we have co-sponsored resolution 2178 (2014), which
sets the political, legal and operational aspects of
the appropriate international response to terrorism.
Algeria believes, nevertheless, that it would be a
dreadful mistake to consider that the job is done with
the adoption of today’s important resolution and the
new obligations that come with it. President Bouteflika
has always been of the view that fighting and defeating
terrorism means holding firm to a long-haul, long-term
and staunch approach in implementing a multifaceted
effective strategy.
We should not be caught unaware. The phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters is a serious issue to be

S/PV.7272

specifically addressed, but it remains merely one aspect
of terrorism or, if I might say, one of the tentacles of
terrorism. Addressing terrorism means bearing in mind
all the other tentacles of this behemoth phenomenon,
by setting up comprehensive strategies to address it at
the local, regional and multilateral levels. It certainly
means looking at all the measures that can be taken to
curb terrorism — stemming recruitment; disrupting its
means of financial support, including kidnapping for
ransom; countering violent extremism and preventing
radicalization — and never losing sight of the necessity
of conflict prevention and conflict resolution. In
that regard, the conflict in the Middle East will
definitely remain a persistent disruption of the world’s
tranquillity if the international community does not
address generally the questions of illegal occupation,
continuous and violent injustice, denial of freedom and
the right to self-determination that constantly feed stiff
resentment.
Let us be very clear. Algeria condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, and we are actively
engaged in the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. In addition, we are a committed
participant in the Global Counterterrorism Forum.
We strongly believe, likewise, that our multifaceted
response must always be respectful of human rights and
international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
Resolution 2178 (2014) clearly has more weight
than what appears on its face because it was adopted
by unanimity. Because it comes at a very challenging
moment, it gives the right signal and draws us towards
a more action-oriented effort involving all Member
States and all regional organizations.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Senegal.
Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): We would
first of all like to welcome President Obama’s initiative
in organizing this high-level open debate on terrorism.
Senegal is a sponsor of resolution 2178 (2014), just
adopted. We would like to take this opportunity to
firmly condemn the cowardly murder of French citizen
Hervé Gourdel and express our deepest condolences
to the people and the Government of France and to
Mr. Gourdel’s family.
During the Fourth Review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy held last June, we

14-5473531/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

expressed our deep concern about the recruitment
in Syria of skilled foreign fighters by terrorist
organizations, including Al-Qaida and its affiliates.
That phenomenon continues to grow and is a source
of major worry for the international community. In
that regard, I commend the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre’s initiative to implement a project
to improve the understanding of the phenomenon and
develop best practices for putting an end to it. Indeed,
the return of foreign fighters to their countries of origin
is not without consequences. The implementation by
the international community of an appropriate and
efficient strategy is imperative to ending this new
threat to global security.
Despite our efforts, terrorism continues to rage in
new and more sophisticated forms, particularly in the
Sahel and West Africa, where the situation is beyond
disturbing, where Boko Haram and various concealed
and clandestine networks are operating. The world’s
political evolution, the development of new information
and communication technologies as well as the
existence of new, more complex and multidimensional
conflicts have encouraged terrorist movements to
refine their methods of action. To that may be added
their often erroneous interpretation of religion and an
abusive use of religious vocabulary. Furthermore, the
increase in hostage-taking by terrorist groups in order
to obtain funds and political concessions is worthy of
our full attention. These kidnappings for the purpose of
extorting funds to finance terrorism must be dealt with
impartially, objectively, technically and apolitically.
Combating all these threats undoubtedly requires
concerted actions that the United Nations has the
responsibility to coordinate, harmonize and facilitate. It
is a question of encouraging initiatives and programmes
that favour dialogue, tolerance and understanding
among civilizations, cultures, peoples and religions.
It is also a question of promoting mutual respect and
prevention of defamation of religion, religious values,
beliefs and cultures.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Senegal’s
staunch determination and unwavering commitment to
collaborating with the United Nations and all concerned
actors in the fight against this pernicious threat to
international peace and security. On behalf of Senegal,
I welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2178
(2014), which is a decisive step on the path towards
finding a lasting solution to the phenomenon and which
at the same time embodies the political will to bring a
collective response to the terrorist threat.
32/43

24/09/2014

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Edgars Rinkēvičs, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Latvia.
Mr. Rinkēvičs (Latvia): The topic of foreign
terrorist fighters is a matter of serious concern for
the international community in its entirety, and it is
very timely that the Security Council is addressing it.
Undoubtedly, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) poses a serious threat not only to the people of
Iraq and Syria but also to the international community
as a whole.
As a responsible member of the international
community, Latvia is willing and ready to contribute to
the fight against terrorism. We have joined the efforts
of the international community in the fight against
terrorism and have expressed the strongest support for
the United States of America’s coordinated actions in
countering the threat posed by ISIL.
Foreign fighters are not a new phenomenon.
Thousands of people from countries outside the region
are fighting and committing terrorist attacks in Iraq and
Syria. Foreign fighters participate in many conflicts
all over the world, be it in Afghanistan, Somalia or
Ukraine. It is an increasing challenge to deal with these
fighters moving from one conflict area to another, thus
becoming professional fighters. There is a high risk
that they can use their new experience wherever they
go. There is no place for glorifying these mercenaries.
It is imperative to understand that these people are not
fighting for peace; they are creating war and feeding
conflict. They should be prevented from doing so by
the international community.
The United Nations has a very important role to
play in streamlining international efforts. In that
context, we strongly welcome the resolution on foreign
terrorist fighters that was adopted by the Security
Council today (resolution 2178 (2014). States Members
of the United Nations should take concerted action to
address the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, as
the resolution urges.
We recognize this issue as an emerging threat to our
national security as well. Therefore, Latvia is actively
working to ensure that all the necessary measures are
taken domestically to prevent the recruitment of foreign
fighters on our territory and discourage residents of
Latvia from illegal involvement in military conflicts
abroad or in providing any support to terrorists wherever
they are. That is something that certainly requires our

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

united, firm action, and I applaud the joint action of the
Security Council in addressing the issue.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Archbishop Pietro Parolin, Secretary of
State of the Holy See.
Archbishop Parolin (Holy See): My delegation
commends the United States of America for convening
this timely Security Council open debate on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts.
Today’s debate comes at a time when we face the
dehumanizing impact of terrorism, fuelled by violent
extremism. The ongoing, and in some regions escalating,
use of terror is a reminder that this challenge requires
a shared commitment from all nations and people of
goodwill. Indeed, terrorism represents a fundamental
threat to our common humanity.
This institution was founded in the wake of an era
in which a similar annihilistic view of human dignity
sought to divide and destroy our world. Today, as
then, nations must come together in order to fulfil our
primary responsibility to protect people threatened by
violence and direct assault on their human dignity.
Pope John Paul II reminded us in the wake of the
tragic events of 11 September 2001 that the right to
defend countries and peoples from acts of terrorism
does not provide license to meet violence with violence,
but rather must be exercised with respect for moral and
legal limits in the choice of ends and means. The guilty
must be correctly identified, since criminal culpability
is always personal and cannot be extended to the
nation, ethnic group or religion to which the terrorists
may belong.
International cooperation must also address the
root causes of international terrorism. In fact, the
present terrorist challenge has a strong sociocultural
component. Young people travelling abroad to join the
ranks of terrorist organizations often come from poor
immigrant families, disillusioned by what they feel is a
situation of exclusion and by the lack of integration and
values in certain societies. Together with the legal tools
and resources to prevent citizens from becoming foreign
terrorist fighters, Governments should engage with
civil society to address the problems of communities
most at risk of radicalization and recruitment and to
achieve their satisfactory social integration.
The Holy See, which is a sovereign international
subject that also represents a world faith community,

S/PV.7272

affirms that people of faith have a grave responsibility
to condemn those who seek to detach faith from reason
and instrumentalize faith as a justification for violence.
As Pope Francis reiterated during his visit to Albania
last Sunday,
“Let no one consider themselves to be the
armour of God while planning and carrying out
acts of violence and oppression. May no one use
religion as a pretext for actions against human
dignity and against the fundamental rights of every
man and woman, above all, the right to life and the
right of everyone to religious freedom”.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Mogens Jensen, Minister of Trade and
Development of Denmark.
Mr. Jensen (Denmark): The many discussions in
New York and around the world this week about the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
terrorist organizations have served to remind us
once again that the threat from terrorism and violent
extremism is acute and real.
Violent extremism and terrorism are a threat not
only to the innocent civilians of Abuja, Mosul or
Aleppo. Relative to our country’s size, a very large
number of foreign fighters from my country have left to
join forces with extremist groups in the Syrian theatre.
To Denmark, as to many other European countries, the
phenomenon of foreign fighters is not an abstract one;
it constitutes a serious security concern.
The challenges we are facing include providing
assistance to concerned parents in an effort to prevent
young people from travelling to war zones, but also to
counter the threat from those who went and are coming
back. Some of these young men and women will come
back battle-hardened, strongly indoctrinated and with
newly forged ties with extremist groups — groups with
the clearly defined goal of harming our societies and
our citizens as much as they can.
If the international community is to counter this
threat effectively, we need to be guided by our respect
for the rule of law, and we need to apply a firm and
truly holistic and integrated approach building on three
pillars.
First, we all have a responsibility to protect the
suffering civilian population in the region against the
ongoing atrocities committed by ISIL. In order to do
this effectively, we must be ready to apply immediate
measures, including military operations.

14-5473533/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Secondly, a broader preventive strategy is needed
to reduce vulnerabilities to radicalization and to stem
the flow of recruits and financial means to extremist
groups.
Finally, this threat is, as we well know, transnational
in character, hence our response also needs to build on
strengthened international cooperation, coordination
and the sharing of lessons learned.
Denmark wholeheartedly supports resolution 2178
(2014), just adopted, which we, too, co-sponsored. We
warmly thank President Obama and Secretary Kerry for
their leadership on this resolution and for spearheading
an international coalition against ISIL and for an
inclusive Iraqi Government.
So far Denmark has provided immediate support to
the international response in the military area, with 130
transport aircraft; significant humanitarian assistance
to mitigate the extraordinary humanitarian crisis
caused by the brutal acts of ISIL; and firm diplomatic
support for the formation of the international coalition
against ISIL.
My Government only last Friday launched a new
Danish national action plan to prevent violent extremism.
It contains a wide range of initiatives to be implemented
over the coming years. This builds on four interlinked
responses to the threat: strengthening the capacities of
local authorities to deal with radicalization; mitigating
online radicalization and recruitment; intensifying
international cooperation, including capacity-building
assistance; and, lastly, working to mobilize civil society.
However, as none of us can solve this problem on
our own, it is imperative to link national initiatives and
expertise with internal efforts. We consider the Global
Counterterrorism Forum, established by the United
States and Turkey three years ago, an obvious platform
for building alliances across regions and continents to
further the implementation of the resolution.
Violent extremism has an impact on the security of
us all, in Copenhagen, in Baghdad and in New York,
but it also hampers development and economic growth
globally. It is therefore very important for us that the
global framework for countering the threat be firmly
anchored in the United Nations and that all Members
of the United Nations family engage actively in the
effort to build resilience and counter violent extremism
wherever we meet it.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ditmir
Bushati, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Albania.
34/43

24/09/2014

Mr. Bushati (Albania): Let me thank you, Madam
President, for calling this timely meeting on this
particularly complex issue. We highly appreciate
the leadership the United States has been showing,
including in particular during its Security Council
presidency, on the issue of countering terrorism and the
rise of foreign terrorist fighters.
Last Sunday, in his first visit to a European country,
Pope Francis chose Albania, a secular country where
Muslims and Christians are living and prospering
together. As Pope Francis exhorted during his visit:
“May no one use religion as a pretext for actions
against human dignity and against the fundamental
rights of every man and woman”.
Contrary to these fundamental values, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has clearly shown
what it is capable of. ISIL must be defeated and its
extremist ideology, which promotes and justifies
terrorism, and ruthless methods must be countered.
In this context, we highly appreciate President
Obama’s remarks and the determination of the United
States to degrade and, ultimately, defeat ISIL. As ISIL
actively tries to recruit citizens everywhere to join its
terrorist cause, the phenomenon of foreign fighters is
now of particular concern. Indeed, foreign fighters pose
a serious threat throughout the whole trajectory of their
journey, to the transit States and the destination States.
But the threat is also great for the States of origin, as
the return of foreign fighters to their countries of origin
carries potential risks, particularly where security
structures are insufficient, where political stability is
fragile, where social cohesion is yet unformed or where
there is a complex religious and ethnic fabric, as is the
case in the Balkans.
The international effort to counter ISIL has been
picking up momentum and contributors. Albania is
proud to have been one of the first countries to respond
to this challenge. But it has now become clear that it is
a challenge that will require our long-term engagement
in different ways, whether through military support to
Iraq or by stopping the flow of foreign fighters, and
all of that without forgetting the social, economic and
humanitarian dimensions of the crises in Iraq and Syria.
We condemn unequivocally and in the strongest
terms every terrorist act committed by terrorist groups
and organizations everywhere. No cause can justify
terror; no logic can accept the death of innocent people.

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In that regard, Albania has been at the forefront of
international efforts in the Western Balkans to stop
the flow of fighters. My country has taken concrete
legislative, administrative and security measures,
passing specific laws that punish participation in
conflicts and wars in other countries.
But let us not forget that the use of force is hardly
the only way to defeat and put an end to terrorism and
to discourage the dark appeal of foreign fighters. If we
are serious about eradicating this phenomenon, we must
also think in social and economic terms about what we
can offer marginalized groups within these societies.
That will give us a greater chance of success in
countering incitement to commit terrorist acts not only
through the force of the rule of law, but also by doing
more to achieve the social inclusion of the marginalized
through education, solidarity and support.
Today’s resolution 2178 (2014), of which my
country is proud to be a sponsor, underlines the
importance of cooperation between all Member States
in addressing the threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters. My country stands ready to further contribute
to international efforts to strengthen peace, stability
and cooperation among nations.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Urmas Paet, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Estonia.
Mr. Paet (Estonia): I would like to thank the
United States presidency and President Obama for
their initiative in convening this meeting to address
terrorism’s threat to international peace and security,
with particular focus on foreign terrorist fighters.
Like many nations, Estonia is gravely concerned about
the recent wave of aggressive terrorism and violent
extremism, which crosses State boundaries and poses
a threat to countries far from conflict zones. Today’s
discussion at the highest political level here in the
Security Council is therefore most timely.
We should agree on further ways and means of
cooperating in fighting the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters. The appalling wave of violence we
are seeing from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and the Nusra Front is being supported by an
influx of radicalized foreign fighters. They pose a
real threat, not only where they are fighting but also
after they return home to their countries of origin. The
problem’s repercussions are also visible in the Sahel
region. Whatever its form or manifestation, no act of
terrorism, regardless of its motivation, can be justified.

S/PV.7272

Terrorism demands a global response. Only
intensive, close and well-coordinated cooperation
between nations and international organizations can
produce results. There are many different ways to
fight it. Direct action must be taken against terrorists’
safe havens, and it can include military strikes, as the
recent actions against ISIL have shown. Fighters must
be prevented from travelling to and from such havens.
Globally, we must block the financing of terrorism and
close all their channels of support. We must identify
and sanction individuals and groups who sponsor
terrorism or facilitate and finance the recruitment of
foreign fighters.
Another important path to reducing the threat
of terrorism is to address the conditions conducive
to its spread. That can range from strengthening
legal systems to reducing poverty and tackling the
development-security nexus. We can combat terrorism
more effectively by approaching it horizontally, as a
cross-cutting issue. We commend the manner in which
United Nations and European Union counter-terrorism
strategies are advancing this approach.
The outcome of our discussion today should enable
Member States to address this growing threat within the
context of respect for international law and human rights.
Estonia, as one of the sponsors of today’s resolution
2178 (2014) on foreign terrorist fighters, therefore
fully supports its adoption and swift implementation.
It is crucial that all nations and relevant international
organizations provide the resources and mechanisms
needed to implement these measures. Estonia is fully
committed to that effort. We must tackle terrorism and
violent extremism as quickly as we can and wherever it
emerges in order to prevent it spreading further.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Yerzhan Ashikbayev, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Ashikbayev (Kazakhstan): I would like to
begin by reiterating Kazakhstan’s firm condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We
share the view that this heinous and inhuman evil must
be rooted out and eliminated through our decisive and
collective action.
Kazakhstan is proud to be a sponsor of today’s
resolution on foreign terrorist fighters (2178 (2014))
because we believe the fight against international
terrorism demands a long-term, comprehensive
approach. It is an approach that must be built on

14-5473535/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

greater regional and global cooperation, with the active
participation of all United Nations Member States and
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Terrorism has no national or
ethnic identity, citizenship or religion. It poses a threat
to all nations, rich and poor. And that threat, which
ignores borders, is growing rapidly. It can be tackled
successfully only if we combine our efforts and broaden
our multifaceted cooperation to counteract it. Member
States must unite and work together to implement the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
adjust their national legislation accordingly.
We believe that the main focus and priorities
of counter-terrorism efforts should be as follows.
First, we should further develop universal anti-terror
legal instruments and other mechanisms. Secondly,
we should build our national and international
anti-terrorism capacities and expand networks and
mechanisms that enable us to exchange best practices.
Thirdly, we should develop an international database
of terrorist organizations and individuals. Fourthly, we
should strengthen our commitment to fighting moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism and improve
our tools for doing so. Fifthly, we should increase our
efforts to prevent terrorists from gaining access to
weapons of mass destruction, arms, nuclear and other
hazardous materials, and travel documents.
Lastly, all Member States and other stakeholders
should encourage the integration of migrants into
their new societies, reduce their social and economic
marginalization and increase dialogue between ethnic
groups, religious denominations and cultures in order
to reduce the risk of radicalization. Kazakhstan, where
more than 130 ethnic groups and representatives of
17 religious denominations live in peace, is committed
to promoting the ideals and values of inter-ethnic and
interfaith dialogue in order to attain peace and security.
We regularly host the Congress of Leaders of World
and Traditional Religions in order to help spiritual
leaders use their authority and wisdom to guide their
congregations towards shared peace. This final point is
vital if we are to reduce the opportunities and conditions
conducive to terrorism and tackle the use of the rhetoric
of social injustice and religious extremism in recruiting
foreign terrorist fighters and mercenaries.
In closing, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan’s
strong commitment to working with all partners in our
region and in the international community to address
the challenge of international terrorism.

36/43

24/09/2014

The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Albert Chua, Second Permanent Secretary of the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Singapore.
Mr. Chua (Singapore): Foreign terrorist fighters
are a clear threat to international peace and security.
An estimated 12,000 foreigners from over 70 countries
have participated in the conflicts in Iraq and Syria. That
is the largest mobilization of foreign militants since the
Soviet-Afghan War in the 1980s.
It is not just the number of foreign fighters that has
been commanding attention, but the horrific tactics
used by terrorist organizations like the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front.
Their violent campaigns against minority groups in
northern Iraq and Syria, the brutal murders of Muslims
and non-Muslims, the abduction of innocent civilians
and the widespread abuse of human rights constitute
crimes against humanity. Singapore condemns in the
strongest possible terms the actions of ISIL and other
terrorist groups. We extend our deepest condolences to
all who have suffered or who have lost loved ones.
Singapore is not immune to the threat of terrorism
and radical ideologies. There are foreign fighters
in Syria who have traveled from South-East Asia.
The Singapore Government knows of a handful of
Singaporeans who have gone to Syria to take part in the
conflict. Other Singaporeans expressed interest to join
the fighting in Syria but were stopped before they were
able to travel.
Like many countries, Singapore is gravely
concerned about the potential threat posed by returning
terrorist fighters. The Soviet-Afghan war drew in
thousands of foreign fighters, led to the creation of
Al-Qaida and inspired the creation of other terrorist
groups. Al-Qaida’s key regional affiliate in South-East
Asia, Jemaah Islamiyah (JI), has been responsible for
several large-scale terrorist attacks, such as the Bali
bombings in 2002. In December 2001, the Singapore
Government foiled a plot by JI members to attack
targets in Singapore, including a number of diplomatic
missions. Fortunately, they were stopped before they
could do harm.
Terrorist groups such as ISIL and the Al-Nusra
Front are a threat to the entire world. The international
community must counter that growing global threat
with a comprehensive strategy that addresses not just
the military but also the ideological aspects of the
conflict. We must counter the radical ideology used

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7272

to recruit foreign terrorist fighters, which fuels their
violent extremist agenda. The Singapore Government
has supported and worked with our Muslim religious
leaders, community groups and individuals to
rehabilitate terrorist detainees and to delegitimize
radical ideologies.

We recognize that the international community must
play its part in confronting the threat posed by such
fighters and by those whose assistance supports them.
Today’s resolution and debate are therefore timely but,
as President Obama has reminded us, resolutions and
rhetoric are not enough.

Singapore welcomes the strong leadership of the
United States on this issue, in particular the formation
of an international coalition to combat the ISIL threat.
Singapore also welcomes the Jeddah Communiqué
issues by Arab countries of the region to stand united
against ISIL. Both will be critical in cutting off
financial and material support for ISIL and preventing
the movement of foreign terrorist fighters, as well as in
the ideological battle.

The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is
not new. It is a threat that has featured in the Council’s
counter-terrorism discussions for more than a decade.
However, information technologies now present
terrorist networks with opportunities to radicalize and
recruit foreign fighters and to finance and facilitate
their movement and activities on a scale that makes the
threat truly formidable.

Singapore firmly supports all international and
regional cooperation to combat terrorism, including the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and all Security Council resolutions
related to counter-terrorism. We welcomed the
adoption of resolution 2170 (2014) on 15 August, which
condemned the terrorist acts and violent extremist
ideology of ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front and urged all
United Nations Members to take appropriate measures
to combat terrorism. Resolution 2178 (2014) on foreign
terrorist fighters, adopted by the Council today, is an
important step in the global effort to combat terrorism,
and Singapore was pleased to co-sponsor it. We stand
ready to play our part in combatting the threat of global
terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
commends the United States for organizing today’s
meeting and thanks the many leaders from around
the world who have come to give their support to
this important initiative. We also extend our deep
condolences to the Government of France for the
horrific execution this morning in Algeria.
New Zealand strongly condemns the activities of
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
violent extremist groups in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere.
We recognize that the international community must
make a determined and cohesive response to those
horrific acts. That is why we co-sponsored resolution
2178 (2014), which was adopted earlier today. Foreign
terrorist fighters have been directly involved in some
of the worst atrocities committed by those groups.

While national and regional circumstances vary, no
country is immune to the threat. A small number of New
Zealand nationals are known to have traveled to Syria
to fight with extremist groups, and we are conscious of
the threat that foreign terrorist fighters can pose to many
of our neighbours in the Asia-Pacific, including our
nearest neighbour, Australia. New Zealand recognizes
the need for a comprehensive approach to tackling
that threat. Domestically, we are looking to tackle
the drivers of radicalization and violent extremism by
engaging communities in building resilience, as well
as taking preventive security and law enforcement
measures such as canceling passports. We are also
working with our partners in South-East Asia and the
Pacific to build their capacity to counter terrorism and
violent extremism and to help them ensure that they do
not become either a target or a source of international
terrorism.
New Zealand welcomes the calls in today’s
resolution for enhanced efforts by the United
Nations counter-terrorism machinery to support such
capacity-building and to support the work of other
relevant regional and international forums to promote
cooperation in that area.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Gómez-Acebo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like at the outset to thank the United States
for the opportunity to participate in this timely and
necessary meeting.
Contemporary terrorism, including in its jihadist
form, from which Spain has long and painfully suffered,
is a multifaceted and mutable phenomenon. However, it
has one defining characteristic — it is a crime against

14-5473537/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

humanity, rooted in the fanatical and absolute denial
of the very idea of human rights. The threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters illustrates the changing nature
of terrorism. It is not a completely new phenomenon,
but its current features have intensified, requiring us
to come up with urgent decisions and solutions that are
also well considered and effective yet that consistently
maintain respect for human rights.
Spain is taking up the fight against the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters in solidarity with the
countries most acutely affected, but also because Spain
itself is directly affected by the problem. My country
is experiencing this problem most immediately as a
country of origin. We have already identified at least
50 individuals who have exited our borders in order
to join terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq. We are also
aware that human trafficking networks may try to use
our territory along their routes in order to transport
foreign terrorist fighters, which would make our
country a transit point. In addition, Spain is exposed to
the security threat posed by returning terrorist fighters.
For all those reasons, we fully identify with and have
actively participated in the efforts of the international
community to address this serious problem.
First of all, Spain has actively focused on preventive
approaches aimed at preventing the radicalization that
can lead to terrorist violence, promoting alternatives
based on education and dialogue. Spain has been applying
that approach for several years. It is at the heart of the
Alliance of Civilizations promoted by Spain, which is
now an integral part of United Nations mechanisms.
The same approach underlies other regional measures
and programmes we have encouraged, such as the
Mediation in the Mediterranean initiative.
Where we have been unable to prevent radicalization
and terrorist recruitment, we have been forced take
other measures to prevent the movements of terrorist
fighters. In that regard, we are preparing to modify
our legal statutes so that the movement of individuals
seeking to leave Spain to join terrorist groups in a third
country would be punishable as a crime under our penal
code. That is a measure that is in line with those taken
by other countries and is recommended by the codes
of best practices we are putting in place. Moreover,
Spain aims to foster information exchanges to prevent
the relocation of foreign terrorist fighters, as we have
begun to do with some neighbouring countries, as part
of a cooperation effort that has already yielded very
positive results.

38/43

24/09/2014

Spain has always supported international
multilateral cooperation to face the great challenges
of our times, among the terrorist threat. For that
reason, my country was one of the proponents of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee and has
supported the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted in 2006.
Against that backdrop, Spain commends President
Obama for his initiative to convene this high-level
Security Council meeting. We welcome the important
resolution 2178 (2014), adopted unanimously by the
Council. We joined as a sponsor of the resolution,
and we are ready to participate with the greatest
degree of commitment in its immediate and effective
implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): On behalf of the His Highness Sheikh Khalifa
Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the United Arab Emirates, I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for holding this important meeting
and for inviting representatives of Member States
to participate in the debate, at which the Council
adopted resolution 2178 (2014), on the flow of foreign
fighters from around the world to join foreign terrorist
organizations.
The acts of terrorists organizations, which have
recently seized large numbers of cities and villages and
directly engaged in fuelling conflicts and committing
grave violations against innocent people, including
assaults, kidnappings, displacements and mass murders,
serve to confirm our belief that there is a common
threat facing all Member States that requires a united
effort to take strong and immediate measures.
The threat we face today has been exacerbated
recently by the lack of deterrent actions in the past. Two
decades ago, we faced the threat of Al-Qaida and other
terrorist organizations whose acts were multiplying
across the Arabian Peninsula and beyond. Today we
continue to suffer from the same threats, and even more
serious ones, due to the emergence of various forms of
violence that are not limited to committing murder and
kidnapping and causing displacement, they also include
sexual violence against women as a prime target, which
is always overlooked during talk about the crimes
committed by those organizations.

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The acts committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) in both Iraq and Syria are the
largest proof of that and have become a source of
concern for the United Arab Emirates. Therefore, we
appeal to the international community to continue its
efforts to eliminate a principal element contributing to
terrorism — the recruitment of foreign fighters — and to
ensure that the effort becomes part of a comprehensive
strategy aimed at eliminating other elements that fuel
terrorism.
The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns the
recruitment of foreign fighters and related financing
activities. We consider such operations one of the most
dangerous elements that contribute to international
terrorism. We also emphasize that the dangerous
proportions of the issue are not limited to areas of
conflict, but also include safe areas from which those
fighters are recruited. The United Arab Emirates
therefore welcomes the resolution adopted today
and regards it as an important and crucial document.
Addressing this threat cannot be done through
security and military measures alone. It also requires
the international community to pursue a unified,
comprehensive strategy that prevents the recruitment
of terrorist elements through the following strategies.
First, we must strengthen international cooperation
at all levels, particularly in exchanging information on
recruitment campaigns for young foreign fighters and
on their movements. It is also important to establish
clear and specific criteria for regulating that process.
Secondly, it is important to tighten control over
social networks, which are used in attracting a larger
number of deluded youths to achieve the vicious goals
under religious slogans, which have no connection with
any divine faith. The United Arab Emirates is currently
conducting a study on the mechanisms for preventing
terrorist organizations from using social networks in
recruitment.
Thirdly, we must tighten national legislation and
laws to ensure the criminalization, prosecution and
punishment of the people involved. In that context, I
would like to point out that the United Arab Emirates
recently adopted a strict federal law to punish those
found guilty of inciting terrorism or who have carried
out terrorist acts.
Fourthly, we need to take all the necessary steps
to combat acts of violent extremism, including by
promoting educational and rehabilitation programmes

S/PV.7272

for unemployed youths to shield them from incitement
and recruitment by terrorist campaigns. On our part,
the United Arab Emirates is committed to combating
violent extremism and its related beliefs and terrorist
acts and coordinates through its membership in the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum with the other
partners to ensure that their territories are not used for
disseminating terrorist acts and other related crimes. By
hosting the Hedayah Centre, the United Arab Emirates
is also contributing to the international community in
the area of sharing best practices for countering violent
extremism in all its forms. At the same time, we will
work on strengthening preventive policies through the
establishment of centres for the rehabilitation of people
affected by extremist and terrorist ideologies.
Finally, we commend the efforts of the Council in
adopting previous resolutions pertaining to the subject
within a short period, most recently in resolution 2170
(2014), which condemns the recruitment of foreign
fighters by ISIL and the Nusra Front in Iraq and Syria.
That shows that the Security Council has a clear
strategy on fighting terrorism. We also hope that the
serious efforts of the Council will include allowing
Member States to participate in its discussions in order
to ensure that our efforts for combating terrorism are
effectively coordinated.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank you, Madam President, for the
initiative to hold this important meeting. This is part of
the momentum we see at the international level and the
efforts being made by a number of parties that seek to
counter terrorism.
Syria was the first to denounce this terrorism, even
before others, after long delay, saw the danger it posed.
We have sought to address it and counter it before it
could spread. We were also the first to confront it on
the ground.
Terrorist acts by foreign fighters who fight the
wars of others, especially in Syria, are a violation of
the age-old tolerance of the Syrian people. Such acts
by terrorists run amok target infrastructure, civilians
and their means of survival, armed forces, schools,
hospitals, mosques, churches, historical monuments,
workplaces and homes. They have also attacked
diplomatic missions, humanitarian workers and
humanitarian convoys.

14-5473539/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Those crimes could not have taken place without
the support that foreign terrorist groups receive
from certain Governments that are members of our
international Organization. Those countries provide
media and diplomatic cover, training, financing and
safe haven. Airports today serve as places of reception
for such criminals, who are sent from those countries
into Syrian territory and who also come across their
borders.
In a letter from my Government dated 28 August
and addressed to the Secretary-General and to
the President of the Security Council, my country
welcomed resolution 2178 (2014), concerning the fight
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and all persons and entities linked to Al-Qaida and ISIL
operating in Iraq and Syria, while always respecting
national sovereignty and international law. We adopted
that position because that resolution was perfectly in
line with Syria’s position with regard to terrorism in all
its forms. We also pointed to our willingness to combat
terrorism through a regional or international coalition,
supported internationally, or through agreements or
bilateral cooperation. We are combating the terrorist
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and the Al-Nusra Front, as well as other terrorist groups
that the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities has not cited in its list because
of opposition from a number of countries. For example,
Islamic Front is not on that list.
Syria is firmly pursuing this war against
terrorism in all its forms, in which we have been
engaged for a number of years, and we support any
sincere international effort to combat terrorism in all
its form and in all its names. But this must be done
while respecting the lives of innocent civilians, while
respecting national sovereignty and in accordance with
international law. We affirm here that the participation
of Israel in the coalition against Daesh undermines the
credibility of the coalition, does the fact that Israel shot
down a Syrian plane that was only doing its national
duty in bombing Daesh and Al-Nusra sites. These are
groups that attacked the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force and kidnapped its personnel. Those
acts show the alliance between Israel and terrorist
organizations attached to Al-Qaida and other terrorist
groups.
We believe that the United Nations is the main forum
for bolstering efforts aimed at combating terrorism

40/43

24/09/2014

in order to ensure international peace and security.
Success in our efforts against terrorism requires that we
distance ourselves from anything that can undermine
the credibility of the role of the United Nations, such
as politicization of this struggle by finding pretexts
for committing terrorist acts and dividing terrorists
into good terrorists and bad terrorists, distinguishing
moderate terrorism from extremist terrorism. Terrorism
is terrorism. In this struggle against terrorism we cannot
conceive of a coalition that includes the countries that
are the primary supporters of terrorism and terrorists,
that provide them with refuge and money. Some
countries — Turkey, Qatar and Saudi Arabia — have
been the main ports of call for terrorists going to Iraq
and Syria.
My country reaffirms its support for resolution
2178 (2014), adopted today by the Council. We also
stress that military strikes will not achieve their goals
against terrorism unless they are carried out in respect
for international law and in coordination with the
countries concerned. Measures must be taken to get
countries that are supporting international terrorism to
stop those practices, which threaten international peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Kumar (India): We would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this open debate. It
not only allows us to focus on the multidimensional and
evolving threat from the foreign terrorist fighters; it
also underscores the need to correctly contextualize the
problem and build the right narrative in order to ensure
sustained focus to address this challenge. It must be
mentioned that while the current intensity of focus on
foreign terrorist fighters, including in resolution 2178
(2014), is rather recent, the threat itself is of some
vintage.
Foreign terrorist fighters are only one facet of
the broader challenge of international terrorism.
Nevertheless, it is one that needs to be addressed,
and the Security Council is to be commended for
establishing a new legal and normative framework for
doing so. The foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon is
a manifestation of international terrorism’s growing
threat to international peace and security. It is evidence
that the terrorism supply chain, including radicalization,
recruitment, financing, planning and communication,
is global.

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The resilience and evolution of the threat also
underscore the fact, as we have maintained and
advocated all along, that we must eschew segmented
and partial approaches. In addition to responding
to specific aspects of the foreign terrorist fighters
phenomenon globally, we need to comprehensively
address the twin challenges of the sophisticated
worldwide economic and operational infrastructure of
terrorism, and interlinkages among the global terror
networks.
Internationally, the emerging dimensions of
the foreign terrorist fighters threat also give acute
relevance to the global agenda on countering terrorism,
as universally agreed under the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy of 2006 and its review
held earlier this year. More than anything else, they
underscore the need for a comprehensive international
normative framework to combat terrorism. We feel that
the time is ripe for us to make expeditious progress
and conclude the draft Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism that we piloted in 1996. We
cannot permit ourselves the luxury of endless theoretical
debate. The price we will pay for procrastination will
be in human lives. The General Assembly needs to
come to a consensus agreement on a comprehensive
convention to outlaw international terrorism.
In addition, given various facets of the foreign
terrorist fighters challenge, including its transnational
nature, and the fact that no country is isolated
from this threat, robust international cooperation
with clear operational modalities — including for
information-sharing, tracking travel routes, recruitment
networks, communication methods and financing
channels — is an imperative that we all need to pursue
with focus and vigour. It is also necessary for States to
ensure that their territories are not used to indoctrinate,
train, equip and finance the terrorists. We also need to
work both individually and collectively to challenge
and repudiate the terrorist narrative. We condemn
terrorism and believe that no cause or grievance can
justify taking recourse to terrorism.
We in India remain concerned about the foreign
terrorist fighters phenomenon and its impact on
security of countries internationally. We believe that
it is important to address this challenge in the larger
context of terrorism and are taking such steps as are
necessary to deal with it. Just yesterday, the Global
Counterterrorism Forum adopted the Hague-Marrakech
Memorandum on Good Practices for a More Effective
Response to the Foreign Terrorist Fighters Phenomenon.

S/PV.7272

Resolution 2178 (2014), which the Security Council
has adopted today, is far-reaching. It should provide
a framework for collective and individual action to
address the menace of foreign terrorist fighters, setting
out a permanent obligation for all Member States. We
hope it will be followed up and effectively implemented.
The international community has to back its words with
deeds. The resolution is a useful addition to the legal
framework to deal with the scourge of terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting and for the
opportunity to address the Council. Malaysia welcomes
today’s meeting, which aims to tackle head-on the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
I wish to reiterate Malaysia’s strong and unequivocal
condemnation of all acts, methods and practices by
individuals and groups that employ terror to coerce
others and strike fear in their hearts. In line with our
long-standing position against terrorism, we fully
support resolution 2178 (2014), adopted by the Council
today and which Malaysia co-sponsored. We support
the resolution’s aims to strengthen and galvanize
international action to combat terrorism in general and
the scourge of foreign terrorist fighters in particular.
In the past, Malaysia grappled with terrorism on
its soil, when terrorists stoked fear and hatred among
the population as they sought to assert the claim that
communism was superior to democracy and religion.
In countering that threat to national sovereignty, peace
and stability, the Government undertook massive and
broad-based measures informed by the need to win the
hearts and minds of the people. The Government’s aim
was simple: to assure the population that they and their
children and future generations would have a decent,
secure life and a promising future and would not join
the ranks of the terrorists. In Malaysia’s experience,
such an approach has worked. My delegation believes
that the hearts-and-minds approach must be fully
considered in our common endeavour to combat the
scourge of the foreign terrorist fighters.
The growing foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon
suggests that ideologies rooted in violent extremism
have spread around the globe and are continuing to do so.
In that regard, Malaysia is of the view that the existing
mechanisms under the United Nations framework,
including the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive

14-5473541/43

S/PV.7272

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations and the relevant Security Council
Sanctions Committees, among others, could be further
strengthened with a view to effectively addressing
terrorism and violent extremism in all their aspects. In
recent months, details have emerged with regard to the
possible participation of a small number of Malaysian
nationals who have gone abroad and reportedly joined
the so-called Islamic State (IS) in the mistaken belief
that doing so would serve the cause of justice and jihad.
I wish to unequivocally stress that, for Malaysia, there
is nothing Islamic about kidnapping, raping, torturing
and murdering civilians. We do not condone or support
the involvement of Malaysian nationals who commit
terrorist acts or participate in conflicts abroad.
For its part, the Malaysian Government authorities
have designated IS as a terrorist organization and will
spare no effort in acting against its members. We have
also taken steps to review certain aspects of the legal and
policy frameworks with a view to further strengthening
counter-terrorism capabilities at the national level.
Malaysia strongly believes that terrorism needs
to be addressed in a comprehensive manner, not
necessarily through the use of force alone. Countering
terrorism effectively requires a multifaceted approach
in addressing the underlying factors that support
terrorism. On that note, Malaysia believes that there
is a serious need to look into the support mechanisms,
including the funding and supply of weapons that
sustain foreign terrorist fighters.
Malaysia takes this opportunity to reiterate its
call for greater cooperation and understanding among
cultures, religions and civilizations. Some years ago,
Malaysia called for the establishment of a global
movement of moderates in order to drown out the voices
of the extremists and their ilk.
In the light of the threat posed by the foreign
terrorist fighter phenomenon and the need for a
concerted and coordinated effort to counter it, Malaysia
believes that it is imperative now, more than ever, that
the Global Movement of Moderates be embraced by the
international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka commends
you, Madam President, for having convened this
timely debate. We have been following with deep
42/43

24/09/2014

concern the events that have been unfolding in Iraq
and neighbouring countries throughout the past two
months and the atrocities being perpetrated by the
so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and associated groups with a supply chain of foreign
fighters.
Sri Lanka deplores in the strongest terms the
terrorist acts committed by such groups. including
against unarmed civilians. The shocking acts of violence
unleashed on people and the destruction of monuments,
places of religious worship and sites of archaeological
and cultural value are deeply disturbing. While our
thoughts and sympathies go out to the many thousands
who continue to suffer as a result of the ruthless acts of
terror, we emphasize the need to take appropriate steps
to protect civilians, minorities, civilian facilities and
places of worship and of historic significance.
As the Council is aware, Sri Lanka suffered for
almost three decades at the hands of separatist terrorists,
described by the Federal Bureau of Investigation as
the world’s most ruthless. The people of Sri Lanka
have therefore experienced first-hand the devastating
impact of terrorism on societies, communities and the
very foundations of a nation. Our own institutions,
long cherished, including our democracy, were under
serious threat. The Sri Lankan Government has time
and time again unequivocally stressed the need for the
world to take action against terrorist acts committed by
non-State actors that have little or no respect for human
life. Terrorism in all its forms ad manifestations must
be condemned.
It is evident that ISIL is now taking on a transnational
form and poses a threat to the wider region. Sri Lanka
would like to reiterate that it is in the best interests of
the international community to ensure that no space be
allowed for any terrorist groups or their sympathizers
to raise funds and logistical support of any form
anywhere. We express our solidarity with the people of
the countries of the region in such difficult times and
stand ready to support timely measures to help victims
on the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
issue of foreign terrorist fighters is being addressed
today because of the situations in Iraq, Syria and
Libya. Some people seek to represent the revolution of
Arab peoples as an Islamic movement and to achieve

14-54735

24/09/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

an Islamic political movement in order to gain power.
They are affiliated with certain regional forces and
seek to promote such a movement to the detriment of
the identity of the Arab peoeple and their territorial
integrity.
Foreign terrorist fighters are a threat to their
countries of origin. They have come to our countries
from Europe, the United States and the four corners of
the world. The revolution in our region has now taken
on a religious dimension. The recruitment and training
of those fighters in some States is a very serious
mistake. The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
has a number of aspects. That serves to underscore
what Egypt has said on many occasions, namely, that
we must define a comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategy. We are aware of the appeals in that regard.
People try to convince young people to participate
in combat in the belief that they are committing crimes
in the name of what is right and just, even if they carry
out such acts on religious grounds. In addition, they
use telecommunications and the Internet in order to
establish the necessary links for the recruitment of such
young people. Those young people are also told lies.
In that regard, I would like to emphasize that Egypt
has for some time been taking steps to deal with terrorism.
That includes measures to combat the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters. In that connection, I would
like to underscore that the Egyptian criminal code
includes provisions that define and penalize terrorism
by punishing all terrorist-related acts, including
involvement in terrorist attacks, incitement and the
provision of financial support. Egypt respects Security

S/PV.7272

Council resolutions, in particular those on combating
terrorism. We submit reports to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee as proof of our commitment.
At the regional level, we seek to implement the
relevant African and Arab agreements. The situation
facing us today promotes the true values of Islam, while
trying to ensure that no connection is made between
Islam and extremism, given that common efforts in
that regard will soon be stepped up in cooperation with
various other States.
When we talk about combating terrorism in the
Middle East, such a fight must be comprehensive and
sustained. We must not only address the threat of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, since all those
terrorist groups are interconnected. Therefore, for
those efforts to be successful, we must fight terrorism
wherever it takes place, whether in Iraq, Syria or any
other country.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that we
must commit to ensuring respect for Security Council
resolutions. The United Nations bodies are called upon
to monitor the implementation of those resolutions
in order to put an end to terrorist attacks and the
recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers. I wish to thank all the
participants — those present and those not present — for
their contributions to this meeting.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m.

14-5473543/43
