OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

c

FE8 2 91984

UN/Sk4 ~b~~ECE~~OIN

1854th

MEETING:

6 NOVEMBER

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1854) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation concerning Western Sahara:
Letter dated 6 November 1975 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Spain to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 1867) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*..

1

Provisional

S/PV. 1854

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. .Mer&n
of such ,a Symbol .‘indicates a reference to a United
‘*‘.
.’ ~ ’ I
Nations dokmient;
’ L
‘,
‘>
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ .:; .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Rectirds of the Security Couricil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in. accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in ‘yearly-volumes
of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the ,Security .CounSl. The new,.system, which has been applied
retroactively’to
resolutions adopted Ibefore i January 1965, bekame fully operative
on that date:
*
:
,‘/,

’
,I
:

..;

..-

.

.
,
r

.’

.,

”

jl
,‘,

,-

1854th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,

6 November

President: Mr. Yakov A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Hassan II, urgently requesting that ,an end be put
forthwith to the declared march into Western Sahara.
Early this morning, in answer to that appeal, as President of the Council I received a cablegram from His
Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco [ibid.]. The
members of the Countiil have had an opportunity
to
study that cablegram.

Present: The representatives of the following States’;
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania~.
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania
and United States of America.
Provisional
Adoption

2.

The situation concerning Western Sahara:
Letter dated 6 November
1975 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Spain
to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1867)
The meeting

3. Thus, despite to two resolutions on this matter
already adopted by the Security Council, resolutions
377 (1975) and 379 (1975), and despite the- special
message sent by the Council through its President,
the march into Western Sahara is now an accomplished
fact. As may be seen from communications
that
have been received, the participants
in the march
have crossed the frontier between Morocco
and
Western Sahara into the territory
under Spanish
control. The situation in Western Sahara remains
serious, and the possibility
of a military
conflict
threatening peace and security is not excluded.

agenda (S/Agenda/l854)

1.

1975, at 8.15 p.m.

of the agenda

was called to order at 8.50 p.m.

4. In this connexion,
I should like to draw the
attention of members of the Council to the, letter
dated 6 November 1975 which has just,been received
from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Spain to the United Nations [S/11871].
It contains very disquieting information.
I am sure
that members of the Council have already studied this
letter.

‘Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara:
Letter dated 6 November 1975 from the ChargC d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Spain to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1867)

5. I wish to,draw members’ attention also to the
fact that the agenda for today’s meeting that has
been adopted refers to another letter dated 6 November 1975 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Spain to the United Nations
[.S/11867]. That briefly,is the situation that must be
examined by the Council and on which it must take
an appropriate decision. I want to add that in that
letter from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Spain to the United Nations [ibid.] there
is a request to convene the Council urgently to con-.
sider the question of Western Sahara in the light of
the events that have occurred.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Security
Council [1849th and 1850th meetings], I propose with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of Morocco, Spain and Algeria to participate,
without the right to vote, in the Council’s consideration of the situation concerning Western Sahara.
\
A) lhe invitation
of the President,
Mr. Slaoui
(Morocco), Mr. Arias Salgado (Spain) and Mr. Rahal
(Algeria) took places at the Council table.

6. Throughout the day the members of the Security
Council have been holding intensive consultations.
During the recently concluded consultations
among
the members of the Council a draft resolution was
prepared and agreed on [S/11870]. Council members
also agreed that at the beginning of today’s meeting
the Council would adopt that agreed draft resolution
by consensus, after which those members .of the

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
Members of the Council will recall that last night
[1853rd meeting] the Council heard answers to the
questions put by them to the representatives of parties
concerned and interested, and it decided to authorize
its President to issue an appeal [see S/f 18681 to the
Government of Morocco and to the King, His Majesty
.

4

Council and representatives of the parties concerned
and interested who so desired would have an opportunity to make statements. If I hear no, comments
or objections, I shall take it that this procedure is
agreed and acceptable to members of the.Council.
was adopted. ’
/’
7. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
I now call on the Secretary-General.

12. That resolution was adopted on the basis of the
report of the Secretary-General
[S/J1863], in which
he states in paragraph 20: “Meanwhile;
the situation
in the area remains grave. I consider it, therefore,
of the greatest importance that any action be avoided
which might
1 further escalate the tension”.
. .

The draft resolution

13. In compliance
with his mandate from the Security Council, the Secretary-General,
whose efforts
to find a peaceful solution to this problem can never
be sufftciently
praised, immediately
began consultations with the administering
Power and with the
parties concerned and interested. As a first step, he
decided to send a personal representative to Morocco,
Mauritania,
Algeria and Spain. That representative
was received by the President of the Government of
Spain and by its Minister for Foreign Affairs.

Russian):

8. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
As the members
of the Security Council are aware, since the adoption
of resolution 379 (1975) last Sunday [1852nd meeting]
I have been in constant touch with the parties concerned and interested, through their representatives
here at United Nations Headquarters and also through
my special envoy, Mr. Andre Lewin, whom I sent
to the area. I have not failed to keep the members of
the Security Council fully informed of all developments as they were reported to me. In the course of
the many hours of consultation which you, Mr. President, have had with the members of the Council, I
had the opportunity
of making several oral reports.
in order to explain in detail the seriousness of the
situation.

14. In spite of the Security Council’s appeal contained in its, resolutions 377 (1975) and 379 (1975),
in spite of the Secretary-General’s
appeal in paragraph 20 of his report, to which I have already
referred, and almost at the same time as the return
to New York of the Secretary-General’s
personal
envoy to the King of Morocco, we were faced with
the decision announced on 5 November
in a radio
and television broadcast to the entire country to begin
a march into Western Sahara. As is already public
knowledge, at 11 a.m. local time today the first
contingents of the marchers crossed the frontier of
Western Sahara.

9. My special envoy returned today and I should
be in a position shortly to submit a comprehensive
report to the Security Council as requested in resolution 379 (1975). As I stated last Sunday, I wish to
assure the Council that I shall continue exercising
every effort to contribute to a peaceful solution of the
problem before the Council, the importance of which
has just been underlined
by the Council by the
adoption of yet another resolution. I hope that the
collective
efforts undertaken
within the United
Nations will bear fruit and that we shall be able to
defuse, through our joint action, a situation which
continues to be very grave.

15. The‘threat which Spain denounced on 18 October
in the letter of its representative
to the President of
the Security Council [s/11851] has unhappily become
.a reality. Thousands of Moroccan subjects, bolstered
by armed elements of the Royal Army, and with the
participation
of authorities
and even members of
the Government,
have violated the boundary of
Western Sahara and illegally entered foreign territory.
Thus an internationally
unlawful
act has been
consummated
which makes the Government
of
Morocco
responsible
for the consequences
that
decision might involve at all levels.

10. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
I now call on the representative of Spain.
11. Mr. ARIAS SALGADO
(Spain) (interpretation
from Spanish): On 2 November the Security Council
adopted by consensus resolution 379 (1975), in paragraph 1 of which the Council:

16. Despite all the appeals of the Security Council
and of many States Members of the United Nations
and despite the risk of unleashing armed confrontation which may cause unnecessary bloodshed, the
King of Morocco, in an irresponsible
act unprecedented in the annals of international
relations, has
not desisted from his purpose and ignores the last
appeal which the Council sent him through its President
barely a few hours ago, calling on the King of Morocco
forthwith to suspend the march on the Sahara.

‘&Urges all the parties concerned and interested
to avoid any unilateral or other action which might
further escalate the tension in the area,”
and in paragraph

2

“Requests
the Secretary-General
to continue
and intensify his consultations
with the parties
concerned and interested, and to report to the
Security Council as soon as possible on the results
of these consultations in order to enable the Council to adopt any further appropriate measures that
may be necessary.”

17. Spain, conscious of the responsibilities incumbent
on it under the Charter of the United Nations and
the right of legitimate self-defence also enshrined in
that Charter, will take the necessary measures to deal
with the violation of the frontier and to restore the
situation of normalcy which existed previously.
2

18. Despite the extremely serious situation that has
arisen, perhaps: there is still time to prevent major
catastrophes. Members of the Council who at its last
meetings, whether public or private, were reluctant
to accept the truth of our denunciations
concerning
the constant deterioration
of peace and security in
the zone and the responsibility
of the Government of
Morocco have, I believe, obtained the convincing
proof they sought.

work of the United Nations or in contradiction
of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the
basic premise of which is the right of the people of the
Sahara to self-determination.
23. My delegation wishes that it could have spoken
before the adoption of the resolution by the Security
Council a few minutes ago. It addressed to the
President of the Council a letter requesting an urgent
public meeting of the Council [S/11867] so that it
could bring before the Council data, information
and
reports on attitudes that could have been very useful
to the Council at the time of evaluating the strength
and vigour of the terms used in and the scope of the
resolution. In the opinion of the -delegation of. Spain,
it was necessary for the Council to condemn the march
and to demand the withdrawal of Moroccan subjects
and the military forces accompanying
them to the
other side of the Saharan frontier until such time as the
General Assembly took a final decision of the formula
of decolonization
applicable to the Territory.

19. We hope the Security Council will not disappoint the hopes which the international
community
and public opinion in my country have placed in its
action. The Council must act by clearly and decisively
condemning this violation of international
law,of the
Charter and of the resolutions
of the General
Assembly on the decolonization
of the Sahara. The
Council must demand that Morocco withdraw from
the Territory forthwith and that it co-operate with
the Secretary-General
in seeking a peaceful solution to
the problem. Spain is prepared to continue to offer the
Secretary-General
all the co-operation he may need.
In the meantime we shall endeavour by every means
to restore the territorial
integrity of the Sahara and
the inviolability
of its frontiers.

24. As I said earlier, my delegation did not have
an opportunity to state its position before the Council
took its decision, The information
in the possession of my delegation had to be submitted in a letter
addressed to the Council [S/11871]. Mr. President,
in introducing
this item you clearly and perfectly
focused on the subject. I shall therefore limit myself
to drawing the attention of the members of the Council to the information contained in this letter.

20. For humanitarian
reasons, of course, Spain will
always strive as far as possible to avoid any shedding
of innocent blood. We hope that the Government
of Morocco will realize the responsibility
it assumes
if it continues to maintain an illegal occupation in a
Territory that does not belong to it.

25. In the resolution that has been adopted there
is no mention of the request for a Security Council
meeting by the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Spain to the United Nations [S/f1867],
nor does the resolution take note of the additional
information
submitted to the Council by my delegation. I am not raising a procedural question but ‘a
very serious matter in view of the situation in the
Territory.
The illegal occupation
has been consummated. At this very hour, thousands of persons
are in a highly dangerous zone. The decisions taken
by the Spanish military authorities with.great moderation and a sense of responsibility
do not mean
that there has been any lack of resolution in defending
the area. If the information
contained in the aforementioned letter proves true and the facts show that
the policy of Morocco is to seek a confrontation
of this kind, my delegation would like to point out to
the Council the grave responsibility incumbent upon it
unless it faces up to this new situation.

21. Snain’s nosition on the auestion of the Sahara
has neither changed nor can it’ change in the future.
The Government of Morocco must recognize this fact.
Many ties and interests unite us at present and many
must be developed in the future. It would therefore
be politically irresponsible to make such co-operation
impossible by insisting on solutions for the decolonization of the Sahara which are today objectively
impossible
for Spain to implement.
The sooner
Morocco accepts this reality the sooner we shall have
a peaceful solution to the problem and the more fruitful will be the relations between our two countries.
22. Before concluding, because of the insistence with
which certain Moroccan
authorities
endeavour to
continue to maintain confusion and ambiguity on the
position of Spain on this matter-an
attitude which
seems to have been favourably received by some
members of the Council-I
should like to recall the
two fundamental elements of our position taking into
account the present circumstances. First, withdrawal,
as required by the- resolution adopted a few minutes
ago, of the march organized by the Government
of Morocco,
which has violated
the frontier of
.Westem Sahara, has become a sine qua non for
“considering any peaceful solution to the problem of the
decolonization
of the Territory. Secondly, no peaceful
solution to the problem of the decolonization
of
the Sahara can be conceived of outside the frame-

26. I do not wish to dwell further on this because
I think that all .the facts of the problem are clearly
before the Council. In connexion with the draft resolution which was just adopted by consensus, I should
like to point out that there is a certain inconsistency.
Paragraph 1 deplores the holding of the march, but a
fundamental
element is lacking, which is, precisely,
a mention of the unlawful act that has been committed,
namely the violation of a frontier and the trespass
3

against, the territorial integrity of the, Sahara. My delegation would have wished this basic. element included
in the, resolution1 ButGibe that as.it may, we believe
that the terms of this resolution-are sufficiently clear
and unambiguous tocause the Government of Morocco
to proceed forthwith to a withdrawal of all the participants in the march from the.Teiritory,of
Western
Sahara, as stated in paragraph 2.of the resolution.,,,,
,I
/“, ,
_I,.
27, The PRESIDENT
(interprethtion$-o’;om
Ru&i@iz):“’
I call on the representative of Morocco.
:

integrity of its State. By-deciding to orga,nize a peacefullmarch-rt has atfirmed its,,right to,life. That right is
unchallengeable,
and tt. rs not by. having recourse
to legal, ,qurbbles. .;or rdeological
mystrfication
that
obstacles: can ,be. raised to the Moroccan nation’s
right @its] existence. That right springs ‘from and is
rendered legitimate by’ our consciousness of nationhood forged during two centuries ‘of ‘history. All
observers have noted the existence of that national
consciousness which was made manifest in response
to the .appeal of His Majesty King Hassan II to
undertake a peaceful march towards the Moroccan
territory we were deprived of by colonization.
It is
precisely to defend their right to life that thousands
of Moroccans have left their homes, families and daily
occupations to accomplish their national duty. This
is a fact of human life which all must obey.

28. Mr. SLAOUI
(Morocco) (interp~efation
frbm.
French): His Majesty the King yesterday gave an
address in which he announced the departure of the
“Green March” for today; 6 November. At that time
His Majesty the King wished to make it perfectly
clear that, first, the participants
were required to
observe strict discipline and to preserve the peaceful
character of the march; secondly, there was to be no
counter-move
to ,any Spanish reaction. In response
to your message this morning [see S/f1868],
His
Majesty the King-felt it incumbent on him to say that
we wish to reassure the Council once again, as we have
repeatedly done, that the march will not at any time
cease to be ‘as peaceful as was the inspiration for the
initiative
and that its peaceful character will -be
maintained throughout. His Majesty the King added
that the Moroccan army would be prepared to face up
to any intervention
by anyone other than Spaniards.
He praised the sense of civic responsibility .and the
maturity of the Moroccan people and paid a tribute
to the friendly and brotherly countries participating
in the march.

32.’ The United Nations cannot ignore’ the right of
the Moroccan nation. Were it to do so this would
be a grave and flagrant violation of the letter and
spirit of the Charter. The Organization’s
raison d’ctre,
as stipulated in the Preamble to the Charter, lies in
respect -for the equality of nations large and small,
and Article 2 of the Charter closely ‘associates the
equality of rights of nations and their right to territorial
integrity.
33. In the nineteenth century Morocco was fragmented by colonialism.
Sectors of a single nation were
subjected to different colonial regimes. Lines were
drawn on maps to define the strategic and economic
interests of European countries.
Those lines had
absolutely no effect on the reality in human terms.
Far from weakening
Moroccan
nationalism
they
revived it and gave it new vigour. That national sentiment has been expressed in the constant struggle which
the Moroccan people from the Sahara to Oujda have
waged against foreign domination.

29. As I had occasion to confirm in my statement
at the last meeting, Morocco is more than ever
determined to use peaceful means in order to settle the
colonial dispute with Spain. The address by His
Majesty the King was perfectly clear in that respect.
The “Green March”
has absolutely no aggressive
character and is inspired by no feeling of hostility
towards anyone at all. The people of Morocco has acted
within its legitimate rights. Morocco solemnly reaffirms
its desire to participate in all serious efforts to arrive
at a negotiated
solution for the decolonization
of
Western Sahara.
30. The question of Western Sahara is an indivisible
whole. The “Green March”
cannot be dealt with
separately from the other factors in the ‘-matter.
This ‘has been confirmed in Security Council resolution 377 (1975) which, while reminding the parties of
the possibility
of negotiation,
calls on them to
exercise restraint and moderation.
We note that,
.despite the .goodwill of Morocco,
the negotiating
process has been blocked as a result of all kinds of
pressure and this has brought us to a real deadlock.
Thus, the “Green March” falls within the exercise
by Morocco of its inalienable rights.

34. With the return from exile of King Mohammed V
in 1955, Morocco did indeed obtain partial independence but, above‘ all, it gained a right to be heard
in international
forums. From then on my country,
which was still colonized, devoted all its means and its
energies to the service of the sacred cause of national
liberation. Immediately
after the partial independence
of Morocco in 1955, unanimity on that subject was
declared from ‘the north to the south of the country.
The Moroccan population in Western Sahara revolted
against the perpetuation
of .Spanish colonial occupation and asked to be associated with the mother
country; that action led to the liberation
of -the
greater part of the Western Sahara. A major foreign
alliance, was needed to reduce the Moroccan people
to submission. The national sentiments of the Saharan
population
were thus made clear and our brothers,
in the Sahara have never ceased since. then to
behave as genuine nationalists, whether Moroccan or
Mauritanian.
.,

31. The people of Morocco is determined to defend
its existence as .a nation as well as the territorial

35. Tarfaya, Ifni and Spanish Sahara are engraved
in the national conscience of every Moroccan as the
4

7

i

.,

;

1

i

.;

c

:.

provinces which’,were the cradle of the ,Almoravid,
the Almohade and the Alaouite dynasties and the’
melting-pot of our the values of civilization. ,Therein
lies the true character of the Moroccan people; the
great veneration in which the sage Maa El Ainin,
representative ,of the Sultan at’ Sakiet El Hamra,
was held throughout Morocco is the manifestation of’
this in concrete form..
,’

.

.

.

.

.

.

-

‘_

” of Ifni and to’determine’ with the Government of
Morocco, bearing in mind the aspirations of’ the
indigenous population, procedures for the transfer
of powers’ in accordance with the ,provisions’ of
: General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).?’

39. What objective conclusions may be drawn from
this text? First of all, the transfer of power was decided
in accordance with resolution 1514 (XV), the Decla36. The people of Morocco has .been struggling since ration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
1955 to safeguard its true ,character, ‘and in this Countries’ and Peoples. This is clear ‘proof, that the
endeavour it is certain that it will receive the :unre- application of resolution .1514(XV) is not limited solely
served support of its African brothers, for each of the to the organization of a. referendum. The Declaration
peoples of Africa have the same concern. Throughout
states the principle of decolonization, which can be
this lengthy period our people has not forgotten for a brought about either by a referendum or by a transfer
single second its natural ‘duty of solidarity, with the of power.
j ,? :
/
liberation movements of its African brothers. Morocco
resolutely opposed every colonial,attempt tojeopardize ,40.;, Furthermore, a referendum is’meaningless when
the unity of any African country, whether it be Algeria,, .. there are national ties between the Territory to be
Zaire or Nigeria.
decolonized and an independent neighbouring State.
Thus there was no question of &king Moroccans
37. My country therefore has no anti-colonialist,, whether they wished to become Moroccans. Thus,
lesson to learn from anyone. My country was in the convinced of the. existence of national ties between
forefront of the nations which laboured for the liquida:
the population of Ifni and the Kingdom of Morocco,
tion of colonialism in all its forms. ‘We are therefore
in 1966 the General Assembly advocated procedures
fully aware of the role we have to play ,among’the
for’ the transfer of power and Ifni was reintegrated
third-world countries, and we ask for understanding
with the mother country in 1969, precisely as a result
on the part of those peoples ‘in our own liberation’ of direct negotiations with Spain.
struggle. Together we must foil the manoeuvres of
colonialism and prevent the ‘perversion of the most 41.. As regards ‘Western Sahara, the policy of the
sacred principles of the Organization in the service General Assembly has been more hesitant. ,The first
of special interests. It is in this’ constant struggle resolution adopted in 1%5, resolution 2072 (XX),
for liberation that Morocco sees the basis and justifirequested Spain to enter into negotiations on the
cation of its right to recover the teriitories,of which
problems reiating to sovereignty presented by the Terit had been deprived. The distinguished :&ebanese ritory. But in 1966, the General Assembly set aside
judge Fouad Ammoun, in the separate opinion annexed the modality of the transfer of power and advocated
to the advisory opinion of the International Court of a referendum in paragraph 4 of resolution 2229 (XXI).
Justice on Western Sahara, declared: ‘. ’ :
This proved once again. that there are two .procedures
,.
<which,
General Assembly ‘may use .as alternatives
:
“Nothing could show more clearly the will for :to suit the
the
prevailing circumstances.
:.
emancipation than the -struggle undertaken in
common, with ‘the risks and immense sacrifices it 42. In fact; these hesitations~are explained by ‘the
entails. That struggle is more decisive than a administering -Power’s exploitation of certain difreferendum, being absolutely sincere and authentic. .ferences’
-which. appeared at that time. among the
. . Many are the peoples ‘who have had recourse-to it to neighbouring countries. Since 1966 Morocco has
make their. right prevail. It is, one need hardly
reiterated at every session of the General
repeat, that thousand-year ,’ struggle which has unceasingly
Assembly
its
right to national unity. The controversy
established the right of peoples to dispone of their
regarding.‘the
ties that bind the population of
own fate, a right -which jurists, statesmen, consti- Sahara to the legal
Kingdom
of ,Morocco has been latent
tutions and declarations, and the United Nations
throughout’
these
last
10
years. In fact, if those ties
Charter, have merely recognized., and solemnly are recognized, as they were
the case of ifni, there
..
.
‘: ;,..:
-. will be no further need .toinhave
proclaimed,‘*2.
recourse to the
referendum
procedure.
It
will
be
necessary
in that
38. Taking note of the irresistible. :will ‘-of the
Moroccan nation, the colonial Power in 195s restored ease to propose negotiations for the transfert of power.
the province of Tarfaya without any, referendum...The -’ ’
‘.
,‘. .
.case of Ifni, however, is more revealing in this respect, 43. “‘L.&t. year when Spain proposed to organ& a
inasmuch as the United Nations was seized of ,the’ .‘. referendum within the next six months, in .order to
prevent a fait accompli, Morocco could only request
question. In 1966, the General Assembly, in parathe International Court of Justice to pronounce itself
graph 3 of resolution 2229 (XXI), requested,,,11
I’ .. ).
on the exisience’of legal ties between Western Sahara
“the administering Power to take immediately the land the two neighbouring countries concerned at the
time of the Spanish colonization. The International
necessary steps to accelerate the decolonization
., .’
5.“.
yi
.,
‘.’
,I ‘.
.:
..
i
. ;.
..
l

Court of Justice gave its advisory opinion3 and
clearly established
the existence of legal ties of
personal allegiance between the populations
of the
Kingdom of Morocco and Western Sahara, as well
as of legal ties of a territorial nature between Mauritania and Western Sahara. To be sure these could
not be links of sovereignty in the conventional
sense
of the. word. The region concerned was a desert
area peopled by nomads. The existence of,an effective, stable, fixed power was, in the circumstances,
inconceivable.

Marrakesh on 9 July this year: “The administration
of El Aaitin or Smara will be in the hands of the
local population because they are closer than we to
local realities”.
47. The indigenous populations have again expressed
their wishes without any ambiguity.
Only four days
ago, the President of the Jemaa was received by His
Majesty King Hassan II at Agadir and made the following statement.
“I have come on behalf of all the inhabitants
and tribes of the Sahara to render to Your Majesty
the allegiance of our ancestors. I have come out of
patriotism
because Sahara is an integral part of
Morocco. We have never ceased to be Moroccans. When we saw that we had become a pawn,
that our fate was literally put at risk by the appetites
and ambitions of some, we decided to say what we
think, loudly and clearly.”

44. Furthermore, political power in Morocco is based
on the allegiance of the basic communities
and their
chiefs to the sultans. This does not in any way mean
that their populations
could decide, on the death of
a sultan, to cease to be Moroccans. It meant only
that those peoples have the right and the duty to
decide on the successor and thus to confirm his
legitimacy.
It was therefore
a domestic
matter
regarding the organization of power within the State
of Morocco. Thus, it is clear that the ties of personal
allegiance established by the Court confirm a fact
which Morocco has at all times proclaimed-namely
that the populations of Western Sahara have always
been a part of the Moroccan nation. It was this
same concept that Mr. Khatri Ould Joumdini,
the
President of the Jemaa in Western Sahara, indicated
clearly in a letter addressed to you, Mr. President.
I quote:

48. That statement
acquires its full significance
when we realize the functions delegated to the Jemaa
by the Spanish State, which considers it to be the
supreme representative organ of the Saharan people,
according to the 1975 report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to Western Sahara.4 The President
of the Jemaa is elected by the 103 members of that
assembly, who in turn are elected by the local jemaas
and municipal councils. After the very important statement by the President of the Jemaa, we must now
reconcile United Nations procedures with the more
recent developments
in the situation in the region.
Furthermore,
it must be recalled that many members
of the Jemaa represent tribes which are an integral
part of the Mauritanian
nation.

“As President of the Jemaa and in the name
of the entire authority of the Jemaa, which Spain
has always defended at the United Nations and
before the opinion of the Arab-African non-aligned
countries, I reiterate the desire of the people of the
Sahara to link their fate with that of their brothers
from whom they have been separated.”

49. Morocco wishes to recall that it declared, before
the International
Court of Justice, that in the Western
Sahara “there is a north and there is a south which
juxtapose in space the legal ties of Western Sahara
with Morocco and with Mauritania”.3
Spain itself has
recognized this fact by inviting the delegations of
Morocco and Mauritania
to participate in the most
recent negotiations at Madrid.

45. These new data and the unanimous expression
of the will of the Moroccan people in the peaceful
march should logically lead the General Assembly to
adjust its earlier resolutions.
To be consistent, the
General Assembly must advocate, as in the Ifni case,
recourse to the other technique of decolonization,
that is to say, the transfer of powers by negotiation
with the administering
Power. In so doing the General
Assembly would implement fully and in all its elements
resolution 1514 (XV) and thus accelerate the process
of decolonization,
while respecting the right to territorial integrity
which is reaffirmed
in paragraph 6
of the Declaration contained in that resolution.

50. The procedure I have described is the only course
open to the Organization which will enable it to take
into consideration
all the principles of the Charter.
This course falls within the framework of the. spirit
and the letter of resolution 1514 (XV); it would prevent
the perversion
and mystification
of the law of
decolonization.
This law was never conceived as a
means of creating puppet States for the benefit of
particular interests and certain imperialist aims. This
law was never conceived as a weapon against the
nationals who constitute the tangible reality of the
world of today. This law, on the contrary, strengthens
and protects all nations, large and small, against foreign
intervention and the threat of disintegration.

46. The process envisaged will take into account,
as in the case of West Irian and Ifni, the aspirations of the indigenous population.
Morocco, following its age-old tradition,
will respect the local
institutions of the peoples. The Jemaa and the traditional chiefs will remain the spokesmen, within the
framework of the Moroccan
State concerning the
particular interests of the peoples of the Sahara. As
His Majesty the King declared in his address at

51. The Court pronounced
itself on certain legal
aspects of the question of the decolonization
of
6

Western
Sahara, as requested
by the General
Assembly in resolution 3292 (XXIX). But in the same
text the General Assembly reserved to itself the right
to indicate the procedure to be followed to speed
up decolonization.
This policy is necessary because of
the new circumstances to which we have referred.
These circumstances lead to the choice’of the technique of transfer of power by negotiation between the
administering
Power and the States concerned.

57. The representative of Spain informed the Council
just now [see>S/11871] ,of a communication
from his
Government regarding the audience accorded by the
Minister of Information
of Morocco to the Ambassador of Spain at .Rabat. Allow me to give you .the
pertinent information.
I shall do so in two parts:
the reply of my Government resulting from the official
position of my Government, and the latest information
that I received by telephone a few minutes before
this meeting of the Council opened.

52. As I clearly yesterday indicated at the private
meeting of the Security Council [1853rd meeting],
Morocco is more than ever determined to co-operate
with the United
Nations
in seeking a solution
negotiated with the admmistering
Power. In so doing,
Morocco intends to comply with resolution 1514 (XV)
which confirms the right of peoples to national unity
and territorial integrity. This remains within the context
of what the Council itself decided in resolution 377
(1975), when it called on the parties to negotiate.
But Morocco cannot envisage such a solution by
negotiation except between the administering
Power
and the parties concerned, that is to say those who
have unceasingly proclaimed
their rights over their
territory and established the legitimacy of their claims
in many ways, in particular before the International
Court of Justice.

58. On behalf of my Government,
I most formally
contradict the information just communicated
to the
Council by the representative of Spain in regard to an
z%lkged~k~~efMand the%
significance of the peaceful march. As King Hassan II
has reported, the march is being carried out by
unarmed
civilians,
men and women.
Morocco
maintains its initial position in every respect and I
solemnly declare that the Government of Morocco is
determined to avoid any incident with Spanish ,armed
forces. Morocco reaffirms solemnly its will to seek a
solution within the framework of the United Nations;
this position has been reiterated to the SecretaryGeneral and to his representative
by His Majesty
King Hassan II in the course of the visits to Morocco.
There is therefore no question of taking seriously
the content of this purely imaginary information.
We
sincerely hope that Spain will avoid reporting wild
information with the object of creating confusion.

53. It is time for the situation to be clarified and
positions made clear. It is difficult to conceive of
the participation
in negotiations
in regard to the
Sahara of a party which has at all times proclaimed
that it has no territorial claim to make. Is it because
the right conclusion has not been drawn from this
that we have not arrived at a logical and final solution?

59. At the moment this meeting began I was able.
to communicate
with the Minister
for Foreign
Affairs, and I shall read the notes I made. At his
own request the Ambassador of Spain at Rabat was
received by Mr. Benhima, who was exercising the
function of Acting Prime Minister. The Ambassador
of Spain said:

54. Morocco has been greatly comforted by the
sincere and unreserved support of a certain number
of countries representing African and Arab opinion.
The Ambassadors of the following countries have
indicated their wish to participate personally in the
peaceful march of my country: Gabon, Iraq, Saudi
Arabia, Jordan and Qatar. Delegations of volunteers
from those countries have also joined their Moroccan brothers in their liberation march.

“Tomorrow a meeting of the Council of Ministers
of Spain must be held. Have you any message to
transmit to my Government? I am the Ambassador
of Spain at Rabat, and I should like to make my
contribution
to the search for a solution. Can I
therefore help by transmitting
a message to the
Council of Ministers?”
60. Mr. Benhima, Acting Prime Minister, immediately telephoned
His Majesty the King at Agadir.
His Majesty was with Mr. Laraki, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, to whom I have just spoken by
telephone, and he said this to me:

55. In conclusion,
I should like to appeal to the
conscience of each member of the Council and beg
them to take into account all the elements of the matter and never to dissociate the substance of the matter
from the question of the peaceful march of the Moroccan people. The influence of one on the other is
such that any objective solution must of necessity
take into account all the facts submitted for your
consideration.

“His Majesty told the Prime Minister that the
negotiations
both at the level of Ministers
for
Foreign Affairs and at the level of Prime Ministers
were simply suspended and that Morocco was
prepared to resume the dialogue.”

56. Finally,
I should like to afTirm Morocco’s
confidence in your assessment and its conviction that
you will never take any decision which does not take
into account the legitimacy
of our rights and the
justness of our claims and initiatives.

That is the information
which I am authorized to
give the Council and which was dictated to me from
Agadir three quarters of an hour ago by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs.
.7

,.,

.,:

..

‘.

-.--

.,

L

i,._1

,I..
.’
‘“,

61. ‘The PRESJDENT.(intPrp~~fntionfrqm Russian):
I call on the representative of Spain. ,,” ‘.
62. Mr. ARIAS SALGADO (Spain) (interpretation
from Spanish): At this late hour,and after the lengthy
meetings which we have devoted to this problem,
it was not my intention to speak again. However,
the statement just made by the representative of
Morocco compels me to provide somexlarifications.

66. “All -‘Members have the ‘obligation under the
Charter ‘to settle problems, and disputes ‘of all kinds
peacefully &d obviously negotiationsyare one of the
appropriate .means to. this end. But to!try to confuse
the scope of negotiations of this kind with the solution of a’ substantive problem which’is within the
competence of the General Assembly&+md, on that I
think that the position of Spain is ciear-seems to
me to be insisting repeatedly on a‘ course which
can lead to nothing.

63. The first is that’ the representative of Morocco
appears to have forgotten where we are and .why we
are meeting. We are not in the General Assembly;
nor are we at the International Court of Justice,
,where I had the honour to take part with him in many
meetings during the month of July; nor are we in the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the’Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countxie.s‘and Peoples.
We are in the Security Council. We are’ meeting
to consider an urgent, grave, concrete and specific
.:question which is creating at the moment enormous
‘problems of all kinds for my country.

67. Lastly, I believe that in, the statement of the
representative of Morocco one fundamental ilement
was lacking in that not once did he refer to the
resolution which has been .adopted. Furthermore, he
did not say whether the march, which is the subject
of the resolution and of the meeting of th,e Council,
would be halted and the marchers withdrawn from
the territory of Western .Sahara, ‘as called for in the
resolution. I believe that this is the problem, the cause
of the very serious situation in which we find ourselves, and that it leads us nowhere at this .time to
consider the situation as presented by the representative of Morocco. :

64. To claim that at present we are debating the
basic problem of the decolonization of the Sahara with:out covering the fundamental question created by the
illegal invasion and occupation of the Territory seems
;to me to be wholly unrealistic and to show a total
loss of any sense ‘of proportion. Continually-and
this is a second aspect that ‘1 should like to make
perfectly clear-in the statements of the representa‘tive of Morocco there are affirmations of what Spain
recognizes, is doing, is Saying, is intending, in this
‘matter. I really must insist once again that the Spanish
position, what Spain recognizes and, does not recognize, Spain -itself can clarify in ‘the appropriate
organs. There is’absolutely no need for the tepresentative of Morocco to remind us daily what the position
of Spain is on these matters.

68: Furthermore, “on the basis of, the information
provided in the’ aforementioned ietter from the
representative of Spain [S/I 18711;if the situation really
is as described by the representative of Morocco, it is
very easy to prove this, since tomorrow, because
of the time differential, the withdrawal could start
in compliance with the request. addressed by the
Security Council to the Government of Morocco.
69,. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I now call on the representative of Algeria.
70. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (interpretation
from
French):’ I must admit that ‘I rather hesitated to ask
to speak at this meeting because I am not really
sure what its purpose is. I wonder; with all due respect
to this body and to its members, what is the meaning
of this- masauerade which has been going
- an for
same time now.

65. At recent meetings I have very often had occasion to make clear the scope of the negotiations
recommended in Article 33 of the Charter of the United
yNations in the present context. At the 1850th meeting 71. ‘The ‘Algerian delegation, like the delegations
of the Council the representative of Spain gave
of other ‘parties concerned and interested in the
Spain’s interpretation of that Article and of the scope problem of Western Sahara, has already had the
of negotiations, to which paragraph 3 of the resolution
opportunity on’ several occasions to set out quite
just adopted’ also refers. He said:.
clearly
the position of’ its Government on this
-. .,.
.,
question and my’,delegation sees no need to repeat
“Regarding the negotiations provided for in once again what we have already stated here and
what .has been recorded as the fundamental position
Article 33 of the Charter, in relation to the interof the.,.Algerian, ‘Government.
national tension created by the Government of 3,.
;’
,,
Morocco with the announcement of a march on the
72. Todav we’ have heard statements, no doubt
Sahara, my delegation considers ‘that any action
which would contribute’ to eliminating -the cause eloquent but aimed at the ‘wrong parties. I do not
.‘. of the international ,tension which has been created believe that the Council has met today at this late
hour, titer .half a day of consultations and after
must be accepted in accordance with the commithaving met throughout last night, to consider the
ment which’ all Members of, the United Nations
have undertaken in accepting the Charter of the .validity of the territorial claims of any particular
country.
United Nations.*’ [1850th meeting, para. Jj2.1
:
:
.,
.
r
8
;
‘_
~’
I

‘.

73. The Security Council is authorized by.the international community to watch over international
peace
and security, and’all the meetings that you have ‘held
so far, all the ;c,onsuItations which you ,have held,
have referred to a situation in which peace and
security in a ‘region of the world are threatened. I
shall therefore not follow the example’ of those
preceding speakers who have tried to draw the attention of the Council to problems which in no way
relate to the present debate and do not fall within
the competence of the Council. The statements we
have heard today have surely been made before
international
bodies more qualified to ‘hear them.
And, to my knowledge,
those authorized. bodies
which have heard those pleadings, which have studied
those documents and which have been able to weigh
those arguments have not ,been convinced. of the
validity of those claims.

’

or not. -And .a11 the members of the international
community
are now in ‘a position to know whether
the Security Council has been equal t.oits responsibilities or not.
,,
.
78. Be that as it, may,’ what. is the situation that
has been described to, you here and that has been
the cause of so many hours of Council meetings? It
concerns a Territory calledthe Sahara:That
Territory
is under Spanish administration.
Certain countries
have submitted claims to the sovereignty over that
Territory.
To submit a claim does not mean that
one is entitled to submit it;.stiIl
less does it mean
that the claim is to be satisfied by the one submitting
it. Hence, sovereignty over the Territory in question,
regardless of the claims put forward-and
at this
stage .of the debate I do not want to state my views
on the validity of the claims .because ‘that is not the
purpose of the debate-beIongs,,as
I, said in one of
my previous statements, to the people of the Sahara
[see 1850th, meeting,
p&cc.
II]. .That. sovereignty
is given material form in frontiers. Anyunauthorized
crossing of those frontiers, against the will of the
people or of the Power administering
the Territory,
is’ a violation qf that Territory.
A violation carried
out with the intention to occupy the territory, with
the declared intention to annex the territory, cannot’
be a, peaceful march, a stroll down the Champs
Ely&es.

74. Why then come .here and repeat the .&me arguments? Why come here at a time when a very
serious situation is brewing, at a time when incidents
may perhaps occur at ‘any moment? Why draw the
attention of the Council to developments
which have
no place here and the value of which has been duly
assessed by the bodies to which they have already
been addressed?
75. I felt compelled
to make this comment at the
beginning of my statement, but what I wanted to say
first was .that I find the method followed by the
Security Council in adopting a decision which related
so directly to the countries concerned and interested,
which involves their own security and in which they
have a legitimate right to participate to some extent,
to be abnormal. What does it mean for the parties
interested to come before the Council now when the
Council has already taken a decision? I should not
like my observation to appear impertinent,
but, in view
of the gravity of the situation which you are considering, but which we are living through, permit me to
express all the same some amazement
at this
procedure.

79: That is the situation.
As representative
of
Algeria, I have drawn your attention to the gravity
of the situation .-resulting from a crossing of the
frontier of the Territory of the Sahara by a march
whose dimensions have already been pointed out.
The Security Council met before the frontier was
crossed. The Security Council adopted a resolution.
Since there was a desire not to hurt the pride of any
of the parties, the resolution was drafte’d in courteous
language; it asked all the : parties concerned and
interested to exercise restraint and moderation. What
effect did resolution 377 (1975) have? If I am to believe
the comments made by Moroccan circles, the resolution, since. it did not actually condemn the planned
march on the Sahara, was taken as encouragement
and as recognition of the legitimacy of the march.

76. Perhaps, by listening to the parties, hearing their
arguments and discussing their suggestions with them,
you might have arrived at a resolution which would
have given us more satisfaction and would have
been somewhat more effective. For this procedure
which I am now criticizing nevertheless has certain
advantages, in that it enables us to ascertain immediately whether or not the decisions you take are
effective.

80. The Security Council met on the eve of this
crossing of the .frontier: The members of the Council
were very disturbed about the imminence
of such
a serious operation. Your concern prompted you to ask
the parties concerned and interested to come here
so that you could ascertain for yourselves the gravity
of the imminent events. You put some questions. You
received answers. You, the members of the Council,
knew fuII well how .the situation would develop.
Perhaps you thought that there ,would be only minor
incidents, that the possiBiIity;mustbe, left open of
saving, the pride of .,certain Governments.
Perhaps
you thought, after you learned that -the Spanish army
had withdrawn a few kiiometres inside the.Territory,
that the Moroccan marchers were going to make

77. You have just taken a decision. It is addressed
to the Government of Morocco. That Government is
called upon to take certain decisions. The representative of the Government
of Morocco has given you
his reply. You do not need to wait any longer to
ascertain whether your resolution
is an effective
one or not. You do not even need to wait any longer
to ascertain whether you have taken a good decision
9

,,

..

only a symbolic entrance into the Territory and then
were going to withdraw. But you put. the question
to the delegation of Morocco. You asked whether
it was the intention of the Government
of Morocco
to withdraw its marchers. I am not saying that the
delegation of Morocco misinformed
you. The delegation of Morocco gave you a very clear answer; it
did-not tell you that the Moroccan marchers would
withdraw. Hence, it was in full knowledge of the
facts and having weighed your responsibilities
that
you took the decision to issue an appeal to His
Majesty the King of Morocco to put an end forthwith to the march [see S/11868].

deterioration
in the situation, assessing the increasing
tension and able to foresee what would happen on
the .morrow, has shown itself to be so timid in its
resolutions;
Either
the Council
considers
itself
responsible for this situation-and
the Council exists
to take the necessary measures to jprevent such a
danger in our region-in
which case it should take
the appropriate measures prescribed in the Charter
with the means provided by the Charter. Or else the
Council is shirking its responsibility
and says that
there is nothing it can do, in which case there is no
reason to hold so many meetings and there is no
need for so many consultations.

81. You know, as we know, what the answer to
that appeal was and in what terms it was couched.
If you issued this appeal, it was certainly not merely
to please one or two of the parties concerned and
interested. You issued this appeal so that it could
produce a result. You issued the appeal because you
knew that it was your responsibility
to prevent the
situation from developing to the point of confrontation. You now know what the situation is because
you have been meeting all afternoon.

85. Our countries, which are Members of the United
Nations, have faith in the Charter; they have faith
in the Security Council’s mission. That is why I have
been directed in several instances by my Government
to come before you and inform you of what is
happening in our region, to tell you of the fears of
my Government
and of its responsibilities
and its
ability to discharge them.
86. I am not objecting to the language that you
use. I am not saying that it is necessary to change
the wording of decisions you take. Algeria sees no
advantage for itself if the language you use in
addressing another country is lacking in courtesy or
might offend the national dignity of that country;
however, what interests my country is the result of
your negotiations. You have negotiated the terms of
these decisions; you have replaced the word “condemns” by “deplores”;
you have replaced the word
“demands”
by “calls upon”, and what have you
obtained? You have obtained a reply which is more
than a rebuff to this, the highest body of the Organization. You have received a cold reply telling you that
your decision, as of now, is null and void and will not
be respected.

82. You have negotiated
amongst yourselves the
terms of a resolution which you have just adopted.’
The reply of the Moroccan delegation to this decision
has been clear and I do not believe it is necessary for you to wait any longer to take another
decision.
831’ After having heard the statement of the representative of Morocco, there should be no further doubt
in your mind that the invasion of Saharan territory
by the Moroccan
marchers will continue.
There
should be no doubt in your mind that this march
will reach the line occupied by the Spanish army.
It is not for me to say what Spain’s attitude at that
point will be, but if I am to believe the statements
that I have heard, just as you have heard, from the
representative of Spain, I suppose that this situation
will degenerate into clashes, in incidents that will
result in deaths, and that situation
will simply
increase the tension and danger for the entire region,
not to mention dangers that should not be disregarded
because they have already appeared-for
example,
clashes between Moroccans who have ventured into
Spanish territory
and the Saharans themselves.
These are not imaginary dangers, since, as you also
probably know, there have been such clashes already.
When a situation develops in this way, everyone
knows that it gets completely out of hand, and it is
because of this that I have already informed the Security Council of the apprehensions
of the Algerian
Government
and its intention
to face up to this
situation.

87. Since, despite the danger of this situation, despite
the gravity of the events which are occurring,
speakers have indulged in a little philosophy, perhaps
I might make a little digression. We must do this,
we the new countries which have just entered the
international
arena, which is already organized with
its own laws, its own customs, its own methods,
its own conventions,
and we have tried to behave
as members of the international
community
should.
It is not without deep concern that for some years
now we see certain very dangerous customs developing. We deplored them prior to this when they did
not affect us directly,
but who can avoid such
dangerous distortions of international
life? The fact
is that we are affected by these distortions which
are now making themselves felt at our very frontiers.
These customs are those of the triumph of might
over right.

84. As a representative
of a country which is one
of the parties concerned and interested in this case,
1 am entitled to wonder why the Security Council,
knowing how the situation would develop, aware of the

88. Without putting too fine a point on it, these
customs amount to utilization
of the fait accompli.
The law is violated, a fait accompli is perpetrated
10

and then negotiated. The fait accompli-validates
your
claims. I have claims on -the .Sahara, and I occupy
the Sahara to prove that my claim is justified. It is
most distressing for us to see this philosophy.develop
generally in the world, and particularly
in a region
where we ourselves are compelled to establish sound
customs and bilateral relations based on an equally
”
sound conception of international
law.

94. As PRESIDENT
of the Security Council, I
would very willingly
explain to the representative
of Algeria the purpose of today’s meeting. As President
of the Council, this morning I received from. His
Majesty the King of Morocco a reply [see S/11868]
to the communication
I sent him last night’ [ibid.],
as authorized by the Council. Neither I nor the members of the Security Council are indifferent to that
reply. I immediately
convened a consultative informal
meeting of the Council members. The Council members
very willingly reacted to my suggestion. The purpose
of the meeting was to inform them of the contents
of the reply received from the King of Morocco. As
you know, intensive consultations were held
. . today. All
tfie members ome 3
consultations.

89. However much I may desire to develop this idea
further, I realize it is quite late and I especially do
not wish to overlook the fact that the subject of the
Council’s debate today, on which you have adopted a
resolution that has had so little effect, does not allow
me to tax the Council’s time or attention by referting
to matters, however interesting they may be, which
might perhaps cause the Council to forget the gravity
of the subject itself.

95. It was recognized that this reply called for further
measures by the Security Council. The general view
was expressed that firmer, stronger measures should
be taken by the Council. Despite the difficulties and
the complexity
involved,
a draft resolution
was
prepared, a draft decision, and that draft is known to
you now, to us and to the entire world.

90. It is not for me to tell the Security Council
what it should do. It is not for the Algerian delegation
to remind the members of the Council of their
responsibilities.
I must repeat what I have already
said on behalf of my Government:
if the Security
Council cannot or will not act in keeping with its
responsibilities,
my Government
will be compelled
to discharge its own responsibilities.
This is neither
a threat nor a provocation.
It is the clearest possible
expression of the strongest possible determination.

96. In the resolution that has now been adopted,*
the Council has expressed great concern at the fact
that the situation concerning Western Sahara has
seriously deteriorated. The Security Council has noted
this fact. It has also noted that Morocco has not
implemented
the two other resolutions and the special
appeal ~and it expresses regret and deplores the
holding of the march.

91. The issue before the Council is the threat to the
peace represented by the march organized by the
Moroccan Government in the Territory of the Sahara.
The fundamental
problem,
the political
problem,
falls within the purview of the General Assembly.
The Algerian Government
has taken a position on
this problem. Naturally, 1 could state our position here
and go into the arguments of my Government,
but I
shall do so before the General Assembly; I shall do so
before the Fourth Committee when this matter comes
up. That, in the view of the Algerian delegation, is
how the problem should be settled in an international
organization.

97. Compared with the preceding resolutions, this is a
crystallization
of the Security Council’s decisions.
Unfortunately,
it is hand to view such an action by
the States Members of the United Nations and the
Security Council as encouraging. There seems to be
rather a kind of blame. Paragraph 2 of the resolution
calls upon Morocco-and
Morocco is named for the
first time in a Council resolution-immediately
to
withdraw all the participants in the march from the
Territory of Western Sahara. In the preceding Council
resolutions that did not appear. The members of the
Council consider this to be a step forward. Naturally,
you may or may not agree with the wording. Other
views were expressed, but the draft resolution was
kept in the form that now appears in the resolution.

92. However that may be, I should like as clearly
and explicitly as possible to state that the Algerian
Government will not accept any solution of the problem
of the decolonization
of Western Sahara which might
be reached outside the United Nations which is not
arrived at in accordance with the resolutions
and
decisions of this body, and in particular of the General
Assembly, and which does not involve all the parties
concerned and interested.

98. It goes without saying that Council members
will take note of the statement made by the representative of Algeria to the effect that he does not insist
on a revision of the resolution that has been adopted,
nor on revising its wording. He simply insists that this
wording should be made stronger. That is how I
understood
his appeal, through the translation.
I
assume that Council members will take note of this
view and this wish of the representative of Algeria.

93. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The representative
of Algeria has used very strong
words in referring to the Security Council and the
purpose of convening today’s meeting. As representative of the UNION
OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS,
I can say that in my country criticism
and self-criticism
are greatly encouraged. Criticism
and self-criticism promote progre& and improve work.

99. In connexion with his statement, I must inform
you that at today’s consultative meeting, as I already
11

_‘.

,’

reported at the outset; the attention‘of~members’of the
Council was drawn .to a letter .from the Charge. d’affaires a.i. of the .Permanent Mission ,of Spain to the
UnitedNations [S/I [87/j +The members of the Council
and the Secretary-General took, note of the serious,ness of the situation as’set forth in that letter and on
the further deterioration of the situation in that area.
JOO. In this connexion, at the second consultative
meeting held today it’ias decided that, after adopting
by consensus the resolution at this meeting and after
hearing the statements made by the, parties, the Council members could again exchange views in the light
of the additional information they might have received
on the situation’in that area. Furthermore, a number
of members of the Security Council have referred to
new facts which have emerged during’ the present
meeting and the wish was ekpressed that informal
consultations among the Council members be held
promptly.
101.. Accordingly, I as President of the Council
intend-of course with the Council’s agreement and
after the closing of the‘present meeting held to take
a decision dealing mainly with the reply of the King
of Morocco+o hold further consultations as to what
additional measures the Council should take. That is
‘how matters stand with regard to our consideration
of this problem in the
_”
.,.’Council.
:.
102. I now call on the representative of Morocco.
103. Mr. SLAOUI (Morocco) (interpretation fvom
French): The representative of Algeria thought it
necessary to remind the Council that: ‘*as representative of Algeria; I have ‘drawn your attention to the
gravity of the situation resulting from a crossing of the
frontier” [see puregraph 79 dmvej.
:
-,

104. With your permission, Mr. President, and with
that of the members’ of the Security Council, allow
me to, say .what President Boumediene himself thinks
of the problem. Paragraph 59 of appendix II to the
report of the United Nations Visiting Mission to
Western Sahara, dated 21 October 1975, says:

“reprkseutative of Algeria ‘has spoken’ irresponsibly
because ‘he wishes .toIead the Council to make condemnations which would close the ,,door to any
negotiated
. I.. ‘>solution likely to prevent,.,.to worst from
occurrmg;.
: _,,
...
, .I
:a.,.,. ,.
. .
8,
. 106. The PRESIDENT(interprecati;i;rfrom Russian):
I ,c$lIed’ on the representatives of the parties to
‘exercise their right of reply, Since none ‘of the Security
Council members were on my list. Now that I have
a speaker on my list I shall call on’him.. I shall then
call on any other speaker and then on the representative of Algeria in exercise of his right of reply.
107. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) ‘(interpretation
from French): I shall be very brief in order to enable
my colleague from Algeria to speak. I ,shall be very
brief not only because it is late ‘but because my
country, through its delegation here, has had an occasion to state its position on the problem of the Sahara
at previous meetings of the Council [1849th, 1850th
and 1852nd meetings]. We shall have an,opportunity to
do so, if the occasion arises, in other United Nations
bodies.
108: These numerous consultative’ ‘and official
meetings prove, if proof was required, that the problem of Western Sahara can hardly be assimilated to
the classical problems of decolonization. It proves
too that this is a problem which is of concern, quite
rightly, to the international community because of its
complex and explosive nature. It is certainly because
of this fact that we realize how urgent it is to find a
solution to this problem, and I believe that this is the
first duty of the Security Council. What solution is
envisaged? As we see it is not a matter of dealing
with one aspect rather than another. We must deal
with the substantive problem of decolonization of the
Territory itself. This decolonization, we believe, can
be achieved-and, in our opinion, this is the most
appropriate procedure-within
the framework of
the United Nations. We also believe- that United
Nations action would ,be considerably facilitated by
negotiations. which the narties concerned could start
forthwith. ’

“In
conclusion, the .President”-President
Houari Boumedibne-“said that he felt particularly
at ease in talking to the .Mission because his country
had no territorial claim on Sahara. If it did have such
a claim,.it would recover what belonged to it without
waiting for the arrival of a United ,Nations mission,
despite the great respect it had ‘for the Organization.“5

109. I believe furthermore that the Security Council
has perfectly well perceived the usefulness of such an
approach when it speaks about negotiations between
the parties. Those negotiations dealing with the substance of the problem, in our opinion, are likely to
facilitate the solution of the present problem created
by the Moroccan march.

105. That statement made by the Algerian head of
State to the Chairman of the United Nations Visiting
Mission enables us properly to assess the many
statements made by ,the .delegation of Algeria concerning its ‘devotion to the principle of self-determination within the framework of the United Nations.
Such is the case; ‘as for the rest, I think that the

110. ,That is why. I Concur in what my colleague
from Morocco has said-namely, that ourtwo countries are prepared not only ,to co-operate faithfully
and sincerely with the Sedretary-General, but are
likewise prepared to start negotiations with Spain,
which is the administering Power, so as to discuss
the entire problem and thus facilitate future action
by the General Assembly regarding decolonization.

--

111. The PRESIDENT
~(&?erpreraUo~ from Russian): I now calIi ‘ .on the ‘representative of Algeria:’
. .
112. Mr. ‘R&AL
(Algeria) (ititerp&dtion
‘f&m
French): Of all that my colleague, the’ representative
of Morocco, has said, 1. shall not take up’ anything
I need not take .up; things, which in any case should
not be taken up by me since thei concern me personally. But, as regards the ,sentence he ‘extracted
from the report of. the. United Nations. Visiting Mission to Western Sahara, I do’have something to say.

made, all the meetings it has held-often
late at nightall the consultations its,members have had;‘once again
I should like’ to accord those efforts Xhe tribute they’
deserve. This, however, does not 1 enable me to
accept lightheartedly
‘the fact that the desired effects
have not,been achieved. Of course;1 cannot hold the
.Council itseif responsible. In fact, when I deplored
the! attention lavished on, the .choice of words; I .did
say that what mattered was not the terms in which.a
decision was ’ expressed but rather, at least in the
opinion of the’ delegation of Algeria, the ,effect that
‘such a decision might produce.
’

113. First ,of all, I am -pleased that the-delegation
of Morocco seems to show so keen an interest in
this document, a rdocument which has many other
paragraphs than the one quoted. The delegation of
Algeria has ,always urged that we refer to the report
,and also to the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice’ so as to be able to decide on the way
of decolonizing the Sahara.

118. I shall ,not avail myself. of this opportunity
to
make another statement, but I had, nevertheless,
to
assure the Security Council and each individual member that it was never the intention of the delegation
of Algeria, or of its spokesman, myself, to cast a slur
on the dignity of the Council. On the contrary, I wish
to emphasize that dignity here, and indeed to request
that everything be done in order that the dignity of the
Council may be not onfy respected but strengthened.

114. When the Algerian people wished to recover
their independence and their country, .they embarked
on a war of liberation which has been sufficiently
praised by others for me not to have to glorify it here.
This struggle, however, did not prevent Algeria from
first putting its problem. to the United
Nations.
Whatever the developments
of that liberation struggle, the Algerian people accepted the fact that the
solution of its problem be reached by its exercise
of the right of self-determination.

119. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russiun): Since there. are no more speakers, I would
like to address the Council in my capacity as representative of the UNION
OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS.
The position of the Soviet Union on
this question has. been set forth in the statements
made by the delegation of the Soviet Union at the
meetings of .the Security Council held on 22 October
[185&h meeting] and 2 November [1852nd meeting],
and also-.during
the informal consultations
among
Security Council members which. have. taken place
over the past few days.
,;
120. The development
of events in Western Sahara
has again required an urgent convening of the Security
Council. We can only express our deep regret that at
the present time Council resolutions 377 (1975) and
379 (1975) have not yet been implemented-resolutions which were aimed at preventing
a further
deterioration
of the situation in Western Sahara.
Furthermore,
as a result of the unilateral
actions
taken in violation’ of the aforementioned
Council
resolutions ‘and of the ‘decision taken this evening
by the Council with regard to the appeal of the
President of the Council to the King of ,Morocco
to put an end to the march in, Western Sahara,
that march has taken place. We share the concern of
Council members,
the Secretary-General
and the
interested parties concerning the escalation of tension
in that area.

115. This reminder, I believe, can give some indications of the philosophy
of Algeria’ as regards the
satisfaction of claims. And when the head of State of
Algeria stated that he would not have waited for a
visiting mission from the United Nations to come to
his country, that meant that he himself would have gone
directly to the United Nations. I must say, too, that
the method applied by the ‘Government
of Morocco
is ,a11 the more illogical in that. it comes after years
and years ‘of commitments
made in the General
Assembly to the ,acceptance of a solution’ to this
problem through the exercise, by the population of the
Western Sahara, of its right to self-determination.
I do not believe that if a Government
had to .defend
its position on the basis ,of logic, it would .be the
Government of Morocco that would find it easiest.
116. After the statement you made a little while ago,
Mr. President, I feel bound to say’that my respect for
the Security Council and’ the respect‘which’1 have for
each of its members individually,
permits me to claim
that the possibly harsh language I used just now was not
directed either to the members ‘of the Council or to
the Council as such. My judgement was perhaps very
harsh as regards a situation which is developing contrary to our wishes and contrary, no doubt, to the wish
of the Council also.

12 1. I should like to take this opportunity to express
my gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his tireless efforts and the efficient measures he has undertaken -to provide Security Council members with the
detailed information
which he has systematically
117. I was very happy to point out in the .course - ‘-reported to the Council, including the report he made
of my statement all the efforts which the Council has
today concerning Western Sahara.
,

13

122. As has been frequently stated by the Soviet
Union, the pro&s
of decolonizing
Western Sahara
has been dragged out. The peoples of that Territory
should be granted their right to self-determination
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
The colonial domination
of Spain should be ended.
All problems arising therefrom should be settled by
peaceful means, and the solution to those problems
should be achieved through negotiations and agreements. In this connexion, the Soviet delegation considers it extremely important that the parties concerned
and interested
should refrain from any unilateral
activities
that might complicate
or aggravate the
situation in that area and threaten peace and security.
In other words, the Soviet Union is in favour of
the kind of solution to this question that would satisfy
the interests of the peoples of Western Sahara
themselves. On this basis, the Soviet delegation insists
on the implementation
of the relevant United Nations
decisions on decolonization
and also the decisions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council on
Western Sahara, including the one adopted today by
the Security Council.
123. The Soviet delegation,
having supported the
compromise
resolution adopted at today’s meeting,
considers that it could be a means of reducing tension
in that area and of restoring peace and security there.
We are deeply convinced that the prompt cessation of
unilateral activity with regard to Western Sahara, and
the withdrawal of all participants in the march into
the Territory,
would normalize the situation in that
area.

/

’ Litho in United Nations, New York

.

124. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
as I already
stated in my previous comments, I should like once
again to remind members of the Council that at the
second consultative
meeting we held today it was
.decided that, after the adoption of a consensus
resolution by the Council and after hearing the statements of the parties, Council members would exchange
views in the light of any additional information
they
had received.
125. Furthermore,
I already stated that a number of
Council members are in possession of new facts
that have become known during the course of today’s
meeting, and the wish was expressed that an urgent
informal consultation among Council members be held.
In accordance with this wish, therefore, I, as President
of the Council, intend-of
course, with the assent of
Council members-to
invite the Council members to
remain after the adjournment
of the official meeting
so that we can have a brief exchange of views at a
short, informal
consultative
meeting. I emphasize
the word “short” in view of the very late hour.
It was so decided.
The meeting

rose at 11.15 p.m.
Notes

l See resolution 380 (1975).
2 Wes/ern
3 Ibid.,
4 OfJiciul
Supplement
5 Ibid.,

Saharu,

Advisory

Opinion,

Records

of the

General

p. 12.

I.C.J.

Reports

Assembly,

Thirtieth

1975.

p. 100.
Session,

No. 23, vol. III, chap. XIII, annex.
appendix II.

14
00300

82-61202-De&m&r

1983-2.200
