S/PV.7796

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7796th meeting

Friday, 28 October 2016, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Iliichev. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Ms. Gaye
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Herasymenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Collective Security Treaty Organization, Shanghai Cooperation Organization
and Commonwealth of Independent States
Letter dated 14 October 2016 from the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2016/867)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-34839 (E)
*1634839*

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.

the International Criminal Court (ICC). The world has
made enormous strides in building a global system of
international criminal justice, with the International
Criminal Court as its centrepiece. The ICC and other
international tribunals have secured ground-breaking
convictions. Yet we know that these and other gains have
also been accompanied by setbacks and shortcomings.
Prosecutions can take many years. Not all countries
accept the ICC’s jurisdiction, and even some of those
that do, do not always support the Court fully.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Collective Security Treaty Organization,
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
Commonwealth of Independent States
Letter dated 14 October 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2016/867)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Pakisan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nikolai
Bordyuzha, Secretary-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization; Mr. Rashid Alimov,
Secretary-General of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization; and Mr. Sergey Ivanov, Vice-Chair of
the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth of
Independent States.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/867, which contains a letter dated
14 October 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I am pleased to be here
today, and I thank the Russian presidency for having
convened this debate.
Before turning to the subject at hand, I wish to say
a few words about the latest developments regarding
2/34

28/10/2016

Some are concerned that the Court has convicted
only Africans, despite evidence of crimes in other parts
of the world. Indeed, in recent days, three African
countries have expressed their intent to withdraw from
the Court. I regret these steps, which could send the
wrong message on these countries’ commitment to
justice.
These challenges are best addressed not by
diminishing support for the Court, but by strengthening
it from within Deterring future atrocities, delivering
justice for victims and defending the rules of war across
the globe are far too important priorities to risk a retreat
from the age of accountability that we have worked so
hard to build and solidify.
I welcome the Secretaries-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Vice-Chair of
the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth of
Independent States.
The global peace and security landscape has
become much more complex in the last decade. Brutal
wars raging across the Middle East and beyond continue
to take lives, displace millions and wreck economies.
Hospitals, schools and aid convoys are targeted with
absolute disregard for international law and basic
humanity. The resurgence of ethnic and sectarian
tensions in the midst of these conflicts risks trapping
nations in chaos for many years to come.
I am especially alarmed at the fact that a wide
variety of armed actors are taking advantage of modern
technology and globalization to wreak havoc on a
horrific scale. Meanwhile, growing xenophobic, nativist
and protectionist policies and sentiments in other parts
of the world are cause for serious concern. These
challenges transcend national borders and demand a
collective response by the international community.
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

To rise to the moment, the United Nations has
completed a number of major reviews of our work.
All emphasized the urgent need to prioritize conflict
prevention in a collective manner that draws on regional
and global partnerships. This has always been one of
my top priorities. After nearly 10 years as SecretaryGeneral, I am even more convinced that the international
community must come together to promote stability
and defuse tensions wherever they occur.
In this context, and in line with Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter, we are seeking to intensify
our interactions with the heads of regional and
subregional organizations. I have personally engaged in
collaborating with our regional partners for results. The
impact has been meaningful, but we can do even more.
Central Asia is the region where we have our
closest contact with the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
and the Commonwealth of Independent States. These
organizations regularly exchange information with
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia on terrorism, violent
extremism, drug trafficking and other issues of shared
interest and concern.
My Special Representative for Central Asia and
Head of the United Nations Regional Centre, Mr. Petko
Draganov, regularly meets with the organizations’
leaders to discuss our joint agenda and the latest
developments. All three organizations actively
participate in supporting the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia.
The United Nations Security Council CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
are in direct contact with counterparts in all three
organizations. The United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) cooperates with all three
organizations on drug trafficking, irregular migration
and counter-terrorism. They have conducted joint
operational initiatives in Afghanistan and Central
Asia. Experts from the three organizations participate
regularly in UNODC meetings, including the Paris Pact
Initiative, a partnership to combat illicit trafficking in
opiates from Afghanistan.
On peacekeeping, I am especially grateful that
senior officials from the Collective Security Treaty
Organization participated in the first-ever United
Nations Chiefs of Police Summit in June to discuss
how we can more effectively tackle challenges

S/PV.7796

together. Our organizations also work to strengthen
confidence-building measures and promote stability in
Afghanistan through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.
The United Nations is committed to strengthening this
productive partnership.
We all agree on the value of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, and we
should not be afraid to confront the difficulties. We
have much in common, but our strategies may at times
pull us in different directions. Resources, capabilities
and mandates vary. Sometimes regional organizations
may have particular challenges that can limit their role
as honest brokers.
That is why it is so important to deepen our strategic
dialogue, forge common approaches to emerging crises
and strive to improve our collective responses to peace
and security threats. In that way, we can make the most
of our respective strengths.
Let us use this valuable Security Council meeting
to advance our partnerships for the sake of the peoples
of these regions and our world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bordyuzha.
Mr. Bordyuzha (spoke in Russian): I should
like at the outset to thank the Russian delegation for
having convened today’s meeting on such an important
issue as cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security. We also thank Mr. Ban Ki-moon for
his statement.
The year 2017 will be marked for us by two
anniversaries: the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
signing, in Tashkent on 15 May 1992, of the Collective
Security Treaty, and the fifteenth anniversary since
the establishment, on the basis of that Treaty, the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). In
that time, the CSTO has created a comprehensive legal
basis regulating the work of the organization in all
areas of its work, establishing the necessary political,
diplomatic, military, and human rights, and special
resources for ensuring the individual and collective
security of member States and counteracting traditional
and new threats.
In developing existing concepts of collective
security, in Yerevan in October we held a meeting of

16-348393/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the Council at which it adopted the CSTO collective
security strategy for 2025. One important area of our
work is coordinating with senior political officials of
member States and cooperating with other international
and regional organizations. We are extending our
working contacts with such international organizations
as the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) and other major international
structures.
We are strengthening CSTO forces. We now have
a joint CSTO force that, beyond bilateral and regional
groups, includes collective forces for rapid response, a
collective CSTO air force, a rapid-deployment force for
Central Asia and CSTO peacekeeping forces. We have
established and are improving our military-technical
and military-economic cooperation mechanisms with
member States.
In the area of response to security threats, the
efforts of CSTO members are focused on counteracting
international terrorism and extremism, illegal drug
trafficking, illegal migration, trafficking in persons,
and crime on the Internet. The effectiveness of these
CSTO special operations — including the Kanal
anti-narcotics programme, the anti-illegal migration
programme Nyelegal, the anti-cybercrime programme
Proxy and the Nayomnik programme, aimed at
preventing CSTO fighters from entering conflict
zones — has been recognized for its effectiveness.
Of particular importance in this year’s work of
the CSTO is counteracting international terrorism.
We are extending our cooperation with national
anti-terrorist services. We are establishing a legal
framework for a common security space for member
States and undertaking joint efforts to adopt a plan
to implement the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. In a recent meeting of the CSTO
Council, a mechanism — unique among international
organizations — was adopted for drawing up a single
list of terrorist and extremist organizations in the CSTO
format. In counter-terrorism, we are endowed with a
collective CSTO response force that is undergoing
extensive training to develop special forces. At our
initiative, in addition to cooperation with specialized
agencies of the United Nations, we coordinate with
anti-terrorist structures of OSCE, CIS and SCO.
4/34

28/10/2016

As a result of the migration crisis in Europe, we
have adopted collective measures to enhance our fight
against illegal immigration. We have begun to monitor
migration flows from areas of armed conflict, mobilize
resources and train joint forces to work with internally
displaced persons. To increase the effectiveness of our
measures to counter crime on the Internet, for the past
three years we have had a consultaive coordination
centre to respond to cybercrime. As a follow-up to
the mechanism, our Heads of State have resolved to
create a CSTO crisis-response centre. We also intend to
establish a CTSO centre to coordinate with the United
Nations crisis response.
I note in particular that in all areas of our work,
CSTO works closely with United Nations structures.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon gave an especially
important boost to cooperation between the
organizations when he paid a visit to CSTO headquarters
in 2011 and spoke to representatives of CSTO member
States. Relations with this important international
Organization are high-priority and constructive, as
set out in the memorandum of cooperation between
the CSTO and United Nations secretariats and the
recurring General Assembly resolution on cooperation
between the two organizations. It is also enshrined in
the observer status enjoyed by CSTO in the General
Assembly. When we met with Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon in Moscow and New York, we discussed the
need to enhance cooperation between CSTO and the
United Nations, and we hope for similarly intensive
and constructive dialogue with the Secretary-General
designate, Mr. Guterres.
We have always enjoyed high-level working
contacts among senior officials of the two organizations
and their participation in United Nations-CSTO events.
The CSTO secretariat works on such important areas as
counteracting international terrorism and extremism,
illegal drug trafficking and illegal immigration,
peacekeeping and a number of other areas related
to international security. We have had particularly
intensive cooperation with the United Nations,
including Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, to resolve the situation in Afghanistan and
assess the situation in Central Asia. We have signed
a memorandum of cooperation with the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, which
includes information exchanges and regular high-level
contacts to assess our anti-terrorism efforts.
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We are implementing a memorandum of
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and exchanging analyses and
information on the drug situation in the region under
CSTO responsibility. CSTO experts will participate in
the UNODC Podmena operation in Central Asia, aimed
at preventing precursors from reaching Afghanistan.
Representatives of UNODC take part in CSTO
operations. The information and teaching materials
prepared by the United Nations are used to train the
staff of counter-narcotics organizations of member
States.
We are also developing cooperation with regional
structures of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, whose representatives
regularly work with CSTO coordination structures. We
hold regular meetings with the leadership of the Regional
Office for the Caucasus, Central Asia and Ukraine and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
and regularly exchange information on emergency
situations. We have agreed a protocol between the
CSTO secretariat, the regional office of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and regional
representations of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Red Crescent in Russia.
We traditionally enjoy high-level cooperation
between CSTO and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.
We hold video-teleconferences and regular exchanges
of information on crises situations, and coordinate
joint activities. The Centre’s leadership takes part
in many meetings with CSTO Ministers for Foreign
Affairs. We enjoy cooperation with the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida,and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities.
On the basis of memorandum of 28 May 2010,
our cooperation with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has intensified. With the Department’s
methodological assistance, we train CSTO peacekeepers
and work is under way to establish a permanent police
stand-by force to deploy to peacekeeping operations,
including those under Security Council mandate. We
are completing the establishment of the legal basis to
regulate the work of the CSTO joint peacekeepers,
and preparing a road map up to 2025 that, following
agreement with the United Nations Secretariat, will
facilitate the establishment of preconditions for using

S/PV.7796

CSTO peacekeeping potential for United Nations
peacekeeping.
In conclusion, I wish once again to express
our readiness to cooperate closely with the United
Nations and to make proposals that we believe
would facilitate and strengthen cooperation between
CSTO and the Organization, with an emphasis on
practical components.
First, we wish to pursue the practice of holding
high-level regional meetings, under the auspices of
the United Nations Secretary-General, to exchange
information related to international security.
Secondly, we hope to coordinate joint efforts and
a mechanism for international cooperation based on
the potential of existing organizations, and to hold
meetings between the CSTO secretariat, the SCO
regional antiterrorist structure, the CIS anti-terrorist
centre, the Department of Transnational Threats and
Security Committee of the OSCE Permanent Council
and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which would promote closer interaction in thisarea.
Thirdly, we would like to see UNODC’s cooperation
with regional and international security organizations
focusing on strengthening their coordination of joint
activity aimed at combating illegal drug trafficking and
creating an effective system for the rehabilitation and
re-socialization of drug addicts. We would also like to
see the leadership of UNODC hold frequent meetings
with senior officials of the regional and international
structures that specialize in issues related to combating
illegal drug trafficking.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Bordyuzha for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alimov.
Mr. Alimov (spoke in Russian): I would first
like to thank the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for taking this important initiative and for
inviting the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
to take part in today’s debate in the Security Council,
a forum that has so much bearing on the fate of the
international community.
This year, SCO is celebrating its fifteenth
anniversary. During that time, the founding member
States of SCO have tested and successfully put into
practice a model of intergovernmental cooperation
based on the principles of the spirit of Shanghai, whose

16-348395/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

key elements are equality, mutual respect, mutually
beneficial cooperation and joint development.SCO
member States proceed from the assumption that
the United Nations remains the leading universal
international organization for the maintenance of global
security and affirm their commitment to the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and to strengthening
its central coordinating role in international affairs.
The relationship between SCO and the United
Nations has been actively evolving since 2004, as
they have significantly strengthened it until it has
become an example of effective cooperation between a
global, universal organization and a regional one. That
cooperation focuses particularly on complementing
United Nations and Security Council efforts in the
maintenance of international peace and security. SCO’s
main priorities include ensuring regional security and
stability, fighting terrorism, separatism and extremism,
and combating illegal drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime. Within our organization, we have
developed a package of international regulations
that now include 31 documents on issues relating
to cooperation in the areas of policy and security
and constitute the legal basis essential to effective
cooperation in that very important field.
SCO supports coordinating the fight against the
threat of terrorism under the auspices of the United
Nations. We are involved in the continued expansion of
cooperation with the United Nations in taking joint action
aimed at implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. In this regard, the activities of SCO regional
anti-terrorist structure are particularly important. It
forms the base for a successfully tested mechanism for
effective multilateral counter-terrorism cooperation, as
well as regular interaction and information exchanges
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Between 2011 and 2015, the relevant authorities
of SCO member States, through the coordinating role
of the SCO regional anti-terrorist structure, prevented
20 terrorist attacks at the preparatory stage and about
650 terrorist and extremist crimes; eliminated 440
terrorist training bases and about 1,700 members of
international terrorist organizations; detained more
than 2,700 members of illegal armed groups and their
accomplices and persons suspected of criminal activity;
and extradited 213 people involved in activities of
terrorist and extremist organizations, with many of
them being sentenced to long prison terms. Much work
6/34

28/10/2016

has been done to curb illicit trafficking in arms and
explosives and to counter the use of Internet networks
for terrorist, separatist and extremist purposes. SCO’s
regional anti-terrorist structure has also developed
and implemented joint measures to detect channels
used to transport people to regions with heightened
terrorist activity in order to enable them to fight for
international terrorist organizations in internal armed
conflicts, and has created a list of terrorist, separatist
and extremist organizations. The structure intends to
explore opportunities for practical cooperation with the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
Achieving peace and stability in Afghanistan as
soon as possible is an important factor in maintaining
and strengthening security in the entire region. The
Tashkent Declaration, adopted on 24 June by the Heads
of SCO member States, emphasizes our involvement in
and support for settling the intra-Afghan conflict by
promoting an inclusive national reconciliation process
under Afghan leadership and conducted by Afghans
themselves, with the United Nations playing a central
coordinating role. We consider a key SCO policy to be
ramping up its efforts in the area of combating the illicit
drug production and trafficking out of Afghanistan
that poses a threat to international peace and
stability, as outlined in Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. Implementing the SCO 20112016 anti-narcotic strategy and programme of action
continues to be particularly important in that regard.
Thanks to the operations of the national drug
control authorities, as well as improved cooperation
between the relevant SCO member State authorities, in
the period from 2010 to 2015 alone we seized about 25
tons of heroin, more than 11 tons of raw opium and more
than 352 tons of marijuana. Operation Myshelovka,
conducted in 2015, enabled us to seize more than 75
tons of precursors. We are currently conducting a joint
effort to develop a strategy for combating the drug threat
over the next five years. In that connection, we consider
continuing and strengthening the close cooperation
between SCO and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to be particularly important.
We note the very productive dialogue between SCO
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia. Considering the recent
breakthrough decisions by the Security Council and
General Assembly on peacebuilding and sustainable
peace, there are good prospects for expanding SCO
contact with the United Nations system, including the
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific.
SCO is working consistently and purposefully to
develop and expand cooperation in the humanitarian
aspects of regional security. SCO member States’
commitment to the spirit of Shanghai, the most
important principle of its activities, is enabling us to
construct a productive intercultural, interreligious and
inter-civilization dialogue based on the parties’ mutual
trust, respect and equality. We intend to continue to
further develop our policy of multifaceted cooperation
with the United Nations and the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Alimov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ivanov.
Mr. Ivanov (spoke in Russian): On behalf of
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), I
would like to express my sincere gratitude for the
invitation to take part in today’s debate on the issue
of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. We are greatly
honoured by the number of regional organizations
represented here and for the opportunity to address
and inform the Security Council. The Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS) and the United Nations
have been cooperating since 24 March 1994, when the
General Assembly adopted resolution 48/237, granting
it observer status. Over the 25 years of its existence, the
CIS has moved into the mainstream of global processes
and has contributed to the development of a broad
political dialogue founded on equality. With time, the
Commonwealth has become a launching pad for creating
and developing new integrative institutions in the postSoviet space, such as the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Eurasian Economic Community.
A major event this year was the meeting in
September in Bishkek of the Council of CIS Heads
of State. It is worth noting four of the declarations
adopted at the Summit, of which the first concerned the
Commonwealth’s twenty-fifth anniversary, assessed its
activity and discussed the importance of improving,
developing and promoting it. Other declarations adopted
included one on the outcomes of the special session of
the General Assembly on the world drug problem, one
on future joint efforts to counter international terrorism

S/PV.7796

and one on the seventieth anniversary of the Nuremberg
trials. The declarations were to be circulated at the
United Nations, which I heard today has been done.
The CIS is not a bystander with regard to current
world problems. In order to address them effectively,
we have established and continue to develop contacts
with the working bodies of the main international
organizations dealing with key issues on the global
agenda. The CIS Executive Committee maintains
relationships, including those based on agreements,
with such United Nations bodies as the Secretariat, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), the secretariat of the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), the
United Nations Office at Geneva, the secretariat of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Our
established practice of regular consultations between
CIS Foreign Ministers on current international issues is
very important in that regard.
The potential of the CIS for constructive action
has been recognized as an important element in broad
international cooperation, as reflected in resolution
69/10, on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Commonwealth of Independent States, adopted on
11 November 2014 by the Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session. This year we intend to adopt a new version of
that document at the seventy-first session, under agenda
item 126. In that connection, I would like to point out
that CIS representatives are regular participants in many
efforts organized in alignment with the United Nations,
such as the Tashkent international conference on the
outcomes of the creation of the Central Asia NuclearWeapon-Free Zone, held on 12 June 2015, and a regional
seminar held in Ashgabat in March 2015 on border
security and management in countering terrorism. At
the end of this month, CIS representatives will take
part in an international conference in Minsk on laying
the foundations for the UNECE region’s economic
integration and sustainable development by 2030, as
well as the Global Sustainable Transport Conference,
to be held on 26 and 27 November in Ashgabat.
I should also mention the regional workshop held
in Minsk from 15 to 17 January 2013 on implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), organized by the Executive
Director of the CIS in cooperation with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and the
secretariat of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which was attended by

16-348397/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

28/10/2016

representatives from every CIS member State. Lasting
and productive partnerships have been established
between the CIS Executive Committee and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia. CIS representatives regularly attend
events organized by the Centre, and the Executive
Director of the CIS holds annual meetings with the
Head of the Regional Centre.

divisions of the United Nations as the United Nations
Population Fund, UNESCO, the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
UNCTAD, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the World Meteorological Organization,
the World Health Organization, the World Intellectual
Property Organization and others.

The CIS maintains active contact with specialized
United Nations agencies of the United Nations through
its cooperative sector bodies. For example, the CIS
member States’ Anti-Terrorism Centre maintains
contacts with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), under the Security Council, and with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Anti-Terrorism
Centre experts regularly participate in CTC missions
verifying CIS member States’ compliance with
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). At the
request of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the Centre prepares information for the
global survey of the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005). The CIS intergovernmental statistics committee
actively cooperates with the Food and Agriculture
Organization in implementing the Global Strategy to
Improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics in the CIS
region. Our Intergovernmental Council on Industrial
Security maintains close contact with the secretariat
of the UNECE Convention on the Protection and Use
of Transboundary Watercourses and International
Lakes. Representatives of the Commission’s secretariat
regularly participate in Council meetings, an in
September 2016, the Convention secretariat was
accorded observer status on the Council. Cooperation
with United Nations institutions is a priority for the CIS
Inter-Parliamentary Assembly.

CIS member States participate in all United Nations
activities. Economic cooperation is our priority, but now
issues related to cooperation on security are also taking
centre stage, thanks to the increasing threats in the area
of international security. We can see that today’s world
is being constantly overwhelmed with new challenges.
New sources of tension are added to old conflicts, and
serious crises permanently endanger not just individual
countries but entire regions. The threats and challenges
posed by terrorist groups demand that we ramp up
our collective counter-measures, including through
regional organizations. The CIS believes that our united
efforts will produce the greatest effects if we steadily
and consistently strengthen the central coordinating
role of the United Nations and develop the potential
of its specialized institutions and global programmes.
The CIS member States affirm their commitment to
effectively implementing their obligations undertaken
through relevant United Nations decisions, as well
as their intention to fully support the United Nations
in implementing and improving its Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.

On the economic front, we are cooperating with
the United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, and we are
preparing to sign a memorandum of understanding with
the United Nations Human Settlements Programme.
The Inter-Parliamentary Assembly pursues regular
contacts with UNESCO to promote its members’ further
adherence to UNESCO conventions. We conduct joint
humanitarian actions and implement projects, while
UNESCO experts take part in the Inter-Parliamentary
Assembly’s standard-setting activities. Our departments
have established cooperation with such entities and
8/34

Needless to say, we are concerned about the serious
risks in the immediate vicinity of CIS external borders,
specifically the continued tensions in the AfghanPakistan region, which of course are a direct threat to the
security of the Central Asian States that are members of
the CIS. As a result of external interference, the export
of so-called colour revolutions and of artificial regime
change, once-stable countries have been plunged into
chaos and anarchy. Instead of the promised democracy
and prosperity, most of the citizens of these countries
are suffering horribly and have been obliged to flee.
Even Europe is now being tested by floods of migrants
and the significantly worsening threat of terrorism.
At the same time, the information space of the
CIS countries has been aggressively attacked by some
States that are trying to use their dominant position
in the global information network to achieve political
and military goals as well as economic ones. In such
circumstances, the Commonwealth countries affirm
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

their determination to expand international cooperation
and unite efforts to increase the effectiveness of regional
and international security systems.
After 25 years of joint integration and development,
and despite the sovereign differences and particularities
of each country, the Commonwealth remains a wellestablished and active party to all of the most important
international instruments that regulate cooperation
in the areas of security, disarmament and combating
today’s threats and challenges, and makes a genuine
contribution to their implementation. Those joint
measures are being undertaken with due account of
the leading role of the United Nations and the need
for constructive partnership with other international
institutions and their specialized bodies.
Therefore, in the light of all this, we can conclude
that the CIS countries have done a great deal of work
to counter new threats and challenges. We have
every reason to believe that the Commonwealth has
made a considerable contribution to the joint efforts
to ensure international security at the regional and
global levels. At the same time, the dynamically
changing international situation, as well as the
ongoing growth and transformation of various factors
posing a real or potential threat to our States, require
further strengthened efforts to deepen and expand
the comprehensive cooperation of the CIS with the
agencies of the United Nations and other international
organizations in order to effectively counter existing and
new emerging threats and challenges to global security.
The development of collective approaches
necessary for effective cooperation in overcoming
modern threats and challenges requires increased
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, we believe
that it would be appropriate to resume the practice of
holding conferences and high-level meetings between
the United Nationsm, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe, which
had been held annually since 1993 on a rotational basis
and included the heads of other regional organizations.
Such meetings would provide an opportunity to the
heads of operational and executive bodies of those
organizations to engage in a high-level discussion
on the most pressing issues of the global agenda and
elaborate common approaches to address them.

S/PV.7796

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Ivanov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends the Russian presidency for its initiative in
convening today’s meeting. I wish to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon; the Secretary-General of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO),
Mr. Alimov; the Secretary-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), Mr. Bordyuzha;
and the Vice-Chair of the Executive Committee of
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),
Mr. Ivanov, for their respective briefings.
At present, the international situation is complex
and undergoing profound changes. Regional hotspot
issues have surfaced one after the other. Traditional
and non-traditional security threats are interwoven.
As the core of the international collective security
mechanism, the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
security. Cooperation in the areas of peace and
security carried out between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, in line with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is
conducive to further strengthening the international
collective security mechanism and better maintaining
international peace and security. Cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations should abide by the following principles.
First, it is necessary to adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is necessary to encourage and support regional and
subregional organizations in peacefully resolving their
regional hotspot issues through dialogue, consultation,
good offices and mediation. It is necessary to respect
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of the countries concerned.
Secondly, it is necessary to adopt a collective,
holistic, collaborative and sustainable concept of
security. It is necessary to take into account the
historical background and current circumstances of the
issues concerned, adopt a moderate approach and take
holistic measures to seek and promote security through
cooperation and the realization of mutual benefits and
common security, which represent a win-win situation.

16-348399/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Thirdly, it is necessary to take into account the
focuses and priorities of regional and subregional
organizations and to clarify the orientation of
cooperation, strengthen coordination and form synergy.
Fourthly, it is necessary to fully exploit the unique
advantages of regional and subregional organizations
with respect to geography, history and culture.
Furthermore, it is necessary to establish means of
cooperation so as to build a relationship of global
partnership based on dialogue instead of confrontation
and partnership instead of alliance. In recent years,
SCO, CSTO and CIS have achieved positive results in
fighting terrorism, drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime, and promoting economic trade
cooperation and people-to-people exchanges. They
have thereby played an able part in maintaining regional
peace, stability and development. China expresses its
appreciation in that connection.
The year 2016 marks the fifteenth anniversary of
SCO. Since its founding in 2001, SCO has kept abreast
with the trends of the time and has advocated the practice
of the Shanghai Spirit, which is embodied by mutual
trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for
diverse civilizations and seeking common progress. It
has achieved remarkable results. Members of SCO have
signed the long-term Treaty of Good Neighbourship,
which has provided mutual support to the paths of
development chosen by each member and has chosen to
seek mutual trust and common development.
SCO has adopted a policy of openness and expanded
relations beyond its purview. It has established a
relationship of cooperation with the United Nations,
CIS and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
It has thereby set a good example for regional and
international cooperation, which should be efficient,
open and mutually beneficial. The Shanghai spirit
has vitality and values that transcend geography and
time. It has provided a useful lesson to all those who
seek to establish good-neighbourly relationships
and common prosperity. It has also injected vitality
into the establishment of a new international order
of relationships based on cooperation and achieving
win-win solutions.
As an important member of SCO, China
consistently supports SCO efforts to play a positive
role in maintaining regional peace and security and
seeking common development. China has actively
implemented SCO development strategies until 2025
10/34

28/10/2016

and adopted measures to make sure that the One Belt,
One Road initiative became SCO development strategy.
China has carried out measures to comprehensively
promote cooperation in all areas. In June, Chinese
President Xi Jinping attended the sixteenth meeting of
the Council of Heads of State, where he proposed that
SCO make security and the maintenance of regional
peace and security its first priority. China has called
for accelerated negotiations on the SCO anti-extremism
convention, and announced a series of practical
measures in support of deepening cooperation within
the SCO. Together with other leaders of SCO, China
published the Tashkent Declaration, which coincided
with the fifteenth anniversary of SCO and made a great
contribution in that connection.
China, together with other countries, is ready
to carry the Shanghai spirit forward and move ahead
with the continued cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations and work together
to establish a new order of international relations built
on cooperation and mutual benefit. China hopes to
forge a community with a shared future so as to work
together to achieve durable peace and security and
prosperity — a world we all aspire to.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Let me first express my
gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the heads of the organizations present for their
respective briefings.
In today’s world, no nation can maintain its peace
and security in isolation. Therefore, it is critically
important to deepen cooperation between the United
Nations and regional security frameworks, in addition
to encouraging collaboration between allies and
like-minded countries. The key is to build trust and
confidence among nations and regional organizations.
We have been briefed by the three organizations
represented here today on measures for maintaining
peace and security in Europe and in neighbouring
regions. The founding declarations on the charters of
these organizations enunciate their adherence to the
objectives and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Hence, activities by these organizations must
be conducive to building mutual trust and confidence,
not only among their members, but also with countries
from outside that region.
Japan has deep bonds with Central Asian countries
that are members of the aforementioned organizations.
Our goal is to bolster inclusive, stable and independent
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

development, while also contributing to regional and
international peace and stability. In addition to a wide
spectrum of bilateral cooperation, Japan has held
Central Asia plus Japan dialogues to address regional
challenges, such as anti-drug measures and border
control. We have also promoted practical cooperation
in areas ranging from agriculture to transport
and distribution.
In addition, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is a significant and
more inclusive platform for building mutual trust
and confidence in the region and sharing knowledge
through assistance to institution-building. It has a
very broad European membership that extends beyond
major parties to the three organizations present in
the Chamber and includes Mongolia. Japan believes
the OSCE is an important channel through which we
contribute to security issues in and outside Europe and
Central Asia.
Japan is proud to be the OSCE’s oldest partner.
Since 1992, we have deepened dialogue and cooperation
and have contributed both funding and personnel to the
Organization. Japan has sent monitoring missions to
a number of elections in the region and has been the
biggest donor to the OSCE’s capacity-building project
for border control officials. We are pleased to play a
bridging role between Asia and Europe, including
through active participation in Asia Contact Group’s
group meetings. We look forward to further cooperation
with the OSCE in this regard.
I cannot emphasize enough the importance of
building mutual trust and confidence in maintaining
peace and stability in the region and the international
community as a whole. Japan strongly hopes that
United Nations Member States and organizations in the
Chamber today will redouble their efforts to that end.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate and the
Secretary-General for his briefing. We fully share his
concern about the situation of the International Criminal
Court. I would like to thank our briefers, Mr. Nikolai
Bordyuzha, Mr. Rashid Alimov and Mr. Sergey Ivanov,
for their statements and for the activities of their
respective organizations.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
state of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations (S/2016/621)
identifies some progress in this area, including those

S/PV.7796

linked to the maintenance of international peace and
security, humanitarian assistance and development.
The international situation has undergone profound and
swift changes that require coordinated responses by the
international community. The increase in transnational
threats, terrorism and the spread of violent extremism,
technological advances in war, cyberweapons and
organized crime, among other factors, pose serious
dangers and challenges to civilians and demand greater
efforts at all levels.
I come from a region with a long tradition of
regional and subregional organizations, from the
Organization of American States and the Agency for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean, which was established by the
Tlatelolco Treaty, as well as more recent organizations,
such as the Union of South American Nations and the
Caribbean Community, both of which made important
contributions to the peace process that is taking place
today in Colombia.
We acknowledge that there is broad potential
for cooperation and complementarity between the
efforts of the United Nations and those of regional
and subregional organizations. In this framework,
regional and subregional organizations devoted to the
maintenance of peace and security are particularly
important and share responsibilities with the Security
Council with regard to international peace and security.
Given the knowledge that these organizations have of
the history, culture and geographical proximity, they
bring a specific added value when it comes to prevention
and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
With respect to cooperation between the United
Nations system and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Commonwealth of Independent
States, the report of the Secretary-General mentions
progress, including the periodic consultation
mechanism between the CSTO and the United Nations
on issues of mutual interest in the area of global and
regional peace and security and on the consideration
of more information with respect to prevention, early
warning and peacekeeping; the consultations between
the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization; cooperation with the Regional Office
for the Caucasus, Central Asia and Ukraine of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs;
and the exchange of information between the Executive

16-3483911/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the head of the Commonwealth of Independent States
Anti-Terrorism Centre, which seek to control the threat
of foreign terrorist fighters in that region. Lastly, the
willingness of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
to cooperate with the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre is another example of this progress.
Allow me to close my statement by welcoming
the decision of the Secretary-General to further
strengthen cooperation with regional organizations
through stronger partnerships in formulating specific
approaches to cooperation depending on the context
and taking fully into account the particularities and
requirements of every region, as well as the mandate of
the institution concerned.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): The Angolan delegation
commends the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for convening this debate on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his insightful opening remarks and welcome
and thank Mr. Nikolai Bordyuzha, Mr. Rashid Alimov
and Mr. Sergey Ivanov for their presentations and for
sharing their views with the Security Council on the
relevant activities undertaken by the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) and the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), which have become relevant
actors in the maintenance of regional peace and security
and important partners of the United Nations.
Experience demonstrates that cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations strengthens the
United Nations efforts in the prevention of conflicts in
the maintenance of peace and in restoring stability in
post-conflict situations in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, which provides
the framework for the establishment of regional and
global partnerships in matters related to international
peace and security. The involvement of regional and
subregional organizations offers invaluable competitive
advantages in complementing the work of the United
Nations bringing to bear, as they do, specific knowledge
of regional conditions, a better understanding of the
genesis of conflicts and their prevention and resolution
in the maintenance of peace and in upholding the rule
of law.
The United Nations, on the other hand, brings to
bear its universal membership and legitimacy, broad
12/34

28/10/2016

experience and operational capacity in the maintenance
of international peace and security. This relationship is
even more virtuous since it facilitates swifter responses
to crisis situations and permits a longer-term combined
engagement in resolving critical situations.
The current security challenges require a
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, which no country
or organization can undertake by itself. In Eurasia and
Central Asia, that cooperation has been of significant
importance in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, as well as in countering international
challenges that are real threats to the livelihoods of the
people of these regions and to peace and security. We
greatly value the involvement of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Commonwealth of Independent
States in countering threats to peace and security,
including terrorism, illegal flows of small arms and
light weapons, cyberterrorism, illegal migration, drug
trafficking and organized crime, and in addressing the
issue of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
in Central Asia, Eastern Europe and the Far East.
We warmly welcome developments regarding
the commitment for enhanced cooperation between
the CSTO and United Nations specialized bodies, in
particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee, at a time
when terrorism has become a real threat to Central Asia;
the cooperation of the United Nations on the issue of
drugs and crime, which is a living curse on the region;
and the development of the peacekeeping capabilities of
United Nations peace operations.
We acknowledge the support of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization to the United Nations aimed
at restoring peace in Afghanistan, and the current
cooperation in preventing and resolving conflicts, in
the fight against terrorism and non-proliferation of
weapons, in countering transnational crime and illegal
drugs, and in the exchange of security intelligence. We
also appreciate the cooperation in methods of security
between the States members of the Commonwealth
of Independent States and other international
organizations, especially the United Nations.
We note that the CIS is party to all of the most
important international instruments related to
cooperation in the field of security, disarmament and
countering terrorism; the intense relations that the CIS
maintains with the United Nations and its specialized
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

agencies; the work of the CIS countries in countering
new threats; and their considerable contribution to
joint efforts to ensure regional and international peace
and security.
As the concept paper (S/2016/867, annex) for this
debate states, the strengthening and deepening of
interaction between the United Nations and CSTO,
SCO and CIS, on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, is a constructive element
in the promotion of United Nations goals. Through
a functional partnership, the United Nations and
these organizations can strengthen the international
community’s efforts in facing contemporary challenges
and in building capacities to address current threats with
a comprehensive and long-term perspective, as a key
factor in sustaining peace and attaining greater stability
in an ever-more dangerous and challenging world.
We conclude by encouraging CSTO, SCO and CIS
to use their influence, and their members to pursue
cooperation among themselves, with the United
Nations and other international and regional partners
in collective efforts to find lasting solutions to global
threats and challenges that affect the international
community — such as terrorism, drug trafficking,
international organized crime, the non-proliferation
of weapons, despicable violations of human rights,
and the aggressive behaviour of many international
actors, including non-State actors — and to build a
more just and peaceful world based on a community of
shared interests.
Mr. González de Linares (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for his statement and
Mr. Bordyuzha, Mr. Alimov and Mr. Ivanov for their
briefings. I am also grateful to the Russian presidency
for having organized a debate of such relavance, given
both the strategic importance of the Central Asia
region and the growing cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
Regional organizations are generally equipped
with mechanisms that are well-adapted to local realities
in terms of preventive diplomacy and, as appropriate,
peacekeeping. That is why their cooperation with the
United Nations harbours promising potential. In the case
of a few regional organizations, such cooperation has
developed to achieve a notable level of maturity, which
is the case of the European Union, the African Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in

S/PV.7796

Europe, which have become the subjects of specific
meetings for the Security Council.
Conversely, in the case of other younger regional
organizations, cooperation with the United Nations is
less structured, as the concept paper (S/2016/867, annex)
circulated by Russia for this debate clearly indicates
is the case of the organizations we are discussing
today: the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Commonwealth of Independent States. Those three
organizations are the subject of a biennial resolution
of the General Assembly, and have for years been
promoting the development of their cooperation with
the United Nations with a view to better complying
with the objectives of the Organization, which is the
ultimate guarantor of intentional peace and security.
That cooperation encompasses a growing number of
aspects, including the fight against drug trafficking,
organized crime, terrorism, violent radicalism and
other aspects that have been mentioned throughout
the debate.
The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia is very active on all of those
fronts, and we believe that the Centre has a particularly
prominent role to play in promoting cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
present in Central Asia. The duties of that body of the
United Nations system are specifically focused on the
region in question, and we believe that it is already
playing its role in a most satisfactory manner.
The European Union cooperates intensively with
countries of the region and with the Centre itself,
especially in matters related to border management and
the fight against drug trafficking and terrorism — in the
latter case, within the framework of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. As a member of the
European Union, Spain greatly values the work of the
Centre. We believe that preventive diplomacy must be
one of our highest priorities, and we therefore welcome
the ongoing cooperation between the Centre and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States. That relationship has a particularly
important potential in early warning, conflict prevention
and the fight against radicalism and violent extremism.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
and welcome the three briefers to our meeting this
morning. We also thank the Russian presidency for its

16-3483913/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

initiative to convene this meeting in order to strengthen
the objectives of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations and coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations, on the one hand,
and the various United Nations agencies, on the other.
Egypt believes in the noble mission of regional
and subregional organizations in connection with the
maintenance of international peace and security as
mentioned in the concept paper (S/2016/867, annex)
distributed by the President. The current challenges
pertaining to peace and security require meaningful
coordination between the United Nations and the
various groups and organizations, in particular those
that deal with the maintenance of peace and security. In
that regard, Egypt is a member of several regional and
subregional organizations through which it contributes
to the maintenance of peace and security, regional
stability and the promotion of good neighbourly
relations and mutual trust between the various parties.
Egypt is striving to strengthen is relations with
different parts of the world, including Eastern Europe,
Central Asia and the Far East. Egypt is also an observer
to the Shanghai Cooperation Organization because our
country is closely following its activities and working
towards exchanging information and experience at
all levels, including in the economic, strategic and
military areas, among others. We are pleased with the
work carried out by that organization, especially with
regard to combating terrorism, drug trafficking and
other cross-border criminal activities, such as illegal
arms trafficking, in particular small arms and light
weapons. Such weapons must not wind up in the hands
of armed terrorist groups. In that vein, we welcome
the efforts made by the organization to restore peace
in Afghanistan.
My country also supports the role played by the
Collective Security Treaty Organization in connection
with combating terrorism, drug trafficking and crossborder organized crime. We are also a member of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
and want to strengthen cooperation with the Committee
and that organization. It is important to benefit from
sharing the experiences and opinions of the Committee
so that we can strengthen the efforts of the United
Nations in those two areas. We also believe that there
is potential for future cooperation in connection with
training for peacekeeping operations and peacekeeping
efforts in Asia or Europe.
14/34

28/10/2016

As for the Executive Committee of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, Egypt maintains
programmes and initiatives aimed at strengthening
regional cooperation and sustainable development
in different areas, including in the humanitarian and
civilian areas, trade, development, direct investment,
the free movement of persons, migration and modern
technology and its uses. In that context, the role played
by the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth
of Independent States is one of complementarity
at the regional level, and one that also strengthens
peacekeeping and security promoted by the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.
Lastly, we stress the importance of dialogue and
cooperation between the United Nations and these
regional and subregional organizations in Europe
and Asia. We recommend that the Council and the
Secretariat communicate directly and regularly
with these organizations through the convening of
debates, consultations, technical consultations and
annual consultations between the Secretariat and the
secretariats of the regional organizations.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation joins other
Security Council members in thanking the Russian
Federation for convening this debate. Enhancing
cooperation between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations is indeed a
relevant and worthwhile objective. I believe that our
discussions today will contribute to that end.
In that connection, I thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for providing an
overview on the state of cooperation between the United
Nations, the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). I
also thank Mr. Nikolai Bordyuzha, Secretary-General
of the CSTO, Mr. Rashid Alimov, Secretary-General
of the SCO, and Mr. Sergey Ivanov, Vice-Chair of the
Executive Committee of the CIS, for their respective
briefings and insights on this topic. I also take this
opportunity to commend the work undertaken by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Petko
Draganov and the entire team at the Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia since its
inception in 2008.
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

States members of the CSTO, the SCO and the
CIS collectively encompass a massive swath of land,
stretching from the borders of Eastern Europe to the
Far East and, as of last year, to South Asia. From the
political, economic or development standpoints alone,
the dividends that could be reaped from a stable and
prosperous region covered by these organizations
are immeasurable. The significant changes to the
international environment in recent years, with new and
increasingly complex challenges to international peace
security, all demand more robust, and even proactive,
responses, especially at the regional level.
Given the intricate linkages between political,
security, economic and development factors,
which necessitate both comprehensive and targeted
approaches, regional organizations have a critical role
to play by bringing to bear the collective weight of
their membership on regional-level issues or situations.
Traditional crisis responses based solely on narrow
conceptions of security may no longer be sufficient or
sustainable. We note that, since their establishment,
each of these organizations has developed a niche area
of expertise intended to better contribute to the needs
of the populations in their respective regions. In that
regard, we urge the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia to continue to
support these organizations to the extent possible.
Efforts to enhance cooperation between the
United Nations and the CSTO, the SCO and the CIS
by deepening collaboration with agencies such as the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia and
bodies of the Security Council should be supported, as
they have yielded noteworthy success in areas such as
combating trafficking in illicit drugs and terrorism in
the Eurasian and Central Asian regions. In that regard,
my delegation supports the draft resolutions expected
to be adopted during the current session of the General
Assembly aimed at further strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and these organizations.
They are important steps towards consolidating the
gains achieved thus far and providing fresh impetus in
exploring new avenues for cooperation.
At the same time, for these organizations to realize
their full potential in addressing the myriad challenges
faced at the regional level, differences must be cast aside.
We should work together to further enhance the
effectiveness and integrity of those regional structures,
while members should be encouraged to deploy their

S/PV.7796

respective comparative advantages and unique local
expertise for the benefit of the region.
The increasingly complex and intertwined
challenges that threaten our world today cannot be
addressed by any country alone or by the United
Nations itself. Those challenges can be effectively
addressed only by our collective and coordinated
efforts through the establishment of strong and
regionally owned frameworks for conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We
hope that the discussions today will generate more
ideas and strategies to foster, expand and enhance
comprehensive cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations with a view to strengthening
our collective capacity to respond effectively to threats
to international peace and security.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I too thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General
Bordyuzha, Secretary-General Alimov and Vice-Chair
Ivanov for their briefings.
New Zealand strongly supports active and regular
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
and subregional organizations in preventing and
resolving conflict. The past 70 years have provided
numerous demonstrations of the value of regional
organizations and of their effectiveness as partners with
the United Nations. The peace and stability currently
enjoyed in much of Latin America, Europe and SouthEast Asia owe a great deal to the regional architecture
that has been put in place there. In Africa, we have also
seen welcome growth in the tempo and effectiveness of
regional and subregional cooperation to address peace
and security challenges over the past 20 years. That
has also been the experience in my own region, the
Pacific, where regional cooperation has been essential
for meeting both security and sustainable development
challenges for the past 40 years.
The reasons for that are clear. Regional organizations
are able to draw on local knowledge and perspectives
that are essential for addressing the security challenges
faced by their members. They provide a mechanism
for mobilizing and sustaining the political will of their
members behind conflict prevention and resolution
efforts. They also provide a means for regions to interact
with the United Nations and to leverage the capabilities
that the global organization can bring to the table.
and

As today’s briefers have made clear, the peace
security challenges facing Central Asian

16-3483915/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

countries cannot be met effectively without close
cooperation among the countries of the region and
strong partnerships with the international community.
Ongoing tensions among Central Asian countries
stemming from disputed borders, the management of
cross-border resources, such as water, and the region’s
complex ethnic makeup will require sustained and
patient management, as will increases in the crossborder flow of peoples, including refugees.
As we are all so aware in the Council, Afghanistan
has been involved in a succession of external and
internal conflicts for many decades. Despite the
immense investments of the international community
following the Council-endorsed action to free the
country from the grip of Al-Qaida and the Taliban after
the events of 9/11, peace and stability remain almost as
elusive as ever there. Enduring instability will further
exacerbate tensions, with cross-border implications for
the wider region.
As was again underlined to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) yesterday
in the briefing by the Secretary-General of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Taliban-controlled
narcotics trade remains a serious threat to the stability
of Afghanistan and its neighbours. We encourage
regional players to continue coordinated efforts,
including cooperation with United Nations bodies such
as the 1988 Committee. It is Central Asia that will
benefit most from a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
Regional cooperation is clearly also essential for
combating transnational criminal networks, including
drug traffickers and the transborder flow of illicit
money and arms. Effective cross-border cooperation
will be vital for addressing terrorism and violent
extremism, the threat of which has been significantly
exacerbated by the more than 2,000 foreign terrorist
fighters thought to have travelled from Central Asia to
battlefields in Iraq and Syria.
As the Permanent Representative of Malaysia said,
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia can play an important part
in facilitating international support for tackling those
threats. The Centre’s support in facilitating dialogue,
promoting cooperation on early warning and analysis,
and helping to mobilize and coordinate the political
will and resources necessary to take effective action
should be greatly valued.
16/34

28/10/2016

History also teaches us that countries that trade
together are less likely to take up arms against each
other. Levels of intraregional trade in Central Asia
remain very low. Increasing connectivity through
economic linkages, the strengthening of cultural
ties and greater mobility can be the building blocks
for stronger diplomatic bonds. In the Asia-Pacific,
for example, we have seen the growth of trade go
hand-in-hand with closer regional cooperation led by
regional organizations. Promoting greater regional
economic integration could both enhance Central
Asia’s prosperity and help maintain peace and stability
over the longer term.
There is obviously no one-size-fits-all approach
to cooperation with regional organizations, but it
is clear that it is in all our interests to encourage
effective regional cooperation and to help regional and
subregional organizations fulfil their potential.
Before I conclude, I want to note an important
positive development in another regional organization
devoted to maintaining international peace and
security, namely, the Antarctic Treaty System, which is
of vital importance to my country and other members
of the Organization. Earlier today in Hobarh, Australia,
the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic
Living Resources agreed to establish the world’s largest
marine protected area. That was the culmination of
over six years of dedicated diplomatic effort led by New
Zealand and the United States, and involving difficult
and intense negotiations with other Commission
members, including, I would note, members of the
Council: Russia, China, Japan, the United Kingdom,
France, Spain, Ukraine and Uruguay.
As my Minister observed when welcoming that
achievement, “This is a great result for quiet diplomacy
and honest toil”. He added that it was particularly
pleasing that this agreement could be reached when
there are so many difficulties and so many differences
happening elsewhere. I have little doubt that he was
thinking of the challenges we face in the Council
and hoping that we might strive for similar positive
results here.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the representatives of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States for their briefings on the actions
carried out by their respective organizations.
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The concept note prepared by the Russian
presidency (S/2016/867, annex) invites us to focus on
the issue of regional cooperation in the light of the
challenges to international peace and security in Central
Asia. First, Central Asia is a region that continues to
face major economic and political challenges, as well
as security challenges. In particular, the situation in
Afghanistan and the various illicit forms of trafficking
that flourish in the area — in drugs, weapons and
human beings — are all destabilizing factors. The
terrorist threat spares no one today and often thrives in
the context of social frustration, among other factors,
and it should not be neglected.
That fragile context makes cooperation crucial
among all actors present in the region, including
States and regional and international organizations. To
complement the actions of regional organizations, the
mission of the United Nations Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia is crucial. Support for the
countries of the region in developing national responses
to these challenges and encouraging them to strengthen
regional cooperation is more needed than ever. I am
thinking in particular about the assistance provided
by the Centre to the implementation by the countries
of Central Asia of the United Nations Global Counterterrorism Strategy, whose tenth anniversary we are
celebrating this year. That is an excellent example of
value added.
France encourages any initiative that will allow
countries in the region to contribute nationally,
regionally and internationally to efforts to prevent
violent extremism and to fight terrorism.
Lastly, beyond the action of regional and subregional
organizations, the European Union has also played a
crucial role in this region since the adoption by the
European Council of the European Union Strategy for a
New Partnership with Central Asia, in June 2007. The
total amount of assistance provided by the European
Union to the region for the period 2014-2020 amounts
to over €1 billion.
With respect to security issues in particular, a
high-level dialogue between the European Union
and countries in Central Asia was held on 18 May in
Brussels. Specific measures were adopted during the
meeting, such as the provision of expertise to bolster
the implementation of a common action plan for Central
Asia within the framework of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the development

S/PV.7796

of programmes related to European Union border
management and the fight against drug addiction and
the renewal and updating of a European Union-Central
Asia action plan to fight drugs. The ministerial meeting
of December 2015 made it possible to reaffirm the
commitment of European citizens to promote the rule
of law, stability, security and cooperation in the area.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank the Russian Federation
for convening today’s debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security. We also welcome the briefings from Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Mr. Nikolai Bordyuzha, Mr. Rashid Alimov
and Mr. Sergey Ivanov.
Our delegation places particular importance on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations,
including the Security Council, and regional and
subregional organizations. We firmly believe that the
contributions of these organizations to the areas of
peace and security reinforce the work of this multilateral
institution in resolving conflicts, in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
While the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security lies
with the Security Council, the many conflicts and crises
around the world call for close cooperation between
all United Nations bodies and regional organizations,
particularly in cases where such organizations have a
closer perspective of regional and local conflicts and a
knowledge of their underlying causes, which allows for
close and mutually beneficial cooperation. We firmly
believe that regional and subregional bodies, such as the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States, among others, play a fundamental
role in promoting dialogue and cooperation with a
view to addressing the challenges and threats to peace
in those regions. There is therefore a need for those
institutions to work in close cooperation with the United
Nations as strategic allies in the areas of international
and regional peace and security. The independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of countries are
common goals of their members States.
Such institutions play an important role in the
maintenance of peace in a very broad region that spans
from Eastern Europe to the Far East. Despite all of

16-3483917/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

their efforts, political and economic stability in the
region is currently affected by a number of challenges
related to security threats, which include terrorism,
violent extremism, radicalization, and recruitment of
foreign terrorist fighters coming from the region and
being recruited by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other groups, as well as ethnic and internal
sociopolitical disputes that increase the risk of armed
conflicts in the region. Tension and border disputes that
are linked to delimitation problems are further negative
factors.
The challenges facing Central Asia call for an
effective and coordinated response from countries
in the region, which must address the challenges and
security threats that the strategic geographical zone is
facing by establishing bilateral and regional cooperation
links. We therefore appreciate the initiatives and the
meetings that those organizations have organized
with countries of the region and with other members
of the international community to address the main
challenges that they currently face. In that regard, we
support the focused approach of those regional and
subregional organizations to seek greater cooperation
between the States of Central Asia in the areas of
combating terrorism, preventing violent extremism and
radicalization, with a view to implementing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which
includes a number of activities aimed at improving
capacity building and information exchange.
The improvement of the political stituation in
Afghanistan, particularly in the context of its transition
and reconciliation process, will have a significant
impact on the stability of its neighbours. Nevertheless,
although there have been achievements in combating
terrorism, violent extremism and drug trafficking, such
problems still pose a threat to the country’s stability.
We therefore commend the efforts of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization in their commitment to combat
those scourges in coordination with Afghan authorities.
For the sake of the stability and security of the
region, it is crucial that these issues be addressed by
establishing conditions conducive to lasting solutions to
regional problems, based on mutual benefits for States
and the principles of international law. Diplomatic
measures and mechanisms for prevention, both of
the United Nations and of regional organizations,
need to be coordinated and targeted towards an early
identification of possible crises and an exchange of
18/34

28/10/2016

information. Venezuela commends the progress made
by the United Nations to work with the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia, which seek
to establish methods to prevent conflicts and create
peacekeeping mechanisms.
In conclusion, we highlight the importance of
continuing to encourage the efforts being made by
those regional and subregional organizations to
create specific areas of cooperation suited to each
circumstance, taking into account the particular
characteristics and interests of member States. We also
encourage increased dialogue and contact between
countries of the region, with the aim of identifying
areas susceptible to disputes or conflicts, in order to
take appropriate confidence-building measures to
develop cooperation strategies that benefit all members
States and the international community as a whole.
Mr. Harasymenko (Ukraine): I would like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
Indeed, it is very important to develop effective
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant statutes of regional
organizations.
In his latest report (S/2016/621) to the Security
Council on the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations, the SecretaryGeneral underscored that such cooperation had
significantly grown and diversified in recent years, and
had proved critical in ensuring effective international
peace and security engagements. We fully agree with
his conclusion and we welcome positive examples of
such cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union, the African Union, the League of
Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and many others. Such organizations have proved to be
capable of taking the lead in promoting peace, security
and stability.
As a current non-permanent member of the
Security Council, Ukraine has already commended
their increased contribution to the maintenance of
peace and security and has welcomed their continued
and important efforts and enhanced peacekeeping
role to prevent, mediate and settle conflicts. Still,
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations has yet to reach its full potential and
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

should be substantially mainstreamed, since the
nature and structure of that cooperation are often
overshadowed or undermined by the interests of certain
Council members. Unfortunately, we must admit that,
in today’s world, the roles of regional organizations in
maintaining peace and security are rather different.
Some of them are committed to their charters and
work to prevent, manage and resolve crises. Others,
on the contrary, tend to abstain from such actions and
politicize their activities because of the distractive
actions of their members.
Since the topic of our discussion today is the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), I would
like to raise a couple of issues that are very important
for creating a full picture of the nature, results and
effects of that interaction.
First, let me remind the Council that, according to
the CSTO and CIS Charters, respectively, their members
should be “acting in strict compliance with their
obligations” under the Charter of the United Nations
and Security Council resolutions “being guided by
the universally recognized principles of international
law”; and “build their relations in accordance” with
the principles of “the inviolability of State borders,
the recognition of existing borders and the rejection of
unlawful territorial annexations” and the “resolution of
disputes by peaceful means”.
However, the facts are very clear. These
organizations demonstrated a complete lack of will to
take appropriate measures to respond to the conflicts in
the region. First of all, I refer to the Russian aggression
in Ukraine and Georgia. The Russian Federation,
one of the founding members of these organizations,
continues to blatantly violate the Charter of the United
Nations, the CIS and CSTO Charters, international law,
as well as multilateral and bilateral agreements.
At this very moment, these organizations are still
pretending that there is no ongoing Russian aggression
against Ukraine, no occupation of Crimea, no de facto
occupation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, and no war
crimes committed against the Ukrainian and Georgian
peoples. I take this opportunity to call on the member
States of these organizations to speak up collectively
and individually and to make a difference. This is also
about their security and their future. Their voices are

S/PV.7796

important in our common efforts aimed at defending
the Charter of the United Nations and the credibility
of the cooperation of regional organizations with the
United Nations.
Until then, unfortunately, we cannot agree that
the CIS and the CSTO are able to “make every effort
to achieve pacific settlement of local disputes”, as
enshrined in Article 52, paragraph 2, of the Charter
of the United Nations. Until then, we do not see any
added value in deepening interactions between these
organizations and the United Nations on the basis of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In
that regard, I would like to commend the SCO members
that during the conflict in Georgia in 2008 underscored
the need to respect the territorial integrity of States.
We wish the same approach to be maintained vis-à-vis
the temporary occupation of Crimea and the Russian
aggression against Ukraine.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
the Russian aggression against Ukraine clearly
demonstrated the insufficiency of mechanisms of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In our view, there is an urgent need
to develop mechanisms of coordination for regional
organizations with the United Nations at a stage when
there are early signs of emergency. It would help us to
shorten the time needed to start actions for the sake of
the prevention and settlement of conflicts.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): First, I want
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and for
his leadership in building strong partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations. I thank
the Secretary-General of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, Mr. Bordyuzha; the Secretary-General of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, Mr. Alimov;
and the Vice-Chair of the Executive Committee of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, Mr. Ivanov, for
joining us here today.
Our discussion today is a timely one. The work
of anticipating and effectively responding to armed
conflict, transnational terrorism, refugee and migrant
flows, cyberthreats, drug trafficking and organized
crimes goes beyond the capacity of any one State. One
way we can address those capacity gaps is through
strong and coordinated action by the United Nations
and regional organizations. Such cooperation has the
potential to strengthen the responsiveness, agility and
breadth of the international community’s approach

16-3483919/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

28/10/2016

to our many challenges. But in order to realize this
potential, regional organizations must prioritize the
interests of all of their members. They must respect
international obligations and commitments and act in
accordance with the decisions of the Security Council
and the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Above all, States must maintain their sovereign right
to make their own decisions, without coercion from
other States — decisions about the organizations and
alliances in which they choose to participate.

and from those advocating for violent extremism are
real. And effectively countering the exploitation of
porous borders and misuse of technologies like the
Internet is not easy. In the rush to respond effectively,
however, States and regional organizations must resist
the temptation to criminalize the freedom of expression,
limit the freedom of association or bar legitimate
political opposition. We saw such overreach in the
recently introduced draft resolution on countering
extremist ideology and propaganda.

As we consider strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and specific regional organizations,
it is imperative that we ensure that these shared
principles and obligations are also respected and
strengthened, not undermined or eroded. Strong and
coordinated actions by the United Nations, regional
organization and partner States have brought peace,
prevented and mitigated conflict and helped coordinate
reconstruction and development after conflicts have
ended. Such actions have contributed to humanitarian
response efforts, fought terrorism and cyberthreats and
strengthened efforts to combat illegal trafficking and
organized crime.

We are concerned that the counter-terrorism
policies proposed by these regional organizations
at times also excessively infringe upon individual
liberties and political freedoms. Restrictions on the
freedom of expression and on the activities of civil
society, especially restrictions that target minority
groups, inevitably backfire. Such restrictive policies
are counter-productive to a State’s ability to engage
with communities that are the greatest terrorist
recruitment targets. Such isolation and persecution can
indeed foment grievances that are drivers of violent
extremism.

From the Balkans to the shipping routes off the
Horn of Africa to Afghanistan, regional organizations
are a force multiplier. Where these kinds of legitimate
joint efforts between the United Nations and regional
organizations are consistent with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations and applicable
conventions, covenants and treaties, they will find
a strong supporter in the United States. But regional
organizations are strongest when they reflect the goals
and aspirations of all of their members, rather than
the dominance of a few. When one or two States set
the agenda and determine the positions of the entire
group, they are no longer truly regional, and the
diversity that they can bring to partnerships with the
United Nations system is impaired. As with Russia’s
involvement in both Georgia and Ukraine, we have
seen that the Commonwealth of Independent States
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization were
unable to defend, or even advocate for, the principle of
territorial integrity.
The organizations we endorse must also ensure that
they respect international obligations and commitments,
particularly with regard to counter-terrorism efforts. As
we see across our agenda, States sometimes struggle
to safeguard both security and individual liberty.
Emergent security threats from terrorist organizations
20/34

The freedom of expression and the free flow
of information are in fact reliable defenses against
violence and conflict. A free and vigorous civil
society is one of the most effective means to address
radicalization and violent extremism online and offline.
Civil society organizations are vital in developing and
sharing credible counter-narratives that disrupt the
radicalization process and counter violent extremism.
The United States record of promoting strong and
increasing cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations around the world — including
NATO, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the African Union, the European Union and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, among
many others — is clear and unwavering. As we consider
strengthening cooperation with additional regional
organizations, it is imperative that we ask ourselves
whether the activities of those organizations advance
the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
whether their decision-making represents the diversity
of their States members and whether they exhibit the
capacity to respond quickly and effectively to regional
crises. Those are the standards that the United States
expects from the regional organizations of which we
are a member, and they are the standards that we should
expect from them all.
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General and all our briefers for their remarks
today. We welcome this chance to discuss the Central
Asian region. It is a part of the world that we hear too
rarely about in the Chamber, although the region faces
many unique challenges that directly affect our core
business, namely, international peace and security.
They are challenges that represent the complex history
and geography of the region. Unresolved border disputes
and tension over access to water and other resources
are having an impact on the security and prosperity of
local communities. We therefore welcome the recent
opportunities for discussions to improve relations
between a number of countries in the region on those
important issues.
Environmental issues are also a major regional
challenge, many of them legacies of the region’s
history. And climate change is emerging as a major new
risk factor. As a result, the region needs international
support to improve its resource management, especially
of water, and to adapt to the damage that has already
been done. We are pleased to be participating in that.
In parts of the reion those challenges include
strengthening respect for human rights and the rule
of law, promoting sustainable development, tackling
corruption and removing restrictive State controls on
economic and political life. There have been some
improvements on those issues, and that is welcome, but
the speed and extent of progress is not what the people
in the region would expect — or, indeed, deserve.
The c hallenges are clear, and so too are the regional
opportunities and potential. To help realize that
potential, the region can look to regional organizations
and to the United Nations.
Therefore, we strongly support cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
on the challenges facing Central Asia. For the United
Kingdom, such cooperation must be consistent with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
all applicable conventions, covenants and treaties. And
it must uphold United Nations principles, particularly
respect for human rights and universal freedoms. There
are a number of regional and subregional organizations
that are already doing valuable work in Central Asia
to help address those shared challenges. Let me share
three examples.
First, as mentioned by Vice-Chair Ivanov, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

S/PV.7796

(OSCE) works on a wide range of security-related issues,
including arms control, confidence- and securitybuilding measures, human rights and democratization
and economic and environmental issues. The OSCE’s
capacity-building activities on preventing and
countering radicalization and terrorism are particularly
welcome, and they are delivered in a manner consistent
with international and OSCE commitments on human
rights. We also welcome the OSCE’s work on women’s
empowerment, judicial and legislative reform, media
development and conflict prevention, including in
relation to the issue of water management, which I
mentioned earlier.
As a second example, the Council of Europe is
working positively with the region. The Council of
Europe’s neighbourhood policy programme with
Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan was designed to facilitate
the political transition to democracy, help promote
good governance and reinforce the regional work of
the Council of Europe in combating cross-border and
global threats.
My final example is the European Union (EU).
The EU remains committed to a strong and durable
relationship with the five Central Asian States and
to reinforcing cooperation on security and stability,
including the sustainable management of natural
resources. The EU’s approach emphasizes the
fundamental importance of democratization, respect
for human rights and the rule of law and socioeconomic
development. The United Kingdom strongly supports
the work of the EU, including that of its Special
Representative for Central Asia, Mr. Peter Burian, in
taking that forward.
I would like to conclude by thanking you,
Mr. President, for holding this debate. It is well timed,
just two and a half months ahead of Kazakhstan joining
the Council. The Council will be richer for Kazakhstan’s
regional insight. We look forward to working closely
together on this issue and many others next year.
Mrs. Gaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking President Churkin and the
Russian delegation for convening this debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. This morning’s meeting
addresses the interaction between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Commonwealth of Independent States, following up

16-3483921/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

our very interesting recent exchanges concerning
cooperation with the African Union (see S/PV.7694)
and the European Union (see S/PV.7705).
Allow me at first to welcome the briefers for their
being here and to thank them for their outstanding
presentations: Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
Mr. Nikolai Bordyuzha, Secretary-General of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization; Mr. Rashid
Alimov, Secretary-General of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization ;and Mr. Sergey Ivanov, Vice-Chair of
the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth of
Independent States.
Today’s meeting provides an opportunity to
strengthen the basis for cooperation between the
United Nations and the organizations I just mentioned,
including within the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which stipulates that regional
and subregional organizations may cooperate in
improving collective security through the maintenance
of international peace and security.
As was rightly indicated by the Secretary-General
in the Chamber in August 2015, “the United Nations
increasingly shares responsibility for peace and
security with regional organizations.” (S/PV.7505,
p. 2) Acting under mandate of the United Nations,
regional organizations have provided local expertise
and operational resources to the United Nations.
For the many conflicts and crises around the world
require especially close cooperation between the
United Nations and its various partners, particularly
regional organizations, which play an essential role in
the maintenance of international peace and security in
their respective areas of competence. Regional entities,
which form a link between the national and global
levels, benefit from geographic proximity with the
conflict situations in their areas and are therefore in a
better position to understand such situations.
It is clear that several of the missions of the entities
with which we are exploring possible cooperation
opportunities are in perfect alignment with the goals of
the United Nations, such as, the maintenance of peace,
security and stability in the region, the fight against
terrorism, the fight against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, the fight against transnational
crime, human trafficking and illegal immigration and
weapons and drug trafficking.
The geographic areas covered by the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation
22/34

28/10/2016

Organization and the Commonwealth of Independent
States are faced with multifaceted threats to peace
and security including terrorism, drugs trafficking
and organized crime. The scope of such challenges
requires resolute collective action and the pooling
of efforts by the various stakeholders, which are a
requirement for efficiency and effectiveness. In that
regard, the United Nations, an organization tasked with
maintaining international peace and security, should
be able to benefit from pragmatic cooperation with
regional organizations. In so doing, it would help to
stem the wide array of threats and contain the potential
causes of conflict. In that regard, my delegation would
like to highlight the remarkable work conduced by the
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia, which, through its proactive approach, anticipates
the situations that could devolve into conflict, by
promoting dialogue and the peaceful settlement of
disputes as the key elements for achieving peace and
sustainable development.
In conclusion, I would like to state that, now more
than ever, my country is convinced about the usefulness
of and the need for a fruitful partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations. I would
also like to reaffirm Senegal’s commitment to effective
multilateralism that is focused on the United Nations,
with the aim of finding lasting solutions to the critical
challenge of attaining global peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We thank the Secretary-General for his statement
on a subject that is so important to our region, and the
leaders of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) for
their detailed briefings.
Today’s meeting is a central one for the Russian
Federation’s presidency of the Security Council
for several reasons. First, the organizations under
discussion are truly vital to the regions in which they
operate. There are pressing security and other issues
on their agendas, and one of Russia’s foreign policy
priorities is cooperating with them. Secondly, we
believe that the considerable potential for cooperation
between the United Nations and CSTO, SCO and CIS
has not yet been fully exploited. Thirdly, we have
often encountered situations in which members of the
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

international community are not fully informed about
their activities. On the one hand, that is to some extent
a positive sign, since it speaks to their self-sufficiency
and effectiveness in resolving the challenges they
face. On the other, that lack of information can lead
to underestimating the role that CSTO, SCO and CIS
play in maintaining peace and security in their regions,
something to be avoided. In that regard, we hope
that today’s briefings and discussion will enable the
international community to understand some of the
basic problems that our region has and how CSTO, SCO
and CIS are working to solve them.
Let me be frank. There is another problem. Under
various pretexts, some of our partners, including some
within the Security Council, have been attempting to
artificially marginalize those organizations, seeing
them as geopolitical competitors. For example, one of
the statements made environment arlier today referred
to certain criteria that such regional organizations
should meet. It is quite clear that if such criteria were
to be applied to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
for example, it would have to be rapidly disbanded. We
should put an end to this kind of ideological approach,
which damages our ability to cooperate in finding
answers to regional and global challenges.
I will begin with the use of so-called tough
security. The Collective Security Treaty Organization
was created in order to respond to our most urgent
military and political challenges, including the upsurge
in terrorist and extremist groups, and its potential for
destabilizing the situation on the borders of CSTO
member States. However, it is important to emphasize
that membership in CSTO is completely voluntary
and our joint efforts are not aimed at just anyone. We
are ready to engage in constructive cooperation with
every member of the international community, and that
approach is enshrined in the organization’s documents.
Terrorist threats are one of CSTO’s most difficult
problems. The overall situation in the Central Asian
republics remains calm, partly thanks to the major
efforts of the leaders of those countries. However,
both for us and for our CSTO partners, the threats to
regional security that result from external factors are
extremely immediate. We are dealing directly with
terrorist attacks and the ideological grooming of some
of our citizens, who then unfortunately end up in the
ranks of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
And, needless to say, we are also concerned about

S/PV.7796

their possible return to Russia or to our neighbours
and partners.
We are equally concerned about the chronic
instability in Afghanistan and the presence there of
terrorist hotbeds. The tracks of Afghans are clearly
visible in the subversive activities of organizations in
Central Asia such as the Uzbekistan Islamic Movement
and Hizb ut-Tahrir. The jihadists entering the region
establish contacts with criminal elements and drug
dealers and build cells for future terrorist activities.
The problem is exacerbated because the so-called
Islamic State has penetrated into Afghanistan and is
expanding its platform there. In that regard, we have
seen that ISIL has recently been increasingly involved
in northern Afghanistan, and there is a growing threat
from elements of the group entering neighbouring
States. Drugs in Afghanistan present a serious problem.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime recently
revealed horrendous data on a 43 per cent increase in
opiate production there. Central Asia has every reason
to talk about Afghan heroin aggression. Afghan drug
trafficking is a significant source of funding for the
extremist underground network in Central Asia.
If we are to end such threats, we must act decisively
on the security front. The CSTO countries will continue
to strengthen and enhance their cooperation with
armed groups and security forces. The Kobalt-2016
joint rapid-response team training session held in May
demonstrated the excellent potential of the special
forces of Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz
Republic and Tajikistan for combating terrorism and
drug trafficking. The practical expertise of CSTO is in
demand, thanks to its more than 10 years of experience
in handling the Kanal anti-drug operation Canal, aimed
at cutting drug-smuggling routes. During that time,
seizures of drug indicators have gone up tenfold, to
20 tons.
The United Nations and CSTO have a major mutual
interest in enhancing their practical cooperation,
particularly in areas such as peacekeeping and
combating organized crime and terrorism. We believe
it is important to continue working on developing
CSTO peacekeeping capacity with the goal of sending
contingents to United Nations peacekeeping missions
in the near future.
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization has
increased its membership and its regional scope. Over
its 15-year history, it has strengthened its involvement

16-3483923/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

in regional processes. The process of making India and
Pakistan full-fledged members is in its final stages. We
hope that their soon-to-be participation in SCO will
enrich its cooperation efforts.
Since 2005, Iran has participated in the work of
the Organization as an observer. We hope that, once
the issue of Iran’s nuclear programme has been fully
settled and the United Nations sanctions have been
lifted, no obstacles to considering its application for
full membership will remain.
Ensuring the security of the SCO area is the main
focus of its work, and there are many challenges similar
to those being faced by CSTO, such as terrorism,
extremism, organized crime, drugs trafficking and
threats from Afghanistan. We need to further enhance
the capacity of regional anti-terrorist structures,
improve coordination among military forces within the
United Nations and other international organizations,
update our anti-terrorist strategy and programme for
its implementation, and improve the legal basis for
cooperation in the area of information security.
We give priority to implementing the SCO
cooperation programme on combating terrorism,
separatism and extremism for the period 2016-2018.
Work is under way on a draft SCO convention to combat
extremism. The joint counter-terrorism efforts of the
SCO Peace Mission military exercise has proven to be
very productive. However, our cooperation with SCO
is not limited just to that. In the Ufa SCO Development
Strategy, which was established under Russia’s
presidency, we planned more than 70 events in the areas
of politics, economics and culture. One important area
of SCO work is fostering close economic cooperation.
We must further eliminate trade barriers and limits to
the movement of capital and labour, deepen production
and technological cooperation, and develop production
chains and joint transport infrastructure. The start of
negotiations on association of the Eurasian Economic
Union and the China Silk Road Economic Belt is a
promising prospect in that regard. We are convinced
that that involvement in this integration process
by all SCO and CIS members will be a prologue to
establishing a broad Eurasian area. We are pleased
with the cooperation dynamics in the areas of tourism,
education and youth.
In our relatively new geopolitical region, CIS is a
veteran organization that has helped us to forge friendly
relations between new sovereign States on the basis of
24/34

28/10/2016

trust, equal rights and respect for each other’s interests.
Despite well-known problems, the overall positive role
played by CIS is obvious. The CIS Heads of State met
for a summit in September in Bishkek, where they
adopted an anniversary statement announcing a joint
commitment to strengthening the Commonwealth,
using its integration capacity and developing greater
partnership among member States. We hope that this
will give a political impulse to the development of trade
and investment cooperation and stimulate cooperation
in the areas of culture, education, science and sports.
We believe that CIS can effectively promote the
interests of the United Nations, including through the
interconnected nature of security and development.
In conclusion, I wish to note that developing a
collective approach in order to effectively overcome
current threats and challenges requires consistent
efforts to enhance the cooperation efforts of the United
Nations with regional and subregional organizations,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
and in particular Chapter VIII. The United Nations and
regional organizations have to complement one another
by exploiting their objective comparative advantages.
CSTO, SCO and CIS are making a considerable
contribution to combating terrorism, the drugs trade,
organized crime and other threats to international peace
and security. All three organizations are developing
practical cooperation with the United Nations, including
with the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia. We are convinced that
today’s meeting has helped to demonstrate the potential
of and genuine interest in these regional organizations
in enhancing mutually beneficial cooperation with the
United Nations on a whole range of issues and different
avenues of work.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in
Russian): I have the honour to deliver my statement
on behalf of the States members of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO): China, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
I thank the Russian presidency for its important
initiative to convene today’s Security Council
debate on cooperation with three important regional
organizations: the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Commonwealth of Independent States. Constant and
close dialogue between the United Nations and the
organizations of the vast Eurasian region is vital to
us all. We support the development of effective and
cooperative relations between the United Nations and
CSO, which is an important global partner in efforts to
ensure international peace and security.
This year, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
celebrates its fifteenth anniversary. Over the course
of its existence — the twelve years during which it
held observer status at the General Assembly — CSO
secured a commendable place and a rank of authority
among the influential, international and regional
organizations. It has become an effective entity
in maintaining security, stability and sustainable
development in the modern system of international
relations. While reflecting the fundamental principles
and ideas of the Organization, the Shanghai spirit is a
unique source of the successful activities conducted by
SCO and an important guide in developing inter-State
relations, countering global challenges and threats, and
settling international disputes. It is based on mutual
trust, equality, consultation, respect for the diversity of
civilizations and cultures, and the aspiration to achieve
development for all.
SCO strictly follows the approach of avoiding blocbased, ideological and confrontational approaches to
addressing urgent international and regional problems.
In strict adherence to the principles enshrined
in the charter of SCO — including the fact that SCO
is not directed against other States or international
organizations — SCO member States are actively
developing contacts and cooperating with other
countries and international and regional organizations.
Partnerships have been established and maintained with
the United Nations and its specialized agencies, and
we are also engaging in cooperation efforts with other
international and regional structures. On 21 November,
the fifth anniversary General Assembly resolution
65/124 on cooperation between the United Nations and
SCO will be adopted. The principle of openness in SCO
is consistently implemented. Procedures are under way
for admission of India and Pakistan as full members of
SCO in mid-2017.
The rapidly changing global situation is marked by
ever-increasing geopolitical tension and the growth of
terrorism and violent extremism, all of which negatively
affect the entire system of international relations. In

S/PV.7796

such conditions, the United Nations remains the leading
universal international organization for the maintenance
of global security and the main platform for addressing
inter-State and international issues. We reaffirm our
commitment to strengthening the central coordinating
role of the United Nations in international relations.
The countries of SCO intend to continue to adhere to
the universally recognized purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, primarily with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security, the development of
cooperation among States, independence, equality,
the independent choice of social systems and paths
for development, mutual respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, the inviolability of borders,
non-aggression, non-interference in internal affairs,
the peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use of
force or threat of force.
We support the further strengthening of the lead
role played by the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security by continuing
extensive consultations in search of a package solution
for its reform in order to improve the transparency
and effectiveness of the Council, guided by the
interest of ensuring the unity of the States Members
of the United Nations, without setting artificial time
lines and expediting options that do not enjoy broad
support from Members States. We believe that all
relevant disputes should be resolved peacefully through
friendly negotiations and agreements among the parties
concerned without internationalization or external
interference. We are firmly convinced about the
inadmissibility of ensuring our own security at the cost
of the security of others. We support strict adherence to
the provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the comprehensive and consistent
promotion of all of the goals and principles reflected
therein.
We stress the importance of preventing the
militarization of outer space so as to ensure equal
and indivisible security for all and to maintain global
stability. We express serious concern about the growing
threat of terrorist groups gaining access to weapons of
mass destruction, including terrorists’ use of chemical
and biological materials for terrorist purposes. We also
call on the international community to work on creating
a peaceful, secure, fair and open information space
based on the principles of cooperation and respect for

16-3483925/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

national sovereignty and non-interference in States’
internal affairs.
We believe firmly that all States Members of
the United Nations should develop coherent political
approaches to the fight against terrorism, establishing
the cooperation between international and regional
organizations that can help to create conditions
conducive to expanded collaboration in combating
terrorism in the context of our new realities. In that
regard, we would like to affirm our solidarity with
multilateral counter-terrorism efforts and our support
for joint actions against terrorist groups, conducted
under the auspices of the United Nations. We also
support further close cooperation in combating the
spread of terrorist ideology, particularly among young
people and through the Internet, as well as in preventing
ethnic, racial and religious intolerance and xenophobia.
We are concerned about the worsening international
drug problem and in that regard we took special note of
the outcome of the General Assembly’s special session
on the world drug problem, held in April in New York.
In our view, it is vital that, with the United Nations
playing a central coordinating role, we unite our efforts
in an integrated and balanced approach based on the
principle of States’ common and shared responsibility
for eradicating global drug production and on improved
cooperation in the areas of drug rehabilitation and
effective reduction of the demand for drugs.
We would like to emphasize that one of SCO’s
priorities in its cooperation with the United Nations
is combating terrorism in all its forms, including
the financing of terrorism, the illicit production
and trafficking of drugs, transnational organized
crime, crimes that exploit modern information and
communication technologies, illegal migration and
human trafficking, the illegal smuggling of arms,
ammunition and explosives, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery, and
strengthening border security.
Today’s debate reflects the desire of all Member
States to discuss the most pressing and multi-dimensional
global issues relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security around the world. SCO countries are
determined to participate actively in that dialogue in
order to help ensure the synergy of the three pillars of
the United Nations — peace and security, sustainable
development and human rights. We intend to deepen our
dialogue and cooperation with all of the international
26/34

28/10/2016

and regional organizations that we have official
relations with, as well as to encourage relevant external
contacts in order to expand our network of multilateral
partnerships, in accordance with the initiative launched
by SCO Heads of State at the Tashkent Summit in 2004.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belarus.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Today
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the member
States of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO): Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the
Russian Federation, Tajikistan and Belarus. We
are grateful to the Security Council for taking this
important initiative to hold a debate on United Nations
cooperation with the three international organizations
in Eurasia — CSTO, the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO). To underline the importance of continued and
close dialogue between the United Nations and those
organizations, we have only to recall that the countries
we represent are home to half the world’s population.
The member States of CSTO support the development
of effective partnerships with the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations with regard to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Both the General Assembly and the Security Council
have emphasized the importance of such cooperation
many times. Whether on the economic or security front,
such collaboration between the various international
and regional bodies represents a requirement of modern
life and the conditions needed to ensure countries’ and
peoples’ sustainable development and to provide a
peaceful, safe environment for progress and prosperity.
The Collective Security Treaty Organization is a
major partner of the international community in that
regard. Since its beginnings, CSTO has transformed
itself into a genuinely multifaceted body with a broad
potential for responding to today’s challenges and
threats. I would like to emphasize that this is not
just about ensuring our member States’ national and
collective security. CSTO’s functions and aims include
coordinating its member States’ foreign policies,
working together in order to strengthen our defensive
capacity, improving our system for practical cooperation
between our crisis response mechanism and national
armed forces in order to ensure our States’ security,
and combating international terrorism, drug trafficking
and illegal migration, as well as cooperating in areas
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

such as information security and the prevention and
elimination of emergency situations. CSTO is ready to
initiate multilateral cooperation mechanisms in all those
areas, and in fact is already doing so in practice. In 2015,
for instance, CSTO held an international conference
on anti-drug operations, aimed at eradicating heroin
distribution channels and synthetic drugs coming out of
Afghanistan, attended by 25 countries as well as CSTO
members, in an example of the joint efforts that affirm
CSTO’s practical contribution to enhancing regional
and international security.
Productive cooperation with the United Nations is a
priority for our States. That is solidly founded on CSTO’s
observer status in the General Assembly, and periodic
Assembly resolutions reflect the mutually beneficial
cooperation between the two organizations. Our two
secretariats’ cooperation is based on two framework
documents, the 2010 Joint Declaration of Cooperation
and the 2012 memorandum of understanding between the
CSTO secretariat and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the United Nations.
CSTO member States are involved in enhancing
cooperation with the United Nations based on the
progress we have already made. We believe that
cooperation on peacekeeping between CSTO and
the United Nations is a promising direction that can
benefit both of our organizations and the international
community, and we have made it a priority. The CSTO
agreement on peacekeeping activity and related training
represents a legal basis for developing our peacekeeping
capacity and putting it into practice. We will very soon
be ready to submit proposals for joint action with the
United Nations for a substantive discussion on the
possible involvement of CSTO member States in United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
We also propose considering other possible forms
of cooperation between the United Nations and CSTO.
There are many current topics that are of interest to both
organizations and indeed the whole world, including
the fight against terrorism, dealing with humanitarian
emergencies and countering human trafficking and
illegal migration. We would like to jointly consider
how CSTO and the United Nations could combine
their efforts to confront such challenges and threats,
for example, by organizing specific measures with the
leadership of both organizations participating.
It is symbolic that today’s debate includes
organizations that are engaged in a wide range of issues,

S/PV.7796

from peace and security to economic, humanitarian and
cultural cooperation, which we see as a reflection of the
commitment of States Members of the United Nations
to considering the world’s most pressing problems as
they react on each other. CSTO States are committed
to participating actively in that process, in their firm
belief in the inseparability of peace, security and
gradual sustainable development.
I would now like to make a few comments in my
national capacity regarding Belarus’s cooperation
with CIS and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Belarus’s natural path to development has always been
through integration within CIS. For us, integration is a
tool by which our countries’ joint efforts can achieve
our key goal — increasing our citizens’ well-being and
quality of life. This year CIS is celebrating its twentyfifth anniversary, and during the years of its existence
it has acted to resolve the many complex challenges
related to the collapse of the Soviet Union, to encourage
the establishment of sovereign independent States and
to preserve and further develop our historical ties to
one another.
Today one of our priorities in cooperating with CIS
today is on the economic front. In our view, successful
cooperation in areas such as energy, transport,
trade, industry and the development of innovative
technologies should be one of the Commonwealth’s
uniting functions. Our experience of cooperating within
CIS has contributed significantly to our development of
integration processes in various formats, including the
establishment of the Eurasian Economic Union. Mutual
cooperation and the integration of these elements in the
Eurasian space is very important for global political
stability and well-being.
Since July 2015, Belarus has been an observer
of the Shanghai Pact. For four years before that we
had the status of Dialogue Partner of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. With Belarus’ participation,
the organization has been dealing with current threats,
economic integration and cooperation the Eurasian
Economic Union in establishing the Silk Road Economic
Belt. We are ready to become a western portal for the
SCO.
Over recent years we have seen considerable
success in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization as it
has grown. The membership of India and Pakistan has
significantly enhanced the authority of the organization
and broadened its political and economic potential. The

16-3483927/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

national interest of Belarus lie in joining with the SCO in
the fight against terrorism, separatism and extremism,
which are areas where we can and must collaborate with
the United Nations and other international and regional
organizations if we are to achieve international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s debate and for circulating the related
comprehensive concept paper (S/2016/867, annex). We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
remarks on this important topic.
Regional and subregional organizations have an
important role to play in maintaining international peace
and security. Accordingly, the United Nations interacts
with several regional organizations — for example, the
African Union on the African continent — and India
has supported such cooperation, pursuant to Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter. Indeed, Article 54
of the Charter directs such organizations to keep the
Security Council fully informed of their activities for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Today, few security problems begin and remain
within the borders of one country; they invariably
radiate beyond the national borders. Terrorism, drug
trafficking, transnational crime, pandemics and
environmental degradation do not respect any borders.
Terrorism constitutes a growing threat to
international peace and security. The international
community is increasingly confronted with terrorist
groups that have influence across continents in terms
of the sourcing of their finances, recruitment, the
spread of their ideologies of hate and their areas of
operation. This has been made possible by the forces
of globalization over the last two decades. The battle
against such groups can be won only collectively
and through much closer international cooperation.
Regional and subregional groups can play an important
role in facilitating such cooperation.
Among the organizations being discussed
today, India has been an observer in the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) for the past decade
and is now an acceding State. India brings principles
to the organization that are in tune with the philosophy
of the SCO. India’s capacities in trade, investments,
information and communication technology, space,
28/34

28/10/2016

science and technology, agriculture, health care,
and small and medium-sized industry can create farreaching synergies with SCO countries.
The SCO is a young organization. With India
as a full member, the boundaries of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization will stretch from the Pacific
to Europe and from the Arctic to the Indian Ocean.
It will represent 40 percent of humankind and over
1 billion young people.
There already exists a Joint Declaration on
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. This cooperation
can be taken forward. For the partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations to
be effective, it needs to be one based on respect for
regional processes, complementarity and a division of
labour based on comparative advantage.
While acting under Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, regional and subregional organizations
should make every effort to assist their member
States to achieve pacific settlement of disputes, in
cooperation with the United Nations, as appropriate.
Such cooperation should encompass all relevant issues
related to international peace and security, including
the fight against terrorism.
It is important that cooperation between the
United Nations and the SCO and other regional bodies
grow organically. Periodic debates like the today’s
offer a useful opportunity for the United Nations and
regional organizations and their member States to
discuss how such growth could proceed in a mutually
supportive manner.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Ms. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
This year, the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) marks its twenty-fifth anniversary. The member
States of the Commonwealth are committed to the
values that are set out in the Charter of the United
Nations. Cooperation within the CIS is based on respect
for humane and humanitarian values, which provides
the basis for combating the ideological extremism,
intolerance and terrorism that threaten the stability
not only of member States of the Commonwealth of
Independent States but the world as a whole.
Since January 2016, the Kyrgyz Republic has held
the presidency of the Commonwealth of Independent
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

States. In this period three entities have celebrated
anniversaries: the Council of Heads of State of the
CIS, the Council of Heads of Government and the
Council of Foreign Ministers. At the Bishkek summit
in September 2016, the Heads of State reviewed a
broad range of issues related to intra-CIS cooperation,
including security issues and combating international
terrorism and extremism. The Heads of State adopted
four statements — on the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Commonwealth, on the seventieth anniversary of
the completion of the work of the Nuremberg Tribunal,
on future joint efforts to counteract international
terrorism, and on the outcome of the special session of
the General Assembly on the world drug problem.
It should be pointed out that all of those problems
were given particular attention in a context in which the
international situation is undergoing complex changes
and international security continues to be subject to
various sources of instability, namely, international
terrorism, religious extremism and other contemporary
challenges and threats. We are especially concerned
by the growth in various terrorist and extremist
organizations and the continuing recruitment of CIS
citizens into entities engaged in armed conflicts.
No less grave an external threat for the CIS
continues to be the situation in Afghanistan, where
there has been no drop in the threat of terrorism,
extremism and drug trafficking. Reiterating that there
is no military solution to the Afghan problem, the
CIS States support the settlement of the intra-Afghan
conflict through inclusive national reconciliation. We
believe that these efforts should be undertaken by the
Afghan people themselves and their designated leaders,
without imposing preconditions and with the United
Nations playing the central coordinating role in the
process of international cooperation on Afghanistan.
As the CIS countries contribute to counteracting
new threats and challenges to security, they take into
account the leading role played by the United Nations
and the need to develop constructive partnerships
with other members of international organizations and
specialized agencies, such as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, INTERPOL, the International Organization
for Migration, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Financial
Action Task Force for combating money-laundering.
CIS States are also parties to all the main international
cooperation agreements on security, disarmament and

S/PV.7796

counteracting contemporary threats and challenges,
and we make a proper contribution to implementing
them.
Our countries make regular submissions to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) of information on their efforts
to improve national systems for monitoring the trade
in weapons of mass destruction, the means for their
delivery and related materials, providing the highest
possible respect for standards of nuclear security
and implementing the International Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material. All CIS States are parties to the global
initiative on combating acts of nuclear terrorism.
Significant experience has been gained in the areas
of cooperation between the CIS and the United Nations
in the achievement of our goals in the social, economic
and humanitarian spheres. However, enhancing the
cooperation’s viability and effectiveness implies
ensuring that there is a solid basis for such cooperation,
which would help us strengthen the links between the
CIS and the specialized agencies and offices of the
United Nations. That would be facilitated by the General
Assembly draft resolution on cooperation between the
United Nations Organization and the Commonwealth
of Independent States, to be adopted in November.
In order to ensure the sustainable socioeconomic
development of CIS countries, member States are
working on enhancing and broadening economic
cooperation. That includes establishing a fully
fledged free trade zone for the Commonwealth,
further upgrading transport and communications and
increasing our humanitarian cooperation, important
components for ensuring stability and security
throughout the CIS area.
In conclusion, allow me to express our gratitude
for the initiative to convene today’s debate and our
trust that cooperation between the United Nations and
the CIS will continue to have a positive impact on the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At
the outset, I would like to express my delegation’s
appreciation to the Russian presidency for convening

16-3483929/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

this important event. I would also like to express
my gratitude to all the briefers and their respective
organizations.
The maintenance of international peace and
security is currently much more challenging than ever
before, and therefore requires a much more shared
and collective response at the national, regional and
international levels. That is why greater cooperation is
now needed between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations that seek to maintain
peace and security.
Regional organizations are better positioned to
grasp the essence of the issues at hand in a realistic
way and provide a better understanding of the facts
on the ground. In many cases, they are also equipped
with preventive mechanisms adapted to local realities
and needs. They can act to defuse tension in emerging
conflicts and seek peaceful political solutions.
To that end, the Security Council regularly holds
meetings with regional organizations such as the African
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union (EU) to
discuss cooperation, but this is the first time that the
Council holds such a debate on cooperations with the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). These are
relatively young emerging organizations and unions,
operating in vast regions, from Eastern Europe to the
Far East, with huge political influence in the world and
significant contributions to strengthening regional and
international security.
Counter-terrorism, drug trafficking, organized
crime, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are some of
the areas for potential interaction between the United
Nations and CSTO, SCO and CIS.

28/10/2016

between the two organizations in various fields.
The threat of Da’esh and its offshoots continues to
be significant and widespread, turning parts of the
region, such as Afghanistan, into hotbeds for terrorists
and extremist groups, thus increasing the need for
increased cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations.
As an organization that the Islamic Republic of
Iran has already expressed interest in joining as a
full member, the SCO actively supports efforts by the
international community and the United Nations in
fields such as the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
the fight against terrorism — through SCO’s regional
counter-terrorism structure — the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, countering transnational
crime and illegal drugs and providing international
information security, among others. It also supports
peace, development and stability in Afghanistan.
The CIS too has sought to facilitate cooperation
and interaction among its member States and to advise
them on security in the face of emerging challenges and
threats in the region.
The United Nations should continue its efforts
to foster coordination and interaction with such
organizations on the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, and those organizations should
also try to harmonize their aims with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations such as the CSTO, the SCO and
the IS can enhance interlinked, mutually reinforcing
security and development. Achieving security,
development and stability in such a macro-region as
Eurasia will readily serve as the basis for economic
growth and nation-building in this important and
immense region.

The General Assembly, through its biennial
resolutions, endorses cooperation between the United
Nations and the CSTO, under agenda item 126,
“Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations”. CSTO’s structure allows it to
actively contribute to international efforts by developing
its own regional peacekeeping capacities or by helping
national Governments with post-conflict development.

We hope that the holding of this debate will
further improve and deepen the cooperation between
the United Nations and these organizations and help
develop collective, innovative approaches to peace,
development and stability in vulnerable parts of Eurasia
that can also be applied to other parts of the globe.

The Joint Declaration on Cooperation between the
Secretariats of the United Nations and SCO, signed in
2010, has laid the foundation for active cooperation

Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to thank the
Russian presidency for organizing today’s open debate
on such an important issue. We also appreciate the

30/34

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.

16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7796

thoughtful concept note shared by your delegation to
inform the debate (S/2016/867, annex).

organizations in the peaceful settlement of local disputes
is therefore amply acknowledged and entrenched.

Our multipolar world is more free and vibrant, yet
more chaotic and turbulent. New and complex conflicts
are emerging, while older and unresolved disputes
continue to fester. The international order established
after the Second World War is falling apart. But a new
order has yet to emerge. At a time when confrontation
has returned between the major Powers, traditional
challenges have not diminished in scope or intensity.
Poverty remains widespread. Violations of human
rights are rampant. Situations of foreign occupation
persist. Violent extremism and terrorism have assumed
dangerous new forms. The global refugee crisis, as we
all know, has reached unprecedented levels.

Operating in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
regional organizations play a positive role in addressing
many diverse challenges, especially the economic and
social dimensions of such challenges. Closer political
interaction among regional countries can also serve to
address the security dimensions of these challenges.
However, as we know, cooperation among members
is an essential factor for the success of regional
arrangements. With relatively smaller memberships,
regional arrangements can usually yield speedier and
mutually productive cooperation.

We believe that one of the tragic ironies of our age is
that we are witnessing unprecedented human suffering
at a time when spectacular advances in human progress
are being made possible by the technological and
scientific breakthroughs of our era. The United Nations
remains an indispensable organization for facilitating
these opportunities and addressing the complex
challenges of our times. But it faces an imposing task
in simultaneously dealing with all those challenges and
opportunities. Enhanced cooperation with regional and
subregional intergovernmental organizations could
help the United Nations succeed.
We agree with the observation in the concept note
that the United Nations derives its legitimacy from its
universal membership and comprehensive activities,
while regional organizations, by their very nature,
often have a better understanding of the situation
on the ground. There is therefore great scope for
cooperation between them. That is why Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations elaborates the
role of regional arrangements in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Article 52 of the Charter not only urges Member
States to
“make every effort to achieve pacific settlement of
local disputes through such regional arrangements
or by such regional agencies before referring them
to the Security Council”,
it also urges the Security Council to “encourage
the... pacific settlement oflocal disputes through such
regional arrangements”. The role and utility of regional

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
offers the promise of mutually beneficial regional
cooperation. With its current membership and
observers, the organization represents half the world’s
population. SCO plays a useful role in promoting
cooperative and collective security in the Eurasian
region, especially in countering terrorism, separatism
and extremism, as well as in fighting drugs and crime.
Since 2010, SCO has also been cooperating regularly
with the United Nations in the fields of prevention
and resolution of conflicts, anti-terrorism through
its Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure, and countering
transnational crime and illegal drugs.
In June, my country signed a memorandum with
SCO, paving the way for our full membership of the
organization. Pakistan hopes to benefit from this
membership, as we firmly believe in the value of finding
regional solutions to regional problems and conflicts.
We call for enhanced dialogue and cooperation between
the United Nations and SCO, as both organizations
share the same purposes and principles.
While Pakistan is not a member of either the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) or the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), we believe
that each regional organization is unique and for that
reason offers different capabilities. In this regard,
we see value in cooperation among various regional
organizations as well. For example, with overlapping
memberships, there could be enhanced cooperation
among SCO, CSTO and CIS. SCO, for example, could
also benefit from cooperation with other regional
organizations such as the the Gulf Cooperation Council
and the Economic Cooperation Organization.

16-3483931/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The One Belt, One Road project, launched by
President Xi Jinping of China, is a significant example
of ways in which cross-regional cooperation can be
promoted in an inclusive and practical way. The ChinaPakistan Economic Corridor is a major component of
that visionary and ambitious enterprise.
Finally, let me say that the United Nations provides
the umbrella under which regional organizations can
promote cooperation with each other in advancing
the objectives of peace, stability and prosperity. The
principles of the Charter of the United Nations remain
the foundation on which nations of different regions
can conduct their mutual relations and cooperation
across regions in our interdependent world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia expresses
it appreciation to the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for initiating this debate and for sharing a
substantive concept paper (S/2016/867, annex). We
thank the Secretary-General for his presence and for
his briefing, and appreciate the presence of Mr. Nikolai
Bordyuzha, Secretary-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO); Mr. Rashid
Alimov, Secretary-General of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization; and Mr. Sergey Ivanov, Vice-Chair
of the Executive Committee of Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS).
While we are aligned with the statement on behalf
of the CSTO, we also wish to add a few points in our
national capacity.
No country can be effective in pursuing its
national agenda without engaging with others. That
is particularly obvious in the case of countries with
modest capacities. The regional and subregional
levels of cooperation provide an effective platform
for pursuing specific common objectives, including
common security goals. The United Nations remains a
critical forum for interregional engagement.
As a member of numerous regional organizations,
CSTO and CIS among them, Armenia benefits strongly
from the institutional strength and effectiveness of the
regional and subregional landscape of cooperation,
including in the fields of political dialogue, security,
human rights, democratic transformation and the
strengthening of the rule of law, trade and economy,
culture and youth. As a member of CSTO, Armenia will
32/34

28/10/2016

continue to deliver on its commitment to forging stronger
cooperation with the United Nations and to contributing
to international peace and United Nations peacekeeping
capacities.As a troop-contributing country for over 12
years, Armenia has gathered considerable national
experience in its multiple engagements in peacekeeping
operations in various parts of the world. Lately, Armenia
has gained valuable experience in a United Nations-led
operation in Lebanon.
Armenia has been investing its experience in
strengthening its preparedness for peacekeeping within
CSTO. In that context, we welcome the expanding
cooperation of the United Nations with CSTO,
including between their respective secretariats. During
our presidency of CSTO over the past year, we have
attached priority to the expansion of such cooperation
between CSTO and the United Nations.
In our national context, the peaceful resolution of
conflicts on the basis of the norms and principles of
international law, without exception, are of specific
significance given the ongoing negotiations for the
peaceful settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict
within the internationally supported format of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Minsk Group co-chairmanship. This format
is by far the most effective for our particular case on
several accounts, not least due to its capacity to sustain
focus on a compromise solution to defuse tensions and
prevent escalation. Armenia welcomes the unwavering
and continued support of the United Nations system
and the Secretary-General for the established format of
negotiations and for the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs.
In April, Azerbaijan unleashed a military
aggression against Nagorno Karabakh, thereby
violating the trilateral agreements of 1994 and 1995 on a
ceasefire, signed by Azerbaijan, Nagorno Karabakh and
Armenia. The ceasefire agreements do not have time
limitations; however, Azerbaijan undertook efforts,
including within the United Nations, to challenge the
validity of the agreements. From the very beginning of
the Azerbaijani aggression, the civilian infrastructure
and civilian population — including children and the
elderly — were intentional targets of indiscriminate
violence. Among the earliest civilian victims were a
12-year-old boy and a 92-year-old woman, who were
brutally tortured, mutilated and killed. Three captive
soldiers of the Nagorno Karabakh defence forces were
beheaded by Azerbaijan armed forces in the style of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. This barbarity
16-34839

28/10/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

was subsequently celebrated in the towns and villages
of Azerbaijan and publicized on its social networks.
It is imperative to preclude dangerous attempts to
seek a military solution to the issue. The implementation
of the confidence-building measures proposed by the
OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs, including the proposals
agreed at the Vienna and Saint Petersburg summits by
the Presidents earlier this year, will certainly serve that
purpose. It is critical for the international community to
urge Azerbaijan to strictly commit to the 1994 and 1995
trilateral agreements. Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh
have accepted and remain wholly committed to the
early implementation of the latest proposals. To date,
Azerbaijan continues to reject the implementation of the
agreed proposals. We reiterate our firm position that a
clear and unequivocal commitment to the ceasefire and
confidence-building measures on the part of the parties
concerned is the only way to create an environment
conducive to the peace process.
In conclusion, Armenia believes in the viability
and efficiency of both the United Nations and regional
arrangements and mechanisms in enhancing trust,
confidence-building and dialogue among nations.
Regional and subregional organizations have an essential
role to play. They often have a better understanding of
local circumstances, tailored approaches and effective
tools, as well their own resources and financing.
Cooperation and dialogue among States from the
subregional to the regional and global levels have been
and remain the modus operandi for the sustainability of
peace, security and cooperation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): My delegation had no
intention to speak at this debate, but some thoughts
expressed during the discussion encouraged us to take
the floor.
In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, Member States conferred upon the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and agreed that, in
carrying out its duties under that responsibility, the
Council acts on their behalf. At the same time, Chapter
VIII of the Charter encourages cooperation between
the United Nations and regional arrangements in the
peaceful settlement of disputes.

S/PV.7796

Since the 2005 World Summit and the adoption
of resolution 1631 (2005), important progress has
been achieved in enhancing cooperation between the
United Nations and regional partners across a full
range of areas — from the maintenance of international
peace and security and humanitarian assistance, to
development and the protection of human rights. Indeed,
in a number of instances, the relevant international
organizations have proved to be indispensable
mechanisms for promoting international and regional
peace and security and cooperation in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. At the same time, serious challenges
remain. While regional organizations are normally well
positioned to understand the causes of armed conflict
owing to their knowledge of the region, it is obvious
that not all of them can boast the reality, political will
and institutional capacity to ensure compliance by
Member States with their statutory commitments.
First and foremost, it is critical that all Member
States adhere to their obligations as they laid out
in the Charter of the United Nations with respect
to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States. Unfortunately, we still face
instances in which States that are responsible for
violations of international law and regional politically
binding obligations not the only continue to benefit
from membership of regional and subregional
organizations, but also abuse such a privilege with a
view to undermining the efforts towards achieving a
peaceful solution to regional security problems.
Furthermore, as far as regional arrangements
established for collective defence purposes are
concerned, it is essential to avoid any ambiguity in
terms of their area of responsibility and the conditions
of invoking collective defence and to ensure that their
respective functions are framed and guided by the
Charter of the United Nations. It is also important
that the collective defence shield not be misused by
aggressors for consolidating the situations created by
the unlawful use of force against other States.
Our firm belief is that the United Nations should
be resorted to by Member States in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Organization, and
not misused for the political advantage of those who
gravely violate international law and advocate the
culture of impunity.

16-3483933/34

S/PV.7796

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

It is regrettable that the contribution of the
delegation of Armenia to our debate was to focus its
statement on misinformation and misinterpretation, the
only purpose of which is to deny its responsibility for
the crimes committed in the course of its aggression
against Azerbaijan.
While speaking in the Security Council, the
representative of Armenia omitted a reference to
the relevant resolutions adopted by the Council in
response to armed attacks against Azerbaijan and the
subsequent occupation of its territories. None of the
Security Council resolutions were implemented by

34/34

28/10/2016

Armenia, which continues to take purposeful measures
to consolidate the gains of the use of force and ethnic
cleansing and build up its military presence in the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan. By disregarding the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
Armenia clearly demonstrates who is actually pursuing
a destructive and militaristic policy and openly
challenging the ongoing political efforts towards a
resolution of the conflict.
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m

16-34839
