30

-----------------·------·----·

t.eneral Assembly- F ortieth Session

independent and emerging States ali possihle assistam:e in
the economic, social and other fields;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Committee with the facilities and services required for
the implementation ofthe present resolution, as well as of
the various resolutions and decisions on decolonization
adopted by the General Assembly and the Special C'ommittee.
99th plenary meeting
2 December l 985

40/58. Dissemination of information on decolonization
The General Assembly.
Having examined the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the
dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of the United Nations in the field of
decolonization, 44
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and ali other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in particular General Assembly resolution 39/92 of
14 December l 984,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument
for furthering the aims and purposes of the Declaration
and mindful of the continuing pressing need to take ali
possible steps to acquaint world public opinion with ali
aspects of the problems of decolonization, with a view to
assisting effectively the peoples of the colonial Territories
to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence,
Aware ofthe increasingly important role being played in
the widespread dissemination of relevant information by a
number of non-govemmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization, and noting with satisfaction
the intensified efforts ofthe Special Committee in enlisting
the support of those organizations in that regard,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. Considers it incumbent upon the United Nations to
continue to play an active role in the process of self-determination and independence and to intensify its efforts for
the widest possible dissemination of information on decolonization, with a view to the further mobilization ofinternational public opinion in support of complete decolonization;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard to the
suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue to take
concrete measures through ali the media at his disposal,
including publications, radio and television, to give
widespread and continuous publicity to the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization, and, inter
alia:
(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic material,
44 fbid., chaps. 11 and lll.
4s A/40/743.

studies and articles relating to the problems of decolonization and, in particular, to continue to publish the periodical Objective: Justice and other publications, special articles and studies, including the Deco/onization series, and
to select from them appropriate material for wider dissemination by means of reprints in various languages;
(b) To seek the full co-operation of the administering
Powers concemed in the discharge of the tasks referred to
above;
(e) To mtensify the activities of ali United Nations
information centres;
(d) To maintain a close working relationship with the
Organization of African Unity by holding periodic consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant information with that organization;
(e) To enlist, with the close co-operation of United
Nations information centres, the support of non-govemmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization in the dissemination of the relevant information;
(/) To ensure the availability of the necessary facilities
and services to that end;
(g) To report to the Special Committee on the measures taken in implementation of the present resolution;
4. Requests ali States, in particular the administering
Powers, the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system and non-govemmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization to
undertake or intensify, in co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral and within their respective spheres of competence, the large-scale dissemination of the information
referred to in paragraph 2 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and report thereon to
the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th p/enary meeting
2 December 1985

40/60.

Co-operation between tbe United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Committee

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/38 of 18 November 1981,
37/8 of 29 October 1982, 38/37 of 5 December 1983 and
39/47 of 10 December 1984,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the state of co-operation between the United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee, 45
Having heard the report ofthe Secretary-General ofthe
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee on the steps
taken by the Committee to ensure continuing, close and
effective co-operation between the two organizations, 46
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General; 45
2. Notes with satisfaction the further progress achieved
towards strengthening the existing co-operation between
the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the study on the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations prepared
by the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee on
the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the United
46 See Officia/ Records o( the General Assembly. Fortieth Session. Plenan•
Meetings. 108th meeting.
