United Nations

A/RES/67/56*

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 January 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 94

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 3 December 2012
[on the report of the First Committee (A/67/409)]

67/56. Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament
negotiations
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any
use of nuclear weapons,
Recalling the Declaration of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,
the first special session devoted to disarmament, 1 which states, inter alia, that all the
peoples of the world have a vital interest in the success of disarmament negotiations,
and that all States have the right to participate in disarmament negotiations,
Reaffirming the role and functions of the Conference on Disarmament and the
Disarmament Commission, as set out in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 2
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 3 which states, inter alia,
that responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social development, as well
as threats to international peace and security, must be shared among the nations of the
world and should be exercised multilaterally and that, as the most universal and most
representative organization in the world, the United Nations must play the central role,
Welcoming the efforts by Member States to secure progress in multilateral
disarmament and the support of the Secretary-General for such efforts, and noting in
this regard the Secretary-General’s five-point proposal on nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the outcome, including the action points, of the 2010 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 4

_______________
* Reissued for technical reasons on 15 July 2013.
1
Resolution S-10/2, sect. II.
2
Ibid., sect. IV.
3
Resolution 55/2.
4
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final
Document, vols. I–III (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vols. I–III)).

12-48196*

*1248196*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/56

Reaffirming the absolute validity of multilateral diplomacy in the field of
disarmament and non-proliferation, and determined to promote multilateralism as an
essential way to develop arms regulation and disarmament negotiations,
Recognizing the absence of concrete outcomes of multilateral nuclear
disarmament negotiations within the United Nations framework for more than a
decade,
Recognizing also the increased political attention to disarmament and
non-proliferation issues and that the international political climate is more
conducive to the promotion of multilateral disarmament and to moving towards the
goal of a world without nuclear weapons,
Emphasizing the importance and urgency of substantive progress on priority
disarmament and non-proliferation issues,
Recognizing the important contribution that civil society makes to multilateral
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control processes,
Mindful of Article 11 of the Charter of the United Nations concerning the
functions and powers of the General Assembly to consider and make
recommendations, including recommendations with regard to disarmament,
Decides to establish an open-ended working group to develop proposals
1.
to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations for the achievement
and maintenance of a world without nuclear weapons;
Also decides that the working group shall convene in Geneva in 2013 for
2.
up to 15 working days, within available timeframes, with the contribution of
international organizations and civil society, in accordance with established practice,
and shall hold its organizational session as soon as possible;
Further decides that the working group shall submit a report on its work,
3.
reflecting discussions held and all proposals made, to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session, which will assess its work, taking into account developments in
other relevant forums;
Requests the Secretary-General to provide, within available resources,
4.
the support necessary to convene the working group and also to transmit the report
of the working group to the Conference on Disarmament and the Disarmament
Commission;
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-eighth session an
5.
item entitled “Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations”.
48th plenary meeting
3 December 2012

2
