VIII,

Resolutions adopted on the reporb of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of rule 156 of its rules of procedure34 and
desiring, accordingly, to increase thc participation of
members from developing countries in the Advisory
Committiee,
1. Decides .to increase the membership of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions from thirteen to sixteen members;
2. Decides to amend, with effect from 1 January
1978, rules 155 to 157 of its rules of procedurc toread
as follows:
"Rule 155
"The General Assembly shall appoint an Advisory
Comrnittee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions consisting of sixteen members, including at
1'east threc financia! experts of recognized standing.
"Rule 156
"The members of the Advisory Committee on Adrninistrative and Budgetary Questions, no two of
whom shall be nationaI,s of the same State, shall be
se1ected on the basis of broad geographical representation, personal qualifications and experience and
shall serve for a period of three years corrcsponding
to three ca1'endar years. Members shall retire by rotation and shall be eligible for reappointment. The
three financia! iexperts shall not retire simultaneously.
The General Assembly shall appoint the members
of the Advisory Comrnittee at the regular session
immediately preceding the expiration of the term of
office of the members or, in case of vacancies, at the
next session.
"Rule 157
"The Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions shall be responsible for expert
examination of the programme budget of the United
Nations and shall assist the Administrative and Budgetary Committee (Fifth Committee). At the beginning of each regular session at which the proposed
programme budget for the following biennium is to
be considered, it shall submit to the General Assembly a detailed report on the proposed programmc
budget for that biennium. It shall also submit, at
such times as may be specified in the applicable provisions of the Financia! Regulations and Rules of thc
United Nations, 35 a report on the accounts of the
United Nations and all United Nations entities for
which the Secretary-General has administrative rcsponsibifüy. It shall examine on behalf of the General
Assembly the administrative budgets of specialized
agencies and proposals for financia! and budgetary
arrangements with such agendes. It shall perform
such other duties as may be assigned to it under the
Financia} Regulations of the United Nations."
102nd plenary meeting
14 December 1977
32/104.

Financia!
Nations

emergency

of

the

Recalling the Secretary-General's statements of
25 Septcmbcr 1975:rn and 14 April 1976 37 in which he
drew attention to the serious financia} situation of the
Unitcd Nations,
Noting with concern that the short-term deficit of
the Organization has continued to grow,
Recalling its rcsolutions 3049 (XXVII) of 19 December 1972, 3538 (XXX) of 17 Dcccmbcr 1975
and 3 I 1 191 of 22 December I 976,
Bea,inR in mind the necd to implement without
further dclay the consensus of the Special Committee
on Peace-kecping Opcrations:18 adopted by the General
Asscmbly on 1 September 1965,39
ReaffirminR the determination of Member States to
arrive at a lasting solution of thc financia} problems
of the Organization,
Mindful of the positions of principie of Member
States,

l. Takes note of the report of the Negotiating
Committee on the Financia! Emergency of the United
Nations, 40 including the guidelines submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee for discussion and negotiation, as contained in paragraph 18 of the report,
and of the views expressed by Member States in thr
Fifth Committee;
2. f.,'xpresses concern that the Committee was unable to reach a consensus on a solution to the financia!
problems of the Organization;
3. Urges ali Member States, particularly those
among them whosc efforts can promote an accord, to
negotiate with the aim of bringing about a lasting solution to the financia! problems of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Committee to keep the financia!
situation of the United Nations under review and to
continue i,ts efforts to bring about a comprehensive
settlement of the financia! problems of the Organization;
5. Further requests the Committee to submit, if
necessary, a supplementary report on further developments to be considered at the ,thirty-third session of
the General Assembly;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, at
the thirty-third session, detailed information regarding the extent, rate of increase and composition of the
deficit of the Organization, as well as voluntary contributions rcceived from Member States and other
sourccs:
7. Decides to include in thc provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the ítem enütled "Financia!
cmergcncy of thc Unitcd Nations: report of thc Negotiating Committee on the Financia! Emergency of the
United Nations".
102nd plenary meeting
14 December 1977

United

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the collective responsibility of Member
States far the financia! security of the United Nations,
3 4 A/520/Rev.12 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.74.I.6) and Amend. l.
3 5 ST/SGB/Financial Rules/1/Rev.2 (1978).

189

36 A/C.5/1685.
37 See Official Records of the General Assemb/y, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 37 (A/31/37), paras. 9 and 10.
HS /bid., Ni11eteenth Session, Annexas, annex No. 21, document A/5916, para. 2.
:w !bid., Ninetcenth Session, Plenary Meetings, 1331st meeting, paras. 3 and 4. See also resolution 2053 (XX).
40 !bid., Thirty-first Ses.1ion, Supp/eme11t No. 37 (A/31/37).
