S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5735th meeting
Tuesday, 28 August 2007, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gayama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Congo)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Delieux
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. Veyssiere
Mr. Yankey
Mr. Budiman
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Suescum
Ms. Tincopa
Mr. Al-Henzab
Mr. Smirnov
Mr. Mlynar
Mr. Crowley
Mr. Hoare
Mr. McBride

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Role of the Security Council in conflict prevention and resolution, in particular
in Africa
Letter dated 14 August 2007 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Congo to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2007/496)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-49201 (E)

*0749201*

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
remind all speakers, as I indicated at this morning’s
session, to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts in
writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I now call on the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate. Uganda attaches
great importance to the issue of the maintenance of
international peace and security. Because of time
constraints, I will try to be brief in my intervention.
First of all, the responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security is primarily that of
the Security Council, in line with the provisions of the
Charter. However, this issue concerns us all. Indeed,
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1) brings out this issue clearly. Its
paragraph 71 states:
“We acknowledge that we are living in an
interdependent and global world and that many of
today’s threats recognize no national boundaries,
are interlinked and must be tackled at the global,
regional and national levels in accordance with
the Charter and international law”.
Unfortunately, some conflicts, especially in
Africa, tend to disappear from the international radar. A
case in point is the situation in Somalia, which until
recently had enjoyed low visibility. Therefore, it is
incumbent upon the international community, and
especially the Security Council, to give equal attention
to conflicts that may threaten international peace and
security wherever they occur.
There are many causes of conflict; I will
highlight just two. First, in developing countries,
especially in Africa, poverty is a serious threat to peace
and security. The need to address poverty, therefore,
can hardly be overemphasized. The Security Council
should see poverty as a threat to international peace
and security, and therefore exert the necessary pressure
and attention towards poverty alleviation, especially by

2

giving the necessary support to policies designed by
Member States to eradicate poverty.
Secondly, democracy can be both a blessing and a
curse. It is a blessing because, where it is genuinely
applied, it allows citizens to participate in determining
the way in which they are governed. However,
democracy can also be a curse if it is viewed as onesize-fits-all. Here, it is important to recall what our
leaders stated in paragraph 135 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome:
“We also reaffirm that while democracies share
common features, there is no single model of
democracy, that it does not belong to any country
or region, and reaffirm the necessity of due
respect for sovereignty and the right of selfdetermination”.
There has been an unfortunate tendency on the
part of some Western democracies to push their model
onto developing countries without due regard for
peculiarities and circumstances in those countries. In
Africa, for instance, where there is a multiplicity of
ethnic groups, the rush to introduce democracy without
first building a nation can be a disaster. For example, a
predominant tribe that exploits its numerical strength
may emerge a victor if the model of “one man, one
vote” is adopted. It may therefore monopolize power,
to the exclusion of minority tribes. The minority tribes
that are thus marginalized and excluded from power
may resort to violence in order to redress the power
imbalance.
In that scenario, therefore, what is required first
is to build a nation by introducing measures that
transcend tribal affiliation. For instance, the use of a
common language, as was the case in Tanzania with
Swahili, can be a useful tool; hence, the need to move
cautiously before a rush to introduce multiparty
democracy in developing countries. Yes, elections and
multiparty democracy can be useful, but, as I have
outlined, they cannot be the only considerations with
regard to the issue of democracy.
I want to comment on the role of the Security
Council with regard to peacekeeping. Traditionally, the
approach adopted by the Security Council has been the
following: where there is no peace to keep,
peacekeeping operations should not be authorized.
Sadly, that has been the case with Somalia. In my view,
the Security Council should liberate itself from this
tight box and, where circumstances demand, actively

07-49201

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

promote peacemaking as well. The presence of United
Nations peacekeepers in conflict-ridden areas may
itself help efforts towards peacemaking. Hence, we
have been urging the Security Council expeditiously to
deploy United Nations peacekeepers in Somalia to
replace the African Union (AU) force.
Ironically, by proxy or indirectly through the
authorization of African Union peacekeepers, the
Security Council is in fact already taking part in
peacemaking. We cannot, therefore, understand the
logic that prevents the Security Council from directly
authorizing a United Nations peacekeeping force now,
instead of postponing the matter to a possible
deployment in the future, as called for by Security
Council resolution 1772 (2007). Uganda, whose troops
are in Somalia under the African Union Mission in
Somalia, is proud to make its humble contribution
towards peacemaking in that country.
In its role of maintaining international peace and
security, the Security Council should dwell more on
preventive measures, without, of course, minimizing
the importance of resolving conflicts when they flare
up. Lastly, the Security Council should press for the
necessary logistical and financial support to be
provided to those countries that are undertaking
peacekeeping operations on its behalf under Chapter
VIII of the Charter.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the initiative taken by your
delegation, Mr. President, in convening today’s open
debate. My delegation welcomes the concept paper that
has been drawn up and the statements by the
representatives of the Secretariat this morning. We are
sure this will all contribute to achieving the necessary
strengthening of our collective capacity within the
United Nations for conflict prevention and resolution.
Guatemala’s own experience has taught us
lessons that place us in a privileged position to
comment on a number of the concerns appearing in the
discussion document circulated by the presidency.
Something we have learned through our discussions
and exchange of lessons learned is that reducing risk
and taking preventive action to avoid threats to peace
are the best ways of attenuating irreparable and
irreversible harm.
Prevention is a shared responsibility embodied in
the principles of the United Nations Charter, Article 1
of which calls for effective collective measures to

07-49201

prevent and eliminate threats to peace. Likewise,
conflict prevention is best reflected in Chapter VI,
particularly through the peaceful means contained in
Article 33.
Prevention is a fundamental responsibility of
States. The United Nations and the international
community play a subsidiary support role to national
endeavours. In that sense, we draw attention to the
importance in any prevention endeavour of building
national capacity in those areas, and the need to
promote dialogue with all actors and to include the
valuable contribution of civil society.
In terms of preventive measures, we are of the
view that conflict prevention should be dealt with from
the perspective of the fullest protection of the rule of
law — the essential concept for the stability of any
democratic State guaranteeing human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Moreover, the measures should
focus primarily on countering the underlying root
causes of conflict, including socio-economic, cultural
and religious causes, the management of natural
resources and sustainable development considerations.
Attention should also be given to the fact that
preventive action calls for attention to gender equality
and the situation of children, among others. For that
reason, my delegation considers it particularly useful
that the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa is to be
welcomed. It is encouraging to note the progress that
has been made over the last year on the African
continent as a whole, although much remains to be
done. Further activity should be undertaken in order to
avoid a recurrence of crises and to ensure the peace
that has been won with such difficulty in countries
emerging from conflict.
The Peacebuilding Commission should also work
hand in hand with the Security Council, in particular in
assessing the progress that has been made and in
evaluating the numerous factors that may determine its
course. Among other issues we might mention the
nature of the underlying conflict, the identification of
vulnerable groups such as indigenous peoples,
children, the situation and the role of women, the
consequences of peace agreements for the rule of law,
together with the different traditions that may coexist
in a given country and which have an impact on the

3

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

development of the system of justice and on the
adaptation of legal rules in the country.

hope to see the outcome of his work in synergy with
the Mediation Unit.

Guatemala has always supported the importance
of a firm and determined approach to endeavours to
build prevention capacity within the Organization in
keeping with the principles and objectives of the
United Nations Charter and international law.

Guatemala wishes to congratulate Liberia for the
progress made in that country and the positive steps
that have been taken. That is a real example of stability
and strengthening in the region and an example that
makes us feel optimistic regarding the future progress
of our brothers in the region. We also congratulate the
Government of Sierra Leone for the peaceful
environment in which the recent presidential and
parliamentary elections were held, since the
withdrawal of the United Nations mission in December
2005.

Allow us to take this opportunity to congratulate
the new Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Africa. We trust that the Office will carry out its work
within the mandate established by the General
Assembly as it has to date.
I wish to briefly touch on some of the
recommendations highlighted in the concept paper.
With regard to the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that the Group of Friends for the prevention of
conflict be institutionalized and made into a formal
forum, Guatemala is of the view that there are already
enough formal forums addressing the matter and that
what is needed is to close the unacceptable divide
between discourse and reality.
We have analysed the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the prevention of armed conflict and are of
the view that there is a lot of redundancy. For that
reason, we feel that instead of establishing a new
forum, it would be important to strengthen
coordination and coherence within the system.
My delegation believes it is premature to discuss
the possible role of the Mediation Support Unit
adopted within the Department for Political Affairs
(DPA), since the unit has not yet been set up. It is
difficult to see, as yet, how the unit will deal with
conflict prevention matters when, as we understand it,
the Secretariat has not yet filled all of the vacant posts
approved by the General Assembly. We understand that
the DPA will be very soon submitting to the General
Assembly a report on the restructuring of that
Department. We hope that in the report the SecretaryGeneral will explain in detail to the General Assembly
his ideas on the role that may be played by the unit in
conflict prevention.
Guatemala wishes to take this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of Mr. Jan Egeland as
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General. It is certain
that his experience and training will ensure that he can
make considerable progress in conflict mediation. We

4

Guatemala welcomes the memorandum of
understanding signed in Addis Ababa on 16 November
2006 between the United Nations and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, with the acceptance
of the Government of the Sudan, regarding a hybrid
operation in Darfur and consequently the adoption by
the Security Council of resolution 1769 (2007).
However, we believe that it is necessary for the
Security Council, when focusing on Darfur, not to put
aside the situation between the north and south of the
country. While a ceasefire has progressed successfully,
it is necessary to tackle the causes of the conflict.
Otherwise, there is a danger that hostilities may
resume, not only between the north and south but also
throughout the country.
Lastly, I wish to reiterate my country’s
commitment to the peacekeeping operations of the
United Nations in Africa. Guatemala is proud to be
taking an increasingly active part in all peacekeeping
operations in the region, since we are certain those
operations will benefit the Organization in fulfilling
the objectives and principles of the Charter.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the Vietnamese delegation, I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, and the Republic of the Congo for your effective
leadership of the work of the Security Council this
month. We warmly welcome your initiative to hold this
important open debate and highly appreciate your
substantive concept paper to that end.
My delegation shares the view expressed
previously by various delegations that it is pertinent for
the Council to revisit the question of its role in conflict
prevention and resolution on a regular basis. The
Charter of the United Nations stipulates that the

07-49201

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

Security Council has the primary role in
maintenance of international peace and security.

the

Given the alarming devastations caused by
contemporary intra-State and interstate conflicts, there
is an overwhelming agreement that durable peace can
be achieved at a much lower cost in human and
material terms through comprehensive and integrated
prevention strategies. Over the years, the Security
Council and the General Assembly have adopted a
number of resolutions on the question of prevention
and resolution of conflicts.
In this connection, my delegation wishes to recall
that General Assembly resolution 60/1, which was
adopted at the 2005 World Summit, underlines the
importance of prevention of armed conflicts in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and promotes a culture of prevention as a
means to effectively address the interconnected
security and development challenges faced by many
nations in the world. Security Council resolution 1625
(2005), while highlighting the need for strengthening
the Council’s role in conflict prevention, particularly in
Africa, reaffirms the principles of refraining from the
threat or the use of force and of peaceful settlements of
international disputes.
Equally important, the international community
has attached greater importance to such interdependent
and complementary components as early warning,
preventive diplomacy and demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration of ex-combatants, as well as postconflict peacebuilding. There is also agreement on the
need for greater coordination and cooperation among
United Nations organs, Member States, regional and
subregional organizations, the private sector, nongovernmental organizations and other civil society
actors to help war-ravaged countries to break out of the
vicious
cycle
of
poverty,
conflict
and
underdevelopment and move into the mainstream of
globalization.
For the past decades, Africa — the second largest
and second most populous continent — has been
grappling with protracted civil wars, ethnic strife,
extreme poverty and humanitarian tragedies. In spite of
certain remarkable progress in some areas, the African
continent continues to have the lowest share of global
foreign direct investment flows while shouldering a
growing debt burden and suffering from inequitable
global trade regimes. All these tremendous challenges

07-49201

instil in the international community a momentum of
broad support for addressing the root causes of
conflicts in the continent and reinvigorating socioeconomic development in the African countries.
In the spirit of solidarity with African countries,
Viet Nam supports fully the initiatives of the African
Union and the concerned subregional organizations to
prevent, mediate and resolve conflicts through peaceful
negotiations, with stronger support from the United
Nations. Viet Nam has followed with keen interest the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) programmes, especially within
the South-South cooperation framework, and notes
with satisfaction that significant headway has been
made in the fight against hunger, poverty, malaria,
tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS and in other fields and sectors
such as infrastructure, health, education, science and
technology
development.
Together
with
the
international community, we shall continue to explore
ways and means to further contribute to the cause of
peace, development and integration of the African
countries.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Muburi-Muita (Kenya): My delegation
welcomes the decision of the Security Council to hold
an open debate to consider how to enhance its
effectiveness in conflict prevention and resolution,
particularly in Africa. We wish to hail this Congolese
initiative and to applaud the support of the SecretaryGeneral.
This year has turned out to be a turning point on
matters of international peace and security, not only for
the United Nations but also for the African Union.
Recently, the Security Council finally adopted a
resolution authorizing its peacekeeping mission
destined for Darfur and also extended the mandate of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We
look forward to seeing full implementation of these
two resolutions. My country will work to support both
missions.
Foremost among the challenges of the Darfur
mission is the urgency to improve the safety and
security of the civilian populations.
Kenya recognizes the good work being done by
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in the Horn of Africa,

5

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

particularly in Somalia. The great effort to coordinate
the humanitarian work by United Nations relief
agencies and that of other international bodies has
saved the lives of a great number of the internally
displaced persons and has ameliorated the condition of
the sick and other vulnerable groups. These
humanitarian agencies are operating in extremely
difficult circumstances, and my delegation calls upon
the international community to support them.
The ongoing restructuring of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations might be construed to mean
that the United Nations is gearing itself up to building
sufficient capacity to deal with numerous complex
peacekeeping missions. It is instinctive to observe that
peacekeeping is more expensive than conflict
prevention. The energies and resources of the United
Nations should therefore be channelled more to
conflict prevention through use of its good offices to
address potential root causes of conflicts at the earliest
stages, before full escalation. These include Increasing
economic opportunities and promoting the culture of
inclusive politics to avoid marginalization and
alienation of large sections of populations, which often
leads to conflict.
Peace, security and development are mutually
interdependent. This is based on the realization that
there can never be development in the absence of peace
and security, while, on the other hand, peace and
security are prerequisites for development. Lack of
development, poverty, deprivation and suffering are all
breeding grounds for insecurity. In this respect, my
delegation would add that the ongoing United Nations
reform should ensure that proper working mechanisms
are put into place between the peace and security
organs, namely, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Security Council on the one hand, and the development
arms of the United Nations, especially the Economic
and Social Council, on the other.
Kenya welcomes the support that the United
Nations is giving to the African Union in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. We
call upon both bodies to deepen the cooperation in
order to enhance the capacity of the AU to handle
regional security issues, especially through the African
Union Peace and Security Council.
While commending the Security Council for its
good work, let me mention that, unfortunately, all too
often it has been stuck in its traditional approach of

6

peacekeeping. In most conflict situations, there will be
no peace to keep, and yet the international community
will be looking to the United Nations to deal with the
situation, as eloquently articulated by the Permanent
Representative of fellow East African Community
partner State, Uganda.
It is a commonly held view that the United
Nations preconditions that a country at conflict must
have a peace to keep in order for the United Nations to
deploy is untenable. To put it in context, the reason for
which a country allows foreign troops on its soil is to
create — not to keep — peace. The high-sounding
argument that there has to be political agreements
between warring factions is itself misplaced. IntraState conflicts require a neutral party to mediate
between the warring parties and a credible neutral
force to protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian
effort.
My country continues to shoulder great
responsibilities in our region of Africa on the subject
under discussion. As the current Chair of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Great Lakes Forum, Kenya has spearheaded aggressive
regional political initiatives to change the situation. We
will continue to pursue these goals as we call upon the
international community — and especially the United
Nations Security Council — to remain seized of the
matter.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of Congo.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): First of all, it is my pleasure to
express our delegation’s satisfaction at seeing the
Council chaired this month by the representative of our
sister Republic of the Congo, with which my country
has excellent relations, characterized by the seal of
trust and mutual respect.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting of the Council. The
active participation of the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Vice-President of the
General Assembly and the representative of the
Peacebuilding Commission clearly illustrates the
importance that our universal Organization attaches to
the role that the Security Council should play in the
prevention and resolution of conflict, especially in
Africa.

07-49201

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

The persistence of conflicts in Africa has given
rise to serious and complex problems, including
massive flows of refugees, internally displaced
persons, the spread of infectious diseases, the
proliferation of weapons and drugs, the destruction of
crucial basic infrastructure and the devastation of
ecosystems and the environment. It is essential that the
international community as a whole realize that the
stability and prosperity of Africa is important for all
humankind, and that the development and
improvement of its well-being requires appropriate
actions both by Africans themselves and by their
bilateral and multilateral partners.
With regard to preventing conflict in Africa, there
is a need to ensure the coherence and operational
effectiveness of existing mechanisms. For example, the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, whose twentysixth ministerial meeting will be held in Cameroon
next week, is among the appropriate frameworks for
cooperation in identifying destabilizing factors in order
to rebuild lasting trust at the regional level.
With regard to peacebuilding, concrete relevant
initiatives usually include disarmament, demobilization
and
reintegration
(DDR)
programmes,
the
strengthening of political and judicial local institutions,
efforts to promote reconciliation among the population,
security sector reform and respect for human rights and
the rule of law.
We commend the Office of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser on Africa for facilitating the
holding of the second United Nations Conference on
DDR and Stability in Africa, which was held in
Kinshasa from 12 to 14 June 2007. The meeting was a
success in terms of the quality of the debate, the level
of participation and the relevance of the
recommendations made. I would therefore like to
emphasize the importance of such conferences, as well
as to call for the incorporation of the recommendations
made at the Conference into peacebuilding strategies
for post-conflict societies.
Transitional justice — whose goal is to provide a
feeling of justice for all citizens, to establish or renew
civic confidence and to reconcile peoples and
communities — has a key role to play in conflict
prevention and resolution.
Organized crime, whether national or transnational in nature, and the greater firepower and higher

07-49201

numbers of weapons, both legal and illegal, as well as
their level of availability, have been identified as
contributing factors in the outbreak of conflict.
Faced with the inability of national judicial
systems to meet the new challenges in re-establishing
justice in post-conflict societies, relying on truth and
reconciliation commissions alone is not enough. We
must further consider using prosecutorial mechanisms
to punish the perpetrators of serious crimes, without
neglecting the issue of providing reparations to the
victims of those crimes. That is the role currently being
played by the International Criminal Court. In that
connection, the role of the Court in the prevention of
conflict and the consolidation of peace in post-conflict
situations should be underlined.
It is important that justice trump politics and
diplomacy at a certain stage in peace processes. In that
regard, I should like to reiterate our appeal for the
establishment of an international criminal tribunal for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where millions
of innocent people have lost their lives following
breaches of the peace. Such a body could further
contribute to avoiding such outrageous situations as the
one that prevails in my country today, where notorious
murderers, perfidious generals and warlords are the
primary interlocutors of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and therefore of the United Nations.
With regard to providing solutions, I would like
to urge the ratification of, and prompt adherence to,
legal and related instruments, such as the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region.
We should also underscore the need to integrate
civil society into conflict resolution processes in
Africa, given the fact that the tools traditionally
employed to manage crises have become largely
useless on the continent.
Beyond those considerations, in addition to
adopting and implementing policies aimed at economic
recovery, reducing poverty and improving governance,
education is the best and safest investment we can
make to bring about peace in Africa and the world,
both today and in the future. In that regard, we must
instil the ideal of peace in the educational system,
especially as regards young people. It is important that
we make them aware of the importance of the values of
tolerance and diversity, as well as teaching them the

7

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

virtues of ethical values based upon traditional
heritage, all the while providing them with an opening
to the world to allow them also to gather universal
values.
In order to ensure implementation and follow-up
vis-à-vis the prevention and resolution of conflicts, one
important step is to strengthen the Secretary-General’s
capacities for mediation and good offices efforts, in
accordance with the 2005 World Summit decision that
established a Mediation Support Unit in the
Department of Political Affairs. Moreover, the
Peacebuilding Support Office should be strengthened
by substantially stepping up the work of the
Peacebuilding Fund.
We could also consider establishing a system to
ensure that regional organizations, and especially the
African Union, enjoy predictable and long-term
financing for their peacekeeping operations. Such an
initiative could be undertaken by strengthening
cooperation — for example, through the partnership
mechanisms that exist between the peace and security
entities of the United Nations and the African Union —
in the areas of conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely exchange
of views. We sincerely hope that today’s deliberations
will help us to better understand, and take stock of, the
progress made thus far.
Although the Republic of Croatia has aligned
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Portugal on behalf of the European Union, I would like
to take this opportunity to share with the Council some
of our thoughts on today’s topic.
Croatia recognizes the primary responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that context, we
regard conflict prevention as one of the core duties that
the Security Council is charged with carrying out on
behalf of all Member States of the United Nations.
Nevertheless, we firmly believe that conflict
prevention goes way beyond the membership of the
Security Council. In that sense, all Member States, to
the best of their knowledge and capacities, have the

8

responsibility to address the underlying causes of
conflict, in hopes of preventing them.
But what makes the task of conflict prevention so
difficult is the fact that we do not have a dedicated
system in place that would automatically, shall we say,
“take care of business”. We have in place various
worthwhile initiatives, forums and bodies — all of
which are in need of a comprehensive approach to
streamline their activities.
Reading the list of the major causes of conflict in
Africa — starting with endemic poverty and
widespread underdevelopment, and in some cases
undemocratic, weak or nonexistent Government
institutions,
and
political
and
economic
discrimination — one realizes that a single United
Nations body cannot do the job alone. Most of the
issues that I have just referred to fall under the purview
of various bodies and organizations of the United
Nations system. Therefore, the internal logic of the
United Nations system holds that substantive
cooperation and effective coordination are the only
way to succeed in conflict prevention.
Since Croatia’s presidency of the Economic and
Social Council, when Ad Hoc Advisory Groups for
African countries emerging from conflict were
established, Croatia has supported better coordination
among the main bodies of the United Nations — the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council — as well as with the
Peacebuilding Commission, as a new advisory body.
Likewise, we have supported including in that
coordination other important regional and subregional
organizations that have already successfully dealt with
local crises.
With respect to the regional and subregional
groups and their role in Africa, we have response
mechanisms for dealing with both old and new security
challenges. The problem lies within their ad hoc
nature. However, a clear trend is emerging toward their
formalization and institutionalization. The Economic
Community of West African States provides an
excellent example of this process, having intervened in
both Liberia and Sierra Leone in the 1990s. The
cooperation of the United Nations with such a regional
player and with broader organizations such as the
African Union can only benefit all parties involved.
Allow me to also point out that even a small
country with rich experience in conflict such as,

07-49201

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

unfortunately, Croatia, can provide beneficial and
constructive input to United Nations conflict
prevention and conflict-resolving activities. So far, our
post-conflict knowledge has been put to use mostly
through our participation in 14 United Nations
peacekeeping missions all over the world and through
our work in the first session of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
There are two lessons learned that we always like
to repeat: first, there is no “one-size-fits-all” approach,
and any attempt to build upon such an approach leads
to failure; and second, gaining a deeper understanding
of the roots of any conflict is of utmost importance,
because it prevents us from following the easier path of
patching up a situation and not resolving the
fundamental antagonisms in a society, which can have
the effect of leaving a wound to fester. This is as
important before a conflict or crisis have arisen as it is
after: before, because it can help avoid a conflict; and
after, because it can help cure open wounds.
We can all agree that experience teaches us that
any crisis can be better handled in its early stages.
Therefore, an approach that would encompass a better
early warning system, so as to identify potential crises
before they emerge, is of utmost importance. We
believe it is also true that the early identification of and
reaction to problems that countries face have a positive
effect on their later development. Unfortunately, we all
know where ignoring the signs can lead in the long run.
In this sense, we understand too well the importance of
time and timeliness for the countries, in particularly
African, that were or are currently on the Security
Council’s agenda, as Croatia was in the 1990s.
Finally, I would like to express our hope for an
opportunity, as well as for our determination to use it,
to share the lessons learned in order to act and not
merely to react.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Honduras.
Mr. Romero-Martínez (Honduras) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
behalf of the delegation of Honduras, for the initiative
you took in holding this important debate on a subject
that concerns us all.
In keeping with the Charter of the United
Nations, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international

07-49201

peace and security. Therefore, these topics cannot be a
matter of indifference to us, as countries of Latin
America that have also experienced conflict and that
aspire to a lasting and sustainable peace throughout the
world.
We appreciate the presence of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, this morning, and of the
Deputy Secretary-General, Mrs. Asha-Rose Migiro. We
also welcome the statements by our colleagues,
Mr. Léo Mérorès, on behalf of the presidency of the
General Assembly, and Mr. Leslie Kojo Christian,
acting Chairman of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission. Their presence reveals
the interest and support that they attribute to initiatives
of this kind.
As stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/60/891), conflict prevention, which is the
responsibility of national governments, is one of the
main obligations in the Charter of United Nations.
Indeed, major advances have been achieved in terms of
standard setting and on the political and institutional
fronts. However, as has been repeated, a gap continues
to exist, at times unbridgeable and unacceptable,
between word and deed.
We all agree that prevention is one of the
cornerstones of peacekeeping. We all also agree that a
lack of justice is a decisive factor in the emergence of
conflict in any part of the world where it occurs. The
proliferation of small arms, the inappropriate
exploitation of natural resources, the lack of
appropriate and just gender equality, the indifference to
efforts to combat HIV/AIDS, ongoing violations of
human rights, the denial of education and a tremendous
lack of awareness of the value of human life constitute
severe blows to the integrity of a world that is
expanding and yet increasingly alienated. That is in
addition to the thousands of smiles on the faces of
young children whose hopes have been frustrated by
the terrifying sound of machine guns or the exchange
of their school books for the terrible weight of a
weapon.
For this reason, today’s debate provides us with
an opportunity to reflect deeply on our responsibilities
within this world Organization. This debate allows us
to analyse past experiences and consider new
approaches that, as promises of good things to come,
have been submitted by different delegations today,
innovative initiatives that allow us to find solutions in

9

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

the short term, under the current circumstances. It is
now important to find the mechanisms, creativity and
political will to carry out actions that will, in the short
term, allow us to glimpse a solution that will move us
towards social and political stability on every
continent.
We commend the work of the African Union and
the recent memorandums of understanding that have
been signed. The concluding document of the African
Union Summit of January 2007, held in Addis Ababa,
stated that the maintenance of international peace and
security, as we stated at the outset, is the primary
responsibility of the United Nations Security Council.
Likewise, in the World Summit Outcome, heads of
State and Government meeting in New York
encouraged and supported the initiatives of the African
Union and of the subregional African organizations to
prevent conflict, engage in mediation or settle conflicts
with the assistance of the United Nations.
It therefore follows that Honduras and its
delegation believe that conflict prevention is vital in
any part of the world, and we support a peaceful
solution to international disputes and mandatory
compliance with the rulings of the International Court
of Justice. We believe in a volition for prevention, and
we believe that there should be a framework and a
legal commitment of national and international
guarantees, and if we create that, we will be making
progress in the genuine establishment of a vocation for
peace and universal understanding.
To conclude, we would like, on behalf of my
country, to state that we hope to see the establishment
of an appropriate mechanism for the prevention of
international conflicts.
Today’s debate has been an important initiative of
focusing on the brothers in Africa, and we are sure that
in the short term, with political determination, it will
culminate in successful processes of stabilization and
restoring peace.
Today should serve as an example of deep
meditation and reflection on the thousands of conflicts
that can emerge in any corner of the hemisphere. No
region is immune.
While great inequality, injustice and, above all,
the denial of the value of human life persist, then the
threat of conflict will remain. Therefore, we must all
accept as a firm commitment that which is set out in

10

the Charter of the United Nations, namely “to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men
and women and of nations large and small”.
The President (spoke in French): I call now on
the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
your competent handling of the work of the Council in
this month of August, and to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Wang Guangya of China, for
his excellent presidency of the Council in July.
My delegation would also like to commend you,
Mr. President, for this positive initiative that you have
taken in organizing this debate and for the wise choice
of the theme. The problem of conflict prevention and
resolution and the role expected of the Security
Council in that area is worthy of examination in all its
dimensions.
One single figure cited in the document on the
terms of reference for this debate (S/2007/496) —
which you were kind enough to prepare for us, Mr.
President — concerning the exponential cost of
peacekeeping operations illustrates how vital it is for
the international community to come up with a real
conflict prevention strategy that would go beyond
detecting symptoms of crises to encompass — and here
the role and responsibility of the Council would be
essential — unresolved conflicts like Western Sahara
and other conflicts. The Council should, in this respect,
reflect upon the example of the crisis in Somalia and
learn the lessons from it, becoming fully involved in
the search for just and lasting solutions, as called for in
the Charter.
In other words, we expect from this debate and
from the decision that it will sanction if it fails to come
up with a plan of action a political will that represents
a break with the indecision that has prevailed in the
past and that has been and continues to be very costly
to the international community.
In fact, the cost parameter is certainly not the
most determinative one when we evaluate the
destructive consequences of conflicts. In reality, the
true equation resides in the number of countries
devastated by conflicts, in the millions of lives lost and
in the suffering inflicted on civilian populations,
especially among the most vulnerable categories,

07-49201

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

because of a crisis that we have not known how to,
been able to — or sometimes even wanted to — stamp
out at the right time and at the least cost.
Once more, it is not a matter of further
investment in analyses and in elements of a strategy
that remains to be hatched, despite the extreme
importance of these aspects. We cannot deny that
beyond common causes, each conflict situation has its
own complex dynamic. It is, however, just as true that
the United Nations has for almost two decades been
examining the phenomenon of conflicts by analyzing
their causes and by suggesting the means for their
prevention and resolution.
In fact, since the publication of An Agenda for
Peace (S/24111) in 1992, other reports and other
studies have enriched our collective knowledge of
conflicts and as a result have assisted in the
development of relevant approaches for conflict
prevention. The reports of the Secretary-General — the
most recent of which have to do, respectively, with the
causes of conflict in Africa and the promotion of
sustainable peace and development in Africa, and the
possibilities and challenges of partnership in the area
of security on a regional and a global scale — contain
an analysis and relevant proposals that only need to be
implemented.
Additionally, the General Assembly and the
Security Council have adopted decisions that,
unfortunately, have not been completely implemented.
Resolution 1625 (2005) — which Algeria had the
honour to co-sponsor with Benin and Tanzania, then
members of the Council — proposes a platform of
action and elements for a coherent, comprehensive
strategy for conflict prevention, particularly in Africa.
It specified the terms of an effective partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union and
its subregional organizations and between that
partnership and international and regional partners,
without neglecting the role and contribution of civil
society.
It is a matter of realizing the objectives of this
resolution and strengthening it, if needed, by relying on
new ideas, especially when they involve capacitybuilding of the African Union in the areas of
prevention by assisting it to improve its system of early
warning, of collection and analysis of information, and
of mediation. One way that might help us in moving
forward would be the establishment of a mechanism

07-49201

for the periodic review of this resolution, such as what
is done for Council resolutions having to do with
women, children and the protection of civilians during
armed conflicts.
From our standpoint, for any conflict prevention
strategy to be effective, it must be based on at least two
key axes. The first has to do with the coordination of
efforts to ensure that the discreet action of preventive
diplomacy and good offices might succeed in the case
of conflicts in gestation. Through his responsibilities, it
is upon the Secretary-General, of course, that this task
devolves. This coordination must also prevail in postconflict stabilization and reconstruction processes.
The second axis has to do with mobilizing
resources, both for building the capacity of regional
actors and for development. In fact, we must relocate
development to the center of any conflict prevention
strategy.
In conclusion, I would like to say that Algeria is
pleased with the will expressed this morning by the
Secretary-General to make the settlement of the
conflicts in Darfur, Somalia, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Western Sahara one of the priorities
of his mandate and his intention to implement a series
of measures to reinforce United Nations capacities in
the area of conflict prevention.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Shinyo (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking the delegation of the Republic of the Congo
for having taken the initiative in organizing this debate
on the role of the Security Council in conflict
prevention and resolution, in particular in Africa. The
situations in Darfur and Somalia remain critical, and in
many instances consolidating peace after a conflict has
ended is a challenge. The debate today is therefore
most timely.
Today, I would like to touch upon three issues,
namely the role of the Security Council in conflict
prevention and resolution, relations with the African
Union, and the efforts of Japanese Government in this
area.
We need a comprehensive approach to conflict
prevention — one that not only addresses the problem
from the political, economic, and social perspectives,
but also takes into account elements such as the rule of
law and humanitarian activities. And, given the wide

11

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

range of actors involved, it is essential to coordinate
what they do in order to ensure that the overall effort
has coherence.

cooperation between the two organizations by looking
carefully at what kind of added value the United
Nations can provide.

The Security Council has been holding thematic
debates focusing on the different elements that can
trigger conflicts: small arms, food security, climate
change, energy and natural resources, for example. We
welcome such discussions and think it is important to
try to translate their outcomes into concrete action.

As for the peacekeeping operations carried out by
regional organizations, I believe that true ownership is
possible only when an organization is able to sustain its
activities on its own. To that end, the international
community should work to enhance the capacity of
regional organizations. The Group of Eight (G-8) and
other bodies have already made such efforts, but it is to
be hoped that in the future, we will see more sharing of
information by regional organizations and more
communication regarding experiences and lessons
learned by countries contributing troops to United
Nations operations.

In order to arrive at more effective means of
conflict prevention, the Security Council should further
develop
cooperative
relations
with
relevant
organizations within as well as outside the United
Nations. To that end, the Council should enhance its
relationship with the Peacebuilding Commission, one
of its subsidiary bodies, which plays an important role
in the consolidation of peace and nation-building. And
in no area is that more important than in preventing a
conflict from recurring in a country where it has finally
been brought to an end. In particular, the Council
should refer to the Commission the task of following
up on problems relating to the consolidation of peace
that were discussed in the thematic debate on that
subject. More specifically, it might request the
Commission to provide an action-oriented advisory
opinion with regard to ways to promote coordination
among organizations and activities in the area of
conflict prevention.
In the area of the prevention of armed conflict
and mediation in Africa, the role of the African Union
(AU) and subregional organizations has been growing,
and we commend them for their efforts. It is necessary
for the international community to support such
undertakings, which are demonstrations of regional
ownership. As for the United Nations and the role it
should play, it is important for the Mediation Support
Unit established within the Department of Political
Affairs to further enhance its partnership with relevant
regional organizations, including the AU, and for the
United Nations mediator to play a role in tying together
the efforts of the various actors in the area of
mediation.
With regard to peacekeeping, the United Nations
Secretariat is already at work developing concrete
cooperative projects with the AU Commission pursuant
to the framework for the latter’s 10-year capacitybuilding programme. In the area of conflict prevention
and mediation, it is also important to promote

12

When it comes to financial support for the
peacekeeping operations conducted by regional
organizations, in principle, every such organization
should be responsible for its own costs. In those
instances in which the United Nations examines the
possibility of offering financial support, the Council
should consider the advisability and modality of
support on a case-by-case basis, taking into account
whether such support would be consistent with the
principles that govern United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and also taking steps to obtain the views of
major States that are not members of the Council — in
particular, major financial contributors, when the
subject is financial support — so as to ensure
transparency.
Japan has always sought to understand the root
causes of conflicts. In order to emancipate people from
fear and poverty, and to assist in creating a society
where people can live their lives with dignity, we have
been making financial contributions through the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, the United
Nations Democracy Fund and the Peacebuilding Fund.
Japan has also been working to enhance awareness of
the importance of peace consolidation through the
Tokyo
International
Conference
on
African
Development (TICAD) process and, to that end,
offering bilateral and multilateral assistance in such
areas as the collection of small arms, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the response to
landmines, as well as reintegration through community
development based on the principle of human security.
In addition, we provide significant support to the
African Union and subregional organizations in Africa
in the area of capacity-building and South-South

07-49201

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

cooperation. We intend to continue to extend such
assistance.
Japan has been Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission since June of this year and will become a
State party to the International Criminal Court in
October. In those capacities, and for all the reasons I
have outlined, we are determined to address the issue
of conflict prevention and resolution in a more active
way. To that end, Japan will host, in April of next year,
the G-8 development ministers’ meeting; in May, the
fourth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD IV); and in July, the G-8
Hokkaido Toyako summit. In those forums and
elsewhere, we intend to continue to take up the
challenges that Africa is facing as a matter of central
importance to the entire international community.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Benin.
Mr. Ehouzou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for having
organized this public debate on the topic “maintenance
of international peace and security: role of the Security
Council in conflict prevention and resolution, in
particular in Africa”. I particularly commend the
Secretary-General for the important introductory
statement he made this morning, which reflects his
great interest in the subject and particularly in our
continent, Africa.
Conflict prevention is an essential aspect of the
Security Council’s mandate emanating from Chapter
VI of the Charter and, more specifically, its Article 34.
The Council has made considerable efforts to meet the
challenges identified. Its various initiatives are based
on the 10 principles of conflict prevention set out in
the Secretary-General’s first report on the subject
(S/2001/574), dated 7 June 2001, to which are added
the recently defined criteria for the exercise by the
international community of the responsibility to
protect.
The measures taken by the Security Council have
had a major objective: preventing the resurgence of the
conflicts it seeks to resolve. The establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, together with the General
Assembly, also had the same motivation. Its efforts to
help countries emerging from conflict to strengthen the
rule of law and achieve reconstruction and sustainable
development are praiseworthy.

07-49201

The adoption of resolution 1625 (2005) — to
which my Algerian colleague just referred — during
the Security Council summit held on 14 September
2005 was aimed primarily at strengthening the
Council’s capacity to take effective measures to
prevent fragile States experiencing difficulties from
relapsing into armed conflict by helping them to
reverse negative trends and, with the international
community’s support, to climb back towards the
desired stability. The need for more effective action on
this front is supported by consensus owing to an
awareness of the inherent threat to our collective
security caused by State failures in fragile countries.
Among the important instruments highlighted by the
resolution in that regard are the periodic reports and
the substantive reports that the Secretary-General,
pursuant to Article 99 of the Charter, is invited to
submit to the Council on the regions where the risk of
conflict exists.
The reports are intended to allow the Council to
identify cases where operational prevention measures
are required; for example in the form of awareness
raising political missions or mediation missions and
preventive deployment, where there is a risk that
substantial violence may erupt. The Mediation Support
Unit within the Department for Political Affairs (DPA)
is, in our view, an embryonic structure that must be
developed by the Secretariat to provide the Security
Council with the information it requires in order to
fully assume its responsibilities in the sphere of
conflict prevention. The Unit should be provided at a
central level with sufficient human resources to
achieve the desired performance. It should also be able
to rely on extension units to be deployed in the regions
involved and in the target countries.
Thus, subregional offices such as the one based in
Dakar should be established in all risk zones. Likewise,
closer cooperation should be considered with early
warning systems and regional conflict-prevention
mechanisms to more effectively share and rationally
utilize information.
Furthermore, there is the strategic assessment of
conflict risk that the Secretary-General is invited to
assist risk countries in carrying out and the
establishment of measures agreed upon on that basis.
Those instruments create a prime framework for the
coordination of actions at the operational level by the
principal organs of the United Nations, by States and
by United Nations programmes and agencies.

13

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

We must carry out an in-depth study of the matter
within the framework of the Security Council seminar
on conflict-prevention strategy announced for
November 2007. That will make it possible to find the
best way to promote systematic coordination and create
a synergy between bilateral and multilateral action in
the sphere of conflict prevention. In that context we
can define a common view that meets the requirements
for rationality and coherence to underpin, among
others, structural prevention actions to be undertaken
to tackle the root causes of the crisis situations in the
countries involved. We reaffirm the considerable
interest of Benin in the forum for conflict prevention
proposed by the Secretary-General, which should
provide an opportunity for the necessary, regular
gathering of actors involved in conflict prevention.
Coordination is also essential in order to enhance
the effective implementation of systemic prevention
measures to tackle external factors which may
contribute to the emergence of conflicts, such as
unlawful arms trafficking, unlawful exploitation of
natural resources, trafficking of all types and moneylaundering. That would give greater authority to
international legality strengthened by more active
involvement of the International Criminal Court, in
particular in the fight against violations of international
humanitarian law.
The importance of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional conflict-prevention bodies
should be emphasized in that connection. Decisive
initiatives taken by the Economic Community of West
African States in the early 1990s to deal with conflicts
in West Africa have led to similar actions in other
regions and to the establishment within the African
Union of a complete African peace and security
architecture throughout the continent. Cooperation
with the African Union and its subregional
communities should rest on decisive implementation of
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. Security Council resolution 1631 (2005)
spelled out those modalities.
It is clear that the United Nations system in
conducting peacekeeping operations has, until recently,
operated with marginal involvement by regional
organizations. The time has come to make the
necessary changes in order to make it possible for the
organizations to fully play their role in the collective
security system established by the Charter — both in
terms of the doctrine of peace operations and in the

14

allocation of related resources. There is reason to
welcome the support programmes implemented to
build the capacity of the African Union in that regard,
as well as the decision taken to introduce an annual
meeting of the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. We also
welcome the practice of appointing joint special
representatives in countries in crisis or in situations of
post-conflict, as occurred in Darfur with the
appointment of the former foreign minister of Congo to
conduct the African Union-United Nations hybrid
operation.
The last point to be discussed constitutes a real
challenge to the viability of the peace and security
architecture of the African Union. The problem has to
do with the coordination of its subregional conflict
prevention mechanisms. In that connection, the African
Union needs to ensure that it has the means to exercise
its position in regard to subregional mechanisms in
order to ensure harmonious coordination with the
Security Council at the operational level. That issue
also deserves an in-depth study in terms of defining the
practical modalities for achieving the desired
coordination.
We urge the Secretary-General to consider — in
conjunction with the President of the African Union
Commission — ways of guiding the actions of Member
States and to ensure that the United Nations can
achieve a level of effectiveness that is in keeping with
the current stakes in conflict prevention.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
should congratulate you, Sir, for your election to the
presidency this month, and also extend felicitations and
congratulations to China for their successful
stewardship of this body last month. My delegation
wishes to thank the delegation of the Republic of the
Congo for organizing this open debate on a topic of
particular importance to us.
The primary responsibility of the Security
Council is not only the maintenance of international
peace and security, but also to promote the peace that it
seeks to maintain. Promoting the establishment of
peace involves, in essence, the prevention of the
conditions and causes of conflict. Compared to the
multitudes of initiatives and undertakings to resolve

07-49201

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

conflicts by both the United Nations and regional
organizations, initiatives to prevent conflicts in the past
sixty years have been relatively few and far apart.
There has been focus on conflict resolution, but not
equal focus on prevention. The strategies for conflict
resolution have, therefore, remained underdeveloped.
The 2005 World Summit established the
Peacebuilding Commission, which seeks to prevent
relapses into conflict in post-conflict situations. This is
commendable and necessary, given the many
recurrences of conflict after successful and costly
peacekeeping missions. Peacebuilding is prevention in
the second instance. We should equally pay similar
attention in the first instance to conflict prevention in
order to contain simmering conflict situations from
reaching a critical mass and breaking into violent
conflicts.
It is probably time for the Security Council and
the Secretary-General to launch an initiative similar to
the Peacebuilding Commission, one fully dedicated to
developing a comprehensive strategy for conflict
prevention in partnership with regional organizations.
There are already various inter-governmental and nongovernmental initiatives aimed at conflict prevention,
but they are fragmented and under-resourced. A
comprehensive conflict prevention strategy would
complete the three pillars of the peace and security
architecture of the United Nations consisting of
conflict
prevention,
conflict
resolution
and
peacebuilding.
My country has practical experience of the
negative impact of conflicts. Tanzania is located within
a region that has a long history of many deadly
conflicts. The United Nations has been very helpful to
us in our efforts to resolve the conflicts in the Great
Lakes region. The United Nations contribution has
been particularly useful in the organization of the two
International Conferences on the Great Lakes Region.
The first took place in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania, in
2004 and the second in Nairobi in 2006. The
conferences grew out of the need to have a
comprehensive regionally designed process and
strategy that encompasses all aspects from peace
prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustained
development. As an outcome of the conferences, the
region was finally able to sign the Pact on Security,
Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region.
The regional pact bears elements of all the three pillars
of the peace and security architecture.

07-49201

An executive secretariat has now been established
with the objective of coordinating and implementing
the Pact. It is expected that, upon its ratification, full
implementation of the projects listed in the regional
programme of action will begin. In the meantime, plans
are underway, in consultation with the African
Development Bank, on how to render operational the
Special Fund for Reconstruction and Development of
the Great Lakes region. As of now, the secretariat has
managed to secure political and diplomatic support
from regional and subregional groupings and
international partners such as the United Nations
system, the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), the East African
Community, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the Group of Friends of the
Great Lakes Region.
We need to devise a practical and effective
strategy that can address the root causes and
underlying conditions of conflicts in a comprehensive
manner. This underlines the importance of having a
holistic approach to prevention, one that addresses the
linkages between development and security and
recognizes the nexus between the two. Let us build an
effective global partnership between States and
institutions that can work in unison to prevent and
resolve violent conflicts.
The close linkages between security, development
and human rights have revealed the imperative of an
integrated approach to conflict prevention, resolution
and peacebuilding. It is therefore important to examine
how best to promote peace and the sustained rule of
law in post-conflict societies.
The establishment of the permanent International
Criminal Court (ICC) was a crucial step. It provides
legal measures for dealing with the suspects of
international crimes and thus assists in combating the
culture of impunity. For the first time in history, the
ICC has provided the international community with an
institution that addresses the most heinous international
crimes and thus ensures that the gravest international
crimes do not go unpunished. Its mandate to try and to
sentence the highest and the mightiest can be
considered a deterrent to potential tyrants and the
prevention of man- or woman-made crises in the world.
The relevance of peacebuilding, for example,
rests on the fact that lasting peace in a country torn by
violence cannot be achieved unless and until the

15

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

destroyed infrastructure is reconstructed. Therefore,
any discussion on conflict prevention would not be
complete without a discussion on institutional and
resource challenges in post-conflict peacebuilding with
a view to strengthening coherence and consistency of
the Security Council’s actions. It is in this regard that
we have supported and actively contributed to the
creation of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as
the Peacebuilding Support Office within the
Secretariat. We shall give the same kind of support to
any initiatives by this Council or by the SecretaryGeneral in the area of conflict prevention.
The challenge here is how to build an effective
partnership between the United Nations system and
other actors for a well-coordinated role in conflict
prevention. United Nations partnership with the
African Union and African subregional arrangements
such as the Great Lakes region, the Economic
Community of West African Nations (ECOWAS),
IGAD and SADC has been quite exemplary in the
areas of peacemaking and peacekeeping. We are happy
that this important collaboration has now been
extended to the area of post-conflict peacebuilding as
well.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to recognize
the special attention that the United Nations is paying
to African conflicts. We are particularly appreciative of
the growing partnerships with the African Union in
conflict
resolution,
peacekeeping
and
now
peacebuilding. However, we have to display the same
spirit and greater commitment to conflict prevention.
We want to thank you, once again, for providing
us this opportunity to participate in this important
debate.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
Mr. Ben-Shaban (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
(spoke in Arabic): First of all, Mr. President, I would
like to congratulate you on your effective handling of
the work of the Council this month. I also wish to
congratulate
your
predecessor,
the
Chinese
Ambassador, for the wise way in which he conducted
the work of the Council last month.
Mr. President, your initiative to organize this
debate on conflict prevention and resolution in Africa
comes at the right time, considering that Africa is the
theatre of a number of developments. Consequently,

16

the Council’s desired role in Africa must be reviewed
and compared to efforts to prevent conflict in Africa in
order to help that continent overcome its difficulties
and surmount its obstacles.
Every day the international community
increasingly acknowledges the importance of dealing
with the conflicts that arise in certain parts of Africa
and the need to settle them peacefully. This means that
the international community is becoming more aware
of the importance of dealing with the root causes of
these conflicts, of the link that exists between them,
and of reform, reconstruction and sustainable
development and the role these play in solidifying
peace.
It should be kept in mind that effective
prevention and recovery strategies require the
establishment of a comprehensive approach through
which a series of measures can be undertaken —
including, for example, policy, humanitarian and
institutional measures and steps to strengthen
sustainable development, eradicate poverty and
promote national reconciliation, good governance,
democracy, the rule of law and respect for and
protection of human rights.
In resolution 1625 (2005) the Security Council,
reaffirming its responsibility for international peace
and security, expressed its determination to strengthen
United Nations effectiveness in the area of the
prevention of armed conflict and to follow up
situations that could result in armed conflict. However,
there is still much for the Council to do in resolving
those most complex issues in the international arena,
which entail overlapping historical, political and social
factors, as well as the negative effects of colonization
in that continent.
Given the special nature of conflicts in Africa and
the overlapping of the numerous factors to which I
have just referred, the establishment of regional and
subregional organizations in Africa has effectively
contributed to resolving some problems and ending
others. That is because those organizations possess the
necessary knowledge and are in a position to
understand the various dimensions of the conflicts on
the continent. My delegation therefore supports the
current trend of allowing regional organizations to plan
a larger role in the maintenance of peace and security
on the African continent, with United Nations
participation.

07-49201

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

If cooperation between the Council and those
organizations is carried out in a methodical and
institutional manner, that should lead to a great deal of
interaction, experience-sharing and joint efforts to help
significantly in resolving African conflicts. The basis
for such cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations consists in community of
purpose and integration of effort in dealing with the
challenges facing the establishment of peace and
security in Africa.
Since its inception in 1999, the African Union has
steadily worked to improve its role of a partner of the
United Nations and its cooperation with United
Nations peacekeeping missions. It has contributed
proactively to mediation and reconciliation and
reconstruction efforts in a number of African countries,
including Angola, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sudan, Uganda
and Somalia, to name a few.
The African Union has played an essential role in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
thereby lightening the Council’s burden. We at the
United Nations should therefore render greater support
to the African Union and cooperate with it. The United
Nations should respond positively to its need to build
up its peacebuilding capacity and to finance its
operations.
General Assembly resolution 60/1, adopted at the
2005 World Summit, in fact encourages such initiatives
by the African Union and subregional organizations in
the areas of conflict prevention, resolution and
mediation, with United Nations help. Whereas Security
Council resolution 1631 (2005) reaffirmed the
Council’s primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it also recognized the
increasing
contribution
made
by
regional
organizations.
My country has always supported efforts to
prevent conflicts or resolve them peacefully, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms of international law.
Libya has acted as a key mediator in resolving a
number of African conflicts and disputes. It has
effectively enshrined the principle of the peaceful
resolution of disputes, making an effort to mediate and
end conflicts in a number of countries, including Chad,

07-49201

the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Sudan.
My country hopes that greater efforts will be
devoted to conflict prevention in Africa so that African
countries can concentrate on development issues and
on achieving prosperity and dignified lives for their
peoples.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Gabon.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I should like to join previous speakers in
congratulating you, Mr. President, as well as the entire
Congolese delegation for its excellent performance in
the Security Council and for the brilliant presidency of
this important United Nations organ for the month of
August. We also wish to congratulate you for
organizing today’s debate and for the quality of the
document circulated to underpin our discussion with
regard to the role of the Security Council in preventing
conflict, particularly in Africa.
I should also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of People’s Republic of China for his
outstanding presidency of the Council in July. I would
also like to wish every success to the new
representative of France and his team, who will preside
over the Security Council during September 2007.
Conflict prevention should be the primary
function of the United Nations, and specifically of the
Security Council, as it carries out its mission to
maintain international peace and security. Although the
United Nations has in the past limited itself to acting as
a firefighter, in recent years it has had limited success
in emphasizing prevention.
Since the issuance of the Secretary-General’s
excellent report (S/1998/318) entitled “The causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”, several ideas have
been proposed regarding the crucial question of
conflict prevention and the role of the Security Council
as regards peace and security, especially in Africa. The
report also included several positive concrete measures
to prevent and resolve conflicts in Africa. While it
emphasized the need to eradicate the causes of conflict
in such areas as governance, human rights and
democracy, the report also underscored the crucial need
to address such matters as combating poverty and the
illegal flow of small arms and light weapons.

17

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

Poverty
poses
the
ongoing
threat
of
discontentment, which can easily be exploited by the
enemies of peace to destabilize States. There is
therefore an urgent need to assist African countries, as
well as other countries, undergoing economic
difficulties. It is therefore essential that we support
development programmes by increasing official
development assistance, reducing the debt burden,
increasing the price of commodities and raw materials
from developing countries and ensuring access to the
markets of developed countries for the goods of
developing countries. Neglecting those considerations
runs the risk of further marginalizing developing
countries, undermining their efforts to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals and putting at further
risk of conflict and, as a result, of destabilization.
With the support of the United Nations, as it
should be recognized, the countries of Africa have put
in place prevention mechanisms and other confidencebuilding measures aimed at establishing an atmosphere
conducive to peace and security, which is essential to
development. For its part, as the document circulated
by the President indicates, the Central African
subregion has, among other things, put in place an
early-warning mechanism and a multilateral force for
Central Africa. However, these mechanisms run up
against the financial difficulties afflicting the Member
States that also have to deal with other major
challenges, not only in terms of development but also
on the health front, in particular with regard to the
HIV/AIDS pandemic.
However, these prevention and conflict resolution
measures introduced in Africa have been effective.
This has been borne out by the Ouagadougou
agreements, which recently brought an end to the crisis
in Côte d’Ivoire, and the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB) in 1966. It is unfortunate that in the latter
case, the efforts made both by MISAB and by the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic were not supported by donors in the context
of peacebuilding, despite the promises that were made
during the international conference held in 2000 on the
subject of the Central African Republic.
The Peacebuilding Commission, which aims at
helping countries to achieve the difficult transition
from war to peace, was established at an opportune
time to deal with this type of situation. My country

18

welcomes the involvement of the financial institutions
in the work of that body.
In its efforts to promote a culture of conflict
prevention, the Security Council should also ensure
that all member States — and I do mean all Member
States — respect the established weapons embargo
regimes. This is necessary in order to stop weapons
from falling into the hands of small unscrupulous
groups who use them to destabilize democratic
regimes, spread insecurity or plunder natural resources
or other wealth. In this regard, the measures taken
under the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme to
issue certificates of origin to combat the sale of blood
diamonds should be scrupulously applied and
translated into reality.
In conclusion, my delegation considers that while
it is necessary to promote social justice through
democracy and the sharing of the fruits of expansion,
at the same time greater coordination between the
Security Council and regional arrangements under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations is
also vital. We are happy to note in this regard the
agreement that was entered into between the United
Nations and the African Union in September 2006.
Likewise, specific support to regional mechanisms for
the promotion and maintenance of peace will make a
contribution to preventing and resolving conflicts. My
delegation also urges that the proposal by the former
Secretary-General contained in paragraph 118 of his
progress report on conflict prevention (A/60/891)
should also be taken into account.
Again, Mr. President, my congratulations to your
delegation for the hard work you have done.
The President (spoke in French): After
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, bearing in mind its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,
acknowledges the importance of the settlement of
disputes by peaceful means and promoting
necessary preventive action in response to threats
to international peace and security.
“The Security Council recognizes the
important role of regional organizations in the

07-49201

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations as well as its
relevant resolutions and Presidential statements.
In this regard it welcomes the increasing
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union.
“The Security Council recalls that the
prevention of conflict remains a primary
responsibility of Member States.
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1625 (2005) on
conflict prevention, particularly in Africa,
requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council within sixty days on options for further
implementation of its resolution 1625 (2005), and
recalls the relevant Presidential statements, in
particular S/PRST/2006/39, S/PRST/2006/45,
S/PRST/2006/57, S/PRST/2007/1, S/PRST/2007/3,
S/PRST/2007/7, S/PRST/2007/22 and S/PRST/2007/24.

“The Security Council also stresses the need
to carry out efforts to increase women’s
participation as contributors and beneficiaries in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. In this
regard, it calls for the further implementation of
its resolution 1325 (2000).
“The Security Council notes the varied
nature of conflicts, which involve not only
conflicts between States and within States, but
also new emerging threats, and thus reiterates its
determination to strengthen its role in preventing
and resolving conflict in all its forms.
“The Security Council recalls its previous
Presidential statements concerning the various
factors and causes that play a role in inciting,
worsening or prolonging conflicts in Africa, and
in particular the factors and causes that have been
highlighted and addressed by the Council.
“The Security Council supports the
comprehensive
and
global
approach
recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report on the prevention of armed conflict
(A/60/891), namely: structural prevention, to
address the root causes of conflict; operational
prevention, to ensure the effective operation of
early
warning
mechanisms,
mediation,

07-49201

humanitarian access and response, the protection
of civilians and targeted sanctions in the face of
immediate crises; and systemic prevention, to
prevent existing conflicts from spilling over into
other States.
“In this context, effective coordination
between and within United Nations organs,
programmes, funds and agencies involved in
policy formulation and implementation is vital
for ensuring better coherence of the existing
mechanisms and the appropriate balance between
peacekeeping
operations
and
preventive
activities.
Such
coordination
should
be
undertaken taking into consideration the ongoing
debate on how to improve systemic coherence
within the United Nations.
“The Security Council welcomes recent
developments regarding the long-term prevention
of conflict, including best practice and policy
work on: security sector reform; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; transitional
justice and the rule of law; electoral practices;
peacebuilding;
democratic
governance;
development; humanitarian assistance and
protection; and the safe and voluntary return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. The
Council encourages further progress and greater
coherence on these issues, and requests the
Secretary-General to include in the report
requested above proposals for how better to
coordinate the positions and expertise of the
relevant United Nations organs, programmes,
funds and agencies, including through regular
interaction with the Member States.
“The
Security
Council
notes
the
recommendations in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the prevention of armed conflict,
(A/60/891) welcomes the efforts that have been
made to strengthen the risk assessment and
conflict prevention capacities of the United
Nations, and encourages the Secretary-General to
continue those efforts in order to improve the
United Nations’ early warning, mediation support
and other preventive activities in Africa and
around the world. In this connection, the Security
Council stresses the crucial role of the Special
Advisers to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities and
on matters relating to the prevention and

19

S/PV.5735 (Resumption 1)

resolution of conflict as well as, where
appropriate, the contribution of United Nations
bodies such as the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Human Rights Council.

agreement reached between the United Nations
and the African Union at Addis Ababa on 16
November 2006 which consolidates the basis of
partnership necessary to address the underlying
causes of conflict. The Council also reaffirms the
joint communiqué agreed with the African Union
Peace and Security Council on 16 June 2007
(S/2007/386).

“The Security Council welcomes the fact
that the Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution, particularly in Africa, has taken
the initiative of giving greater thought to these
questions and taken a special interest in the
problem of the elaboration of an effective global
conflict prevention strategy — the subject of a
seminar to be held in November 2007.
“The Security Council stresses the
importance of a regional approach to conflict
prevention, as applicable, and in this connection
welcomes the growing contribution being made
by regional organizations in addressing issues of
peace and security, and looks forward to the
report of the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the relevant regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, and pursuant to
PRST/2007/7, on specific proposals on how the
United Nations can better support arrangements
for further cooperation and coordination with
regional
organizations
on
Chapter VIII
arrangements, in order to contribute significantly
to the common security challenges in the areas of
concern and to promote the deepening and
broadening of dialogue and cooperation between
the Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union.
“The Security Council underlines the need
for a stronger and more structured relationship
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union,
contributing to the achievement of the goals of
peace and stability in the context of the
arrangements provided for in Chapter VIII of the
Charter. The Council thus welcomes the

20

“The Security Council welcomes the work
done by the African Union to set up its Panel of
the Wise and Continental Early Warning System,
which are key components of the African Peace
and Security Architecture.
“The Security Council also recognizes the
important contribution of subregional bodies and
underscores the need for African subregional
bodies to enhance their capacities in early
warning and conflict prevention in order to allow
these important actors to respond more promptly
to the emerging threats to security in their areas.
“At the same time, the Security Council
encourages Member States to make further efforts
to ensure adequate consultation between civil
society and national institutions, on the one hand,
and the United Nations and the international
community, on the other hand, so as to be better
equipped to address the global character of
questions of peace and security”.
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2007/31.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

07-49201
