TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
SS
MEETING: 21 AUGUST 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 144 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , .

1

Letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives of Canada, Denmark,
France, Paraguay, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8758) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

S/PV. 1441

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Sew-i@ Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-FIRST

Held in New York on Wednesday,

&sent:
The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet S@alist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Weedless to say, the above-mentioned military units
will be withdrawn from the territory of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic as soon as the present threat to
security is eliminated and the lawful authorities find that
the presence of those units is no longer necessary.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l441)

“The actions of the Soviet Union and other socialist
countries are prompted by concern for stren’gthening
peace and ensuring that the foundations of European
security are not undermined. Attempts to present these
actions in a different light can in no way alter our
peaceful intentions or diminish the right of the socialist
countries to individual and collective self-defence.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. -Letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives
of Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8758).

“The Soviet Government has repeatedly warned that
the attempts of imperialist reaction to interfere in the
domestic affairs of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
and in relations between the socialist countries will not be
tolerated and will be firmly rebuffed. It takks this
opportunity to call once again upon all States to observe
strictly the principles of respect for sovereignty and
independence and of the inadmissibility of direct or
indirect aggression against other States and peoples.

1. The PRESIDENT: The 1441st meeting of the Security
Council is called to order.
2. I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on a
point of order.
3. Mr.

MALIK

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. President, in connection
with document S/87.58 of 21 August 19681 which was
distributed to the member of the Security Council, I
would like to read the letter addressed to you by the Soviet
delegation concerning the above-mentioned letter of the six
delegations :
from

(Union

Russian):

“On the instructions of the Soviet Government, I wish
to inform you that the Soviet Union vigorously opposes
consideration of this question by the Security Council,
since that would serve the interests of certain foreign
circles, which represent forces of aggression. The events in
Czechoslovakia are a matter that concerns the CzechoSlovak people and the States of the socialist community,
which are bound by appropriate mutual obligations ,”

“The Governments of the United States of America and
of several other countries which are allies of the United
States have addressed a letter to you requesting the
convening of a meeting of the Security Council to
consider the question of the present situation in the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.

4. I request you, Mr, President, to circulate this letter as
an official Security Council document.
5. The PRESIDENT:
requested.*

“There is, however, no basis for consideration of this
matter by the Security Council. As you are aware,
miIitary units of the Socialist countries have:entered the
territory of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic pursuant
to a request by the Government of that State, which
appealed to allied Governments for assistance,including
assistance in the form of armed forces, in view of the
threat created by foreign and domestic reaction to the
socialist social order and the constitutional State system
of Czechoslovakia. The Soviet Government and the
Governments of other allied States decided to meet the
1 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-third
Supplement for July, August and September 1968, p. 136.

21 August 1968, at 5.30 p.m.
Czechoslovak Government’s request for military assistance in conformity with mutual treaty obligations and on
the basis of the relevant provisions of the United Nations
Charter.

President: Mr. JoBo August0 DE ARAUJO CASTRO
(Brazil).

(translated

MEETING

The document will be circulated as

6. This afternoon’s meeting of the Security Council has
been convened after consultations with the members of the
Council pursuant to the urgent request which I received
earlier this afternoon.
Adoption of the agenda

7. The PRESIDENT: The first item on the agenda is the
adoption of the agenda [S/Agenda/l441].

Year,

2 Later circulated as document S/8759.

1

8. Mr. BALL (United States of America): Six Govemments have requested that the item, the present serious
situation in Czechoslovakia, be inscribed on the agenda of
the Security Council. There is not the slightest doubt that
this request is proper, that it is demanded by the present
crisis and that its inscription should be promptly effected if
the Council is to live up to the responsibilities given it by
the Charter.

forbearance due to the fact that we are now discussing the
matter of the adoption of the agenda. So, although I expect
all representatives to be very brief and to the point, I
cannot take the position that the representative of the
United States is out of order, all the more so since I have
allowed the representative of the Soviet Union to state his
objections at the beginning in reading a letter.
16. I ask the representative of the United States to
proceed.

9. The situation the world facestonight is an affront to all
civilized sensibilities. Foreign armies, without warning, have
invaded a Member State of the United Nations. If the
Security Council does not seize itself of this grossviolation
of the Charter and deal with it promptly and incisively, its
vitality and integrity, its very seriousnessof purpose, will be
subject to serious question.

17. Mr. BALL (United States of America): What wasmast
piquant about this communique was that they made this
affirmation “on the basis of the principles of equality,
respect for sovereignty and national independence”.
18. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union on a point of order.

10. Rarely has a situation come before the Council where
the ugly facts of aggressionhave been written so large and
in such unmistakable characters. The Soviet Union has
arrogantly announced to the world that it has sent its
armies into Czechoslovakia, and the evidence is beyond
question that it and its clients have done so in order to
impose by force a repressive political system which is
Plainly obnoxious to the people and leadership of Czechoslovakia.

19. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(transzated porn Russian): Mr. President, I am inclined to

consider that the statement of the representative of
Hungary is fully justified. We are in fact discussing the
question of the agenda.
20. You referred to the fact that I had read a letter, Yes,
but that letter wasaddressed to you in reply to the letter of
the six Government delegations. I have not yet entered into
a discussion of the substance of this question, since I
consider that this is premature. However, the representative
of the United States, taking advantage of the fact that we
are discussing only the question of the inscription of the
six-delegation proposal on the agenda has already begun to
deal with its substance-as he sees it, of course-although
that is really a misinterpretation of it.

11. The Soviet Union and its Eastern European accomplices have not even tried to conceal the fact of this
invasion. How could they? Rather-in a feeble and futile
effort at self-justification-they have fabricated the claim
that this invasion was requested by Czechoslovakia, with
the contention that what we confront is an internal matter
which is none of the business of the Security Council. We
all know that this claim is a fraud, an inept and obvious
fraud.

21. We shall present the relevant provisions of the Brati.
slava Conference communique which consider United
States policy regarding Viet-Nam, the Middle East and
Europe, as well as many other parts of the world; in the
light of this it is odd, to say the least, for the American
representative to play the part of advocate of the declaration of the six Communist parties, and even more so for
him to mention it at the beginning of a discussion on a
question of procedure.

12. Only a few days ago the Communist Parties of the
Soviet Union and its WarsawPact Allies which joined with
it in last night’s aggression met with the Czechoslovak
Communist Party at Bratislava. The whole world took note
of the astonishing fact that present at the meeting was
almost the entire Soviet Politburo and that the Czechoslovak representatives included the leading members of the
Politburo of that country. This was a situation, therefore,
in which the Soviet leaders and the leaders of its allies were
sitting down in solemn conclave with what they clearly
recognized as the authoritative leaders of Czechoslovakia.
And at the conclusion of the meeting they all joined in a
communique affirming their “unbreakable friendship” and
their “firm resolve to do everything in their power to
deepen the all round co-operation of their countries”.

22. Therefore, it seems to me that we should consider very
carefully the question raised by the representative of
Hungary, bearing in mind that the point of the discussionis
a procedural question in connexion with the proposal made
by the six delegations concerning the agenda.
23. The Soviet delegation has expressedits objections net
only to the inscription of the above-mentioned matter en
the agenda, but to the convening of the Security Council ss
well, since this matter does not come within the purviewef
the Council. Therefore, at the present stage the speakers
should confine themselves to the procedural aspect of the
problem.

13. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Hungary on a point of order.
14. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): I should like to know
whether the statement of the representative of the United
States is an explanatory statement, becauseit seems to me
that he is trying to explain the substance of the letter of the
six countries-what is not written in that letter-and it
seems to me that the agenda hasnot been adopted.

24. I do not insist on consecutive interpretation on the
usual understanding.

15. The PRESIDENT: On the point of order raised by the
representative of Hungary, I ask for his patience and

25. The PRESIDENT: On the point of order raised by the
representative of the Soviet Union, I can only state that as
2

slovakia”. The declaration expressed the hope that the
offending Governments “will understand the seriousnessof
the situation created by this action which cannot be
explained in any way and all the less may stand to reason,
and will make it immediately possible for the Czechoslovak
people and its legitimate representatives to continue their
activities without delay”.

President I hope that all the statements on the adoption of
the agenda and all the points of order raised will be brief
and to the point.
26. Taking that into consideration and in this spirit I
should like to ask the representative of the United States to
proceed, It is my intention that we should reach a decision
on the agenda as soon as possible so that we may know
where we stand. I cdl on the representative of the United
States.

32. The issuing of this declaration was a brave act which
all free men must applaud. For where are the responsible
officials of the Czochoslovak Foreign Ministry while their
country is occupied?

27. Mr. BALL (United States of America): I want to say
very emphatically that we are deeply concerned to get on
with the agenda tonight. It is perfectly normal, however,
when Governments sponsor the inscription of an item on
the agenda that they explain the reasons why they do,
particularly when the inscribing of the item has been
challenged, as it has been, by the representative of the
Soviet Union.

33. Last night, as the invading forces poured into Prague,
the embassy of a respected neutral country found itself
surrounded. When the embassy officials protested by
telephone to the Czechoslovak Foreign Ministry they were
told that the officials of the Foreign Ministry could do
nothing to help “since they were prisonersthemselves”.
34. Just before the Council met this evening, the Permanent Mission of Czechoslovakia issued an additional declaration which reads as follows:

28. What I am doing is to explain the reasonswhy it is not
only proper but imperative that this item be inscribed so
that we can get on to the serious consideration of the very
great crisis that we face tonight. I can well understand, I
may say, why the representative of the Soviet Union is
disturbed by my quoting the Bratislava communique-if I
were he, under those circumstances I should also be
ashamed of it.

“The deputies of the National Assembly met and
unanimously accepted the following declaration at a time
when the Government and other organs cannot exercise
their functions.
“( 1) We identify ourselves with the declarations of the
Presidium of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia and the Presidium of the
National Assembly protesting against the occupation of
Czechoslovakia by armies of the five countries of the
Warsaw Treaty and considering it as a violation of
international law, provisions of the Warsaw Treaty and
the principles of equality among nations.

29. Tonight the most piquant aspect of that communique
is that the affirmation was made “on the basis of the
principles of equality, respect for sovereignty and national
independence, territorial integrity and fraternal mutual
assistance and solidarity”. Tonightn!iost, if not all, of the
Czechodovak representatives who met at Bratislava are
under detention,

“(2) We request that the constitutional representatives, primarily President of the Republic Ludvrk
Svoboda, Prime Minister OldrichCernik, Chairman of the
National Assembly Josef Smrkovskq, First Secretary
Alexander Dubcek, Chairman of the Central Committee
of the National Front Dr. Frantisek Kriegel, Chairman of
the Czech National Council Cestmir Cr’sarand others be
released from internment and thus could exercise their
constitutional functions with which the sovereign people
of this country entrusted them. The delegation of the
National Assembly, which we sent to the Soviet Embassy
this morning, has not returned so far. We protest against
the fact jhat the National Assembly, Government, institutions of the National Front and their representatives are
prevented from exercising their legitimate rights and
further from freedom of movement and assembly..

30. The Soviet Government, having shown its customary
respect for their “sovereignty and territorial integrity” by
Invading their country, is claiming that they do not speak
for their country-that that privilege belongs to some vague
and unnamed individuals. At Bratislava there was no
question in the minds of the Soviet Union as to who were
the leaders of Czechoslovakia, nor could there be for the
whole world knew the facts. Yet, did those leaders request
that their country be attacked and overrun by foreign
troops?
31. Last night, when the invasion occurred, Radio Prague,
the official Government station, broadcast the following
statement with regard to the invasion: “This (the invasion.)
happened without the knowledge of the President of the
Republic, the Chairman of the National Assembly, the
Premier or the First Secretary of the Czechoslovak Communist Party Central Committee”. This morning the Permanent Mission to the United Nations of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic released a declaration of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Czechoslovak Government. That
declaration stated that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, with
the endorsement of the President of the Republic, lodged
with the embassies of the Soviet Union and its puppets in
Prague a “resolute protest with the requirement that the
illegal occupation of Czechoslovakia be Stopped without
delay and all armed troops be withdrawn from Czecho-

“(3) We categorically request immediate withdrawal of
the armed forces of the five States of the WarsawTreaty
and full respect for the State sovereignty of the CzechoSlovak Socialist Republic.
“(4) We appeal to parliaments of all countries and to
the world public opinion and ask them to support our
legitimate requirements.
“(5) We entrust the delegation of the National
Assembly, composed of Marie Mikovi, Josef Macek, Josef
3

Vallo, Pave1Repos, Josef Pospichal and Vriclav Kucera to
contact Chairman of the National Assembly Josef Smrkovskjr, President of the Republic Ludvrk Svoboda and
Prime Minister Cernfk, in order to inform them about this
decision and agree with them on further proceeding. The
delegation of the National Assembly will report to the
Czechoslovak people on the result of the negotiations
without delay.

were also at the Bratislava meeting and endorsed this
touching sentiment.
41. The voices that the Soviet leaders heard calling on
them to invade were, if they existed at all, the voices of a
new breed of quislings+ The invitation on which the Soviet
case depends, if indeed there were anything which could be
described as an invitation, was, aa is so patently clear, a
document of treason invented and written by frightened
men in Moscow reacting to their own dark nightmares,

“(6) We call on all people not to resort to forcible
actions against occupation armies, not to be provoked by
various forces, which try to get proofs justifying the
intervention, and to misuse the situation to arbitrary
actions.

42. There are many poignant aspects to this tragedy, but
not the least must be the disgust and revulsion felt by the
brave and honest people of Poland and Hungary who tried
themselves a dozen years ago to break free from the
tyranny of Moscow, disgust and revulsion that their own
soldiers are associated in such a brutal and despicable
enterprise.

“Working people, citizens! Remain on your working
places and protect your enterprises. For further development of socialism in Czechoslovakia make use of all
democratic means. If necessary, you will be able to
defend yourself also by a general strike. We are confident
that we will overcome these serious moments with pride
and character.”

43. I trust, indeed I am confident, that this Council will
not take much time to dispose of this doomed and
desperate effort to frustrate its procedures, Often in
discharging the responsibilities entrusted to the Council by
the United Nations Charter, we face grave and difficult
problems, but that is not what we face this evening, The
question of inscription, which the Soviet Union has
challenged, is not a grave problem-not a grave problem,
but a minor one, becauseeven the Soviet Union knows that
its effort to block the Council from considering this
question is both futile and absurd. Nor is it a serious
question because the issue is so clear and the answerso
plain.

35. Conscious as they must have been of the heavy burden
of guilt and responsibility they are taking on themselves,
the Soviet Union and the other invading Powers made
foolish mistakes of a kind that are so often committed by
guilty conspirators.
36. In their efforts to create the patently false impression
that the Czechoslovak Government was requesting its own
destruction and the Czechoslovak peoples were asking for
the occupation of their country, they trapped themselves
by clumsy discrepancies. An official Soviet statement
published in Tass asserted,for example, that the request to
invade Czechoslovakia came from certain unnamed “party
and State officials of the Czechoslovak Government”.

44. Let us then get on with our business. In Czechoslovakia tonight the dark and ugly visage of the Soviet
intention has been sharply revealed. It is the intention to
destroy, to sap, to deter free debate, to prevent mankind
from uttering or facing the truth. I know that the
responsible Governments represented around this Council
table will never be party to such a shoddy business.

37. The Polish Government, getting the message only
dimly, described these ghostly officials as “party and State
activists”.

45. There was no Western conspiracy against communist
rule in Czechoslovakia. There wasno Czechoslovak Govern.
ment request to the Soviet Union and its allies to interfere
in its internal affairs. There was no request, as Moscow
would have the world believe, to install a puppet regime in
the capital of Masaryk, Benes and Dubcek.

38. The East German regime, clumsily missing the whole
legal point, mutated this reference into “party and State
personalities in Czechoslovakia who are loyally devoted to
socialism”.
39. And confounding the issue still further, the Bulgarian
Government referred to “party and State leaders of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic”.

46. This Council has a heavy responsibility, as do all
Members of the world Organization, to condemn this
brazen violation of the United Nations Charter and to call
on the Soviet Union and its allies to withdraw its forces
immediately from Czechoslovakia. I urge, therefore, the
immediate adoption of the agenda, so that the Council csa
get on with the important task it has before it, Time is
wasting, In the light of the Soviet objection, I requesttkst
the question of the adoption of the agenda be put tc a
formal vote.

40. These shadow figures who allegedly requested that
their country be despoiled by foreigners have not yet been
given names by Moscow. The facts are clear that the duly
constituted leaders of the Czechoslovak Government, the
President of the Republic, the Chairman of the National
Assembly, the Premier and even the First Secretary of the
Czechoslovak Communist Party Central Committee made
no such request. In fact, they knew nothing of this invasion
nor of the duplicitous designs which brought it about. Yet
these were the men which Mr. Kosygin and Mr. Brezhnev
conferred with in solemn council and with whom they
declared unbreakable friendship a few days ago, And let us
not forget that leaders of all the other invading nations

47. The PRESIDENT: I understand that the representative
of Canada has asked for the floor to speak on the question
of the adoption of the agenda. I now call on him
48. Mr, IGNATIEFF (Canada): I should like to intervene
briefly with regard to the objections which had been raised
4

much briefer, issued on 21 August by the Presidium of the
National Assembly of Czechoslovakia:

by the representative of the Soviet Union regarding the
inscription on the agenda of the letter addressed to you,
Mr, Chairman, in the name of six delegations which
included that of Canada.
,y.‘
i49. I believe that’all Members of this Organization, and
.particularly members of this Council who are charged under
Article 24 with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, must be
conscious of the importance of upholding certain principles
which are the foundation of the Charter. One of these
principles is the sovereign equ-ality of all Member States.
Another is that all Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State.
These principles, which reflect fundamental concepts of
international law, not only stand by themselves as foundation stones .for mutual relations among Members of the
United Nations and our efforts to reconcile positions when
they are in conflict; but they have also been quoted as
guidelines in the context of many difficult international
situations and they have inspired a, variety of resolutions
and statements of position, both in the Security Council
and in the General Assembly.

“The Presidium of the National Assembly expresses a
deep and entire disagreement with the occupation of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic by the allied armies. This
act has outrageously interfered into the sovereignty of
our State. We demand an immediate departure of your
troops from our country.”
52. The intervention by force of the Soviet Union and
some of its allies in the affairs of Czechoslovakia is
completely contradictory to the Charter principles I have
cited. It brutally negates the right of a State to take those
steps which it considers to be in its best interests and in the
interests of the economic and social development of its
people. It is a blow to the self-respect and dignity of all
Member States, particularly the small States which constitute the majority of Members in this Organization.
53. At a time like this the Council cannot possibly remain
silent. We must make clear, in this Council, on behalf of the
United Nations where the weight of world public opinion
stands on the issue. We must make clear to the Soviet
Union and certain of her allies that their actions infringe
upon basic rights of sovereign States to decide their own
affairs, and that the situation can only be rectified if they
desist immediately from intervention by means of armed
force and withdraw all their forces without delay from
Czechoslovakia.

50. So, in explaining why, in our view, this item should be
inscribed on the agenda I need only cite at this time
resolution 213 1 (XX), a declaration on the inadmissibility
of intervention in the domestic affairs of States for the
protection of their independence and sovereignty. That
resolution, which was adopted by the General Assembly .by 4.
54. These are the cogent reasons why the Canadian
an overwhelming majority as the result of a Soviet’
delegation
joined in requesting inscription of this item on
initiative, included the following declaration asits very first
the agenda, and why we believe that consideraticn of this
operative paragraph:
important matter should be pursued as a matter of urgency.
“No State has the right to intervene, directly or
5.5. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I, too, wish to
indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the internal or
speak shortly, to show why my Government considers that
external affairs of any other State. Consequently, armed
this subject should be inscribed and why we consider that
intervention and all other forms of interference or
the objection of the Soviet Union cannot be sustained. And
attempted threats against the personality of the State or
against its political, economic and cultural elements, are I would wish to add that it is right that we should do so,
condemned.”
and it is necessary that we should do so, ln view of the
formal objection raised by the representative of the Soviet
51. It is in the light of these broad considerations, based Union.
on Charter principles and resolutions, that we in this
56. Since we heard of the terrible news last night, and as
Council have quite properly met today to consider the item
confirmation
was received through the night and this
proposed for inscription in the agenda. It seems to my
morning, there was an immediate reaction of consternation
delegation-indeed, there can be no serious dispute about
the facts of this case, for late on 20 August statements were here at the United Nations-and so there should’have been.
issued by, on the one hand, the Presidium of the Czecho- We came together, particularly members of the Council,
with an immediate concern to call the Council. We had no
Slovak Communist Party Central Committee and, on the
doubt that this was necessary; we had no doubt that it was
other, by the Tass News Agency on behalf of the Soviet
urgent.
Government. While differing about the background to the
latest developments, both these statements clearly
57. Meanwhile, the statements of shock and condemconfirmed one stark fact: that the Union of Soviet Socialist
nation came in from one capital after another, and from
Republics and some of its allies have intervened with armed
countries of every kind and every continent. My own
force in the affairs of Czechoslovakia. Notwithstanding the
Govemrnent at once described the action taken by the
assertion in the Tass release, repeated by the representative
Soviet Union and some of its allies in invading Czechoof the Soviet Union, in objecting to the adoption of the
slovakia aa a flagrant violation of the United Nations
agenda, that this intervention has been undertaken at the
Charter and all accepted standards of international behavrequest of unidentified party and Government leaders of
iour. The statement of my Government went on to say:
Czechoslovakia, all indications are patently to the contrary.
In addition to the quotation given by the representative of
“The action is also in sharp conflict with the often
the United States, there is the following statement, which is
repeated statements by the Soviet Government about
5

we have to consider tonight is Russia. We heard reference to
the “lawful authorities”. It is not necessary for us to speak
on behalf of the lawful authorities. They have spoken
courageously for themselves. The statements-some of
which have been referred to this evening-made by the
Czechoslovak Government and the leaders of Czecho.
Slovakia are, I suggest to you, amongst the bravest
statements that we know in history. They have spoken for
themselves and they have made their declaration;

non-interference with the sovereign rights of independent
States. This is a tragedy not only for Czechoslovakia but
for Europe and for .the whole world. It is a serious blow
to the efforts which so many countries have been making
to improve relations between East and West.”
Those were the words of my Government’s statement this
morning.
58. That was the word which came first to so many who
stood appalled to see such tragic events: the word tragedy.
It is, indeed, a tragedy that has occurred, a tragedy for
Czechoslovakia and a tragedy for Europe and a tragedy for
the whole world

64. It is argued that the internal developments in Czech@
Slovakia had international implications which the Soviet
Union could not tolerate, and the Tass statement of today
makes this remarkable claim. The wording of the Tass
statement says: “The further aggravation of the situation ia
Czechoslovakia affects the vital interests of the Soviet
Union and other socialist States, the interests of the
security of the States of the socialist community.” It is a~
extraordinary claim, indeed, that principles of respect for
sovereignty-the sovereignty of independent nations-do
not apply to communist countries.

59. The first reaction was clearly one of shock-how
shocking wasthe impact of naked force, and how shocking
that a small and brave people should be so bullied and SO
betrayed. How shocking that so much careful planning to
create confidence between East and West should be
recklessly disregarded and pushed aside. Indeed, I am
amazed that so much should be destroyed by a single crude
blow: hopes of greater freedom in Czechoslovakia; hopes of
better understanding between Eastern and Western nations
in Europe; hopes of closer international co-operation to
take the place of the cold war; even the unity of communist
countries. All these were jeopardized; all these were
threatened by the evil invasion.

65. Moreover, the claim which is made is contrary to the
Warsaw Treaty itself. In article 1, the parties undertook to
refrain in their international relations from the threat 01 use
of force, and to settle their international disputes by
peaceful means. The armed invasion carried out by the
Soviet Union and other States stands condemned by the
public policy of the Soviet Union itself. It is condemned by
the United Nations Charter. It is condemned by the
Government of Czechoslovakia. It is condemn‘ed by the
text of the Warsaw Pact. It is even condemned by the
public statements of the Soviet Union in the United
Nations.

60. All of us must have felt a sense of compassion for
Ambassador Malik who has today endeavoured to carry out
such an unworthy task. We can picture his distaste, indeed
his disgust, at having to defend such a disgraceful act. No
wonder that in doing so he carried so little conviction.
61. As my Foreign Secretary said today: the United
Nations is supposed to have a special responsibility to
protect the rights of smaller nations. The invasion of
Czechoslovakia puts at risk the rights of every small
country. When we see what the Soviet Union can do to an
ally, we shudder to think what it might do to anyone else.

66. My Government unhesitatingly condemns the armed
intervention of the Warsaw Pact forces. A clear call must go
out from this Council to the Soviet leaders. Let them
withdraw their troops and respect the sovereignty of a small
and independent Member nation of the United Nations.
There can be no more important and no more urgent call
on the Council than that.

62. Today, as you have pointed out, Mr. President, we are
not discussing every aspect of the invasion of yesterday. We
are discussing only the question of whether the United
Nations has a right and a duty to debate the question which
has been put to us. In justifying the inscription of the item
on our agenda I shall quote only the words of the Foreign
Minister of the Soviet Union. Many of us will remember
him saying:

67. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative
of Denmark, who wishes to speak on the adoption of the
agenda.
68. Mr. MELLBIN (Denmark): I shall be brief. In oppos.
ing the adoption of the agenda, the representative of the
Soviet Union invoked the principle of the inadmissibility of
intervention in the domestic affairs of States and the
protection of their independence and sovereignty. This is a
line of thinking which my delegation cannot share.

“The front-line in the struggle against violations of
national sovereignty is everywhere. This struggle is going
on in all continents, at different levels of iritemational
relations, and in a variety of forms. It is one in which the
United Nations is required to play an active role,”

69. We fail to see how such arguments are compatible with
the action undertaken by the Soviet Union and certain Of
its allies in the Warsaw Pact in invading and occup~ht:
Czechoslovakia against the wish and the will of its people
and its lawful Government. To my delegation it seemsthat
this action is an unequivocal example of interverb
tion-armed intervention, at that.

That is the judgement of Mr. Gromyko.
63. We have heard tonight the claim-the extraordinary
claim-that the Soviet troops were invited and welcomed,
We heard it claimed that the leaders of Czechoslovakia had
applied for assistance. We heard reference to the phrase
“imperialist reaction”. The only imperialist reaction that

70. These alarming developments have caused grave
concern to my Government. We are in no doubt that the
6

Security Council is entitled to consider the item brought
before it by six delegations, one of them mine. The invasion
and occupation by foreign troops of a country, undertaken
without the knowledge and without the consent of the
lawful authorities of that country, is clearly a matter which
is international in character and creates a situation which
the Security Council is not only competent but, as a matter
of fact, duty bound to consider.

international scene. Specifically, the same Declaration
contains a solemn confirmation of the position of these
countries and their unwavering determination to continue
to render assistance and support to the heroic Viet-Namese
people in its just struggle against the American interventionists .
78. The war being waged by the United States in Vietnam
is a real example of repulsive aggression, Mr. Ball! As for
Czechoslovakia, there the fraternal socialist countries are
rendering assistance to the Czechoslovak people in its
struggle against the threat of foreign and internal reaction,
against the imperialist Powers’ attempts to turn that
country from the socialist path, to deprive the people of
the gains brought to it by the people’s revolution.

71. My delegation therefore urges the speedy adoption of
the proposed agenda before us.
72. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. President, I have listened
attentively to the very lengthy statements by the authors of
the proposal that the Security Council examine the
question of the situation in Czechoslovakia.

(translated jkom Russian):

79. The American representative also “forgets” to
mention the Middle East where, through the hands of the
Israeli aggressors, with the backing and participation of
highly placed overseasprotectors, an attempt was made to
eliminate progressive regimes in the Arab countries. Mr. Ball
maintains a studied silence on that; it is not in his interest
to talk about that here. He tries, by mean slander,
fabrications and insinuations against the socialist countries,
to camouflage the truly repulsive aggressive deeds of
American imperialism.in Vietnam and the Middle East.

73. It would be no exaggeration to say that the most
astounding and ridiculous thing about all these statements
is that the imperialists are suddenly striking the pose of
“defenders” of communism and socialism. Such is, to put it
bluntly, the unusual role played by the representative of
the enormous United States capital and by a British lord.
74. Mr. President, I wish to repeat once again that the
request of the “six delegations” headed by the representative of the United States of America and a discussion of
this matter by the Security Council lack any foundation
whatever.

80. That’s how matters stand so far as the term “repulsive
aggression” is concerned, Mr. Ball,
81. Czechoslovakia’s appeal to the friendly socialist States
for assistance was prompted precisely by the threat posed
to the existence of the socialist system in Czechoslovakia
by the counter-revolutionary forces, entering into an
agreement with the foreign powers hostile to socialism.

75. The attempt to deny the socialist countries’ right to
render assistance to fraternal socialist States, to the people
of the socialist countries, is an old trick of the imperialists;
its purpose is to shatter the unity and solidarity of the
socialist countries, to seek openings for such divisions. The
military units of the socialist countries entered the territory
of Czechoslovakia on the basis of a request by the
Government of that State. It was that Government itself
which appealed to the Governments of its allies for
assistance.

82. No matter how much the representative of the United
Kingdom, Lord Caradon, tries here to deny the ties
between Czechoslovak internal reaction and the foreign
aggressive powers, he will not succeed in doing so. I shall
mention the statement of a well-known organ of British
monopoly capital, the’ London newspaper The Observer. It
is franker than the British Lord in the Security Council, and
writes openly :

76. It has been denied here that there has been any threat
from the imperialist States to the socialist system in
Czechoslovakia. However, the Soviet Government is in
possession of irrefutable data on the ties between the
internal reaction in Czechoslovakia and foreign powers in
the West, with those which have an interest in wresting
Czechoslovakia from the Socialist community.

“If Czechoslovakia, embarking on a course of deviationism, abandons the Warsaw Treaty, the military position of
the Soviet Union will be seriously weakened, and this is in
fact confirmed by the geographic map, for it shows that
Czechoslovakia cuts a sharp wedge into the Russian
border.”

77. The representative of the United States has referred to
the Bratislava Conference and to the Declaration adopted in
Bratislava by the leaders of the Communist parties of six
European socialist countries. But he omitted any mention
of the fact that the aggressivepolicy of imperialism, which
complicates the international situation, was unmasked in
this Declaration, and that under these circumstances the
fraternal parties of the socialist countries, in the interests of
the struggle for consolidation of the common peace and
security of peoples, for organization of a resolute rejection
of the aggressive policy of imperialism, and for strengthening of the principle of peaceful coexistence of States
having different social systems, again confirmed their
readiness to agree on and co-ordinate their actions on the

83. This is the meaning of the intentions of certain people
in England, and these intentions are stated with cynical
frankness by The Observer. Therefore, no high-flown
phrases from the United Kingdom representative will be of
any use here. It is useless,Lord Caradon, for you to express
sympathy for me. I am proud that, here in the Security
Council, I am defending the just cause of the Czechoslovak
people, the Czechoslovak Communists, the people and
Communists of all the socialist States and oY the whole
socialist community against the intrigues, the manoeuvres,
the evil and truly repulsive actions which foreign powers arc
attempting to perpetrate with regard to Czechoslovakia.
7

84. When you, Lord Caradon, assume the role of “advocate of the unity of the socialist countries”, that is
indeed disgusting; it is hypocritical, there is not so much as
a particle of sincerity in it. Therefore, if it is a question of
who does not envy whom, well, I assure you that I have
many more reasons not to envy you in the role you are
playing today.

stressed the fact that the two world wars unleashed by
imperialism in the midst of Europe plunged all mankind
into the fire of the conflict. It is this problem-the averting
of theunleashing of new armed conflicts in Europe, capable
of leading to a thermonuclear world war, which motivates
the Governments, the peoples, and the armed forces of the
European socialist countries.

85. Imperialist reaction is not only continuing, but
strengthening its hostile campaign against Socialist Czech@
Slovakia, against its working class; it is supporting the
increasingly active counter-revolutionary forces in Czechoslovakia. The imperialists covertly and overtly incite and
direct these forces to undermine the foundations of
Czechoslovakia’s fraternal co-operation with the Soviet
Union and the other socialist countries which is of vitally
important significance for all the socialist States.

89. Nobody can doubt in the least that the preservation of
peace in Europe is of decisive significance to the mainte.
nance of the general peace, and to averting the threat of the
outbreak of a new world war. It is toward the achievement
of that goal, which affects the interests of all peoples, that
the Socialist countries are directing their joint efforts, fully
determined as these countries are not to permit peace to be
broken in Europe and to block the forces of militarism,
aggression and revenge which have so often plunged
Europe’s peoples, and consequently those of the entire
world, in the flames of war.

86, It is well-known that the events in Czechoslovakia and
around it have repeatedly been the subject of exchangesof
views between Czechoslovakia’s leaders and those of the
other socialist countries. The American representative, in
his statement here today, even recalled this fact. These
countries have been, and are, at one in considering that the
support, consolidation and defence of the socialist gains of
their peoples are a common international obligation of all
the socialist States. They are also at one in the opinion that
the policy of imperialism, and American imperialism first
and foremost, constitutes a serious threat to all the
socialist-and not only to the socialist-States. The common
position of the socialist States was solemnly proclaimed in
the Bratislava Declaration I mentioned earlier. This Declaration, signed by the leaders of all the socialist countries
participating in the Bratislava Conference, contains a clear
and definite warning to the imperialist and all
anti-Communist forces that nobody will ever be permitted
to break the unity of the socialist countries and undermine
the foundations of socialism or deprive the peoples of the
socialist countries of those gains achieved by them at the
cost of heroic efforts and selfless labour.

90. I The decision of the socialist countries on renderlag
assistance to the Czechoslovak people is entirely in accord.
ante with the right of States to individual and collective
self-defence, with the right provided for in both the Charter
of the United Nations and in the treaties of alliance
concluded between the fraternal socialist States, and,
specifically, with the WarsawTreaty.
91. No matter how the initiators of the introduction of
this matter in the Security Council attempt to misinterpret
the treaty obligations existing among the socialist countries,
they will not succeed in proving that the actions under.
taken by the socialist countries are not in accordancewith
the WarsawTreaty.
92, In this connexion it must be noted, in particular, that
the Warsaw Treaty, which, was concluded. by the socialist
States in answer to revanchist West Germany’s entry into
the aggressive imperialist NATO block, wasand remains a
powerful and absolutely essential factor in the peace and
security of the peoples of Europe. It servesas an insuper.
able obstacle for all those who would like to revise the
results of the Second World War, those who cherish ideas of
revenge and nurture the hope of disunity between the
countries of the socialist community. The WarsawTreaty
steadfastly protects the achievements of socialism, the
sovereignty and the independence of the fraternal socialist
States. It aims at the consolidation of European security
and at the maintenance of the general peace. Westressagain
that attempts to present the actions of the Soviet Union
and of the other socialist countries in any other light can in
no way change our peaceful intentions.

87. The further aggravation of the situation in Czechoslovakia affects the vital interests of the other socialist
countries, including the Soviet Union. At the same time,
the threat to the socialist system in Czechoslovakia also
constitutes a threat to the foundations of European peace.
That is precisely why the actions of the Soviet Union and
the other socialist countries are motivated by the concern
for strengthening peace and preventing the undermining of
the foundations of European security.
88. Nobody can have the slightest doubt that the preservation of peace in Europe is of decisive significance to the
maintenance of the general peace and to averting the threat
of the outbreak of a new world war. And I must say frankly
that more than one representative to the United Nations
(not, of course, among the representatives of the imperialist
countries) declared in conversation wltb us today that the
socialist countries are acting rightly in taking measures
against the machinations and intrigues of imperialism in
Europe, and that it is just such measures which can
consolidate peace in Europe and ensure the security of the
European peoples, and avert the dangerous development of
events throughout the world. These people who spoke to us

93. The representative of Canada in turn has tried to refer
here to the United Nations Charter, but it is the Charter
itself, in Article 51 specifically, which permits States te
take collective and individual measures for self-defence,and
the actions undertaken by the socialist countries are jmt
such measures in conformity with the Charter.
94. We particularly stress that the actions undertaken hy
the socialist countries are not directed against any State,
and in no way infringe upon anybody’s national interM.
They are not directed against the countries of Asia, fieY do
8

not threaten the interests of the African countries, they do
not threaten the countries of Latin America and are not
directed against them. The only ones who have grown
worried in connexion with these measures are the member
countries of the NATO bloc. Of course, they do not like
these actions because even when they sleep they dream of
breaking the unity of the countries of the socialist
community, of driving a wedge between them, aswasstated
unequivocally in the newspaper The Observer, which I
quoted especially for Lord Caradon. These countries do not
like those measures. But that is exactly why the authors of
the letter by the six delegations have, in fact, isolated
themselves and have shown the essence of their policy in
Europe and what their aims are. However, I feel that the
sixth, Paraguay, is included among them through a misunderstanding.

98. The support

of the counter-revolutionary forces in
Czechoslovakia by the Western Powersis being undertaken
at a time of continuing tension in the world situation, when
the NATO countries, and above all the United States, are
not renouncing their policy of force-a policy of intervention and aggression against the peoples fighting for their
freedom and independence.

99. The British representative has spoken here of some
alleged “tragedy” in Czechoslovakia. But this is a figment
of the lord’s imagination. There is no tragedy there. There
is a sincere desire on the part of the fraternal socialist States
to help the people and leaders of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic to prevent the rebirth of the imperialistic social
order in Czechoslovakia which would indeed be tragic for
the people there. While the British lord uses the word
“tragedy”, he fails to find words to describe the tragedy in
Viet-Nam, or the tragedy of the Arab population which finds,
itself under the heel of foreign occupiers. When the matter
of the situation in the Middle East, of the new acts of
aggression there were being discussed recently in the
Security Council, the authors of the six-country letter, with
the exception of one or two of them, took all possible steps
to block the adoption of a strong resolution concerning the
aggressor and new acts of aggression against Arab States.
This is, no secret to anybody. The missions of the Arab
countries to the United Nations know this very well, the
members of the Security Council know it; everybody
knows who it was that blocked the adoption of a strong
resolution with regard to the aggressorand the new acts of
aggression. Yet today, if you please, the defenders and
protectors of the Israeli aggressionin the Middle East are
trying to play the part of upholders of the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of peoples. This is
indeed a sight fit for the gods.

95. The Soviet Government has repeatedly warned that
attempts by imperialist reaction to interfere in the internal
affairs of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and in the
relations between the socialist countries will not be
tolerated, and will meet with resolute rejection. It takes
advantage of the present opportunity again to call upon all
States strictly to observe the principles of respect for
sovereignty and independence and the inadmissibility of
direct or indirect aggression against States and peoples.
96. The question naturally arises: what is the real reason
the Government of the United States and its allies are
raising this matter in the Security Council? There can be
only one answer to this question: the reason for this
manifestly imperialist action is that it may further stimulate
and provoke the counter-revolutionary struggle and the
hostile campaign not only against socialist Czechoslovakia,
its working class and its people, but also against the entire
socialist community as a whole, to support and instigate the
counter-revolutionary forces to undermine the bases of
socialism in Czechoslovakia, to undermine its fraternal
collaboration with the Soviet Union and with the other
socialist States. Are such actions compatible with the
assurancesby the Governments of the Western Powers of
their desire to maintain normal relations with the socialist
States? The position held at present by the United States,
and the slanderous form of the American delegate’s
statements against the Soviet Union and all the socialist
countries are by no means fortuitous, since support by the
United States of the reactionary forces throughout the
world in the fight against socialism and popular democracy
has for a long time been one of the main lines in the policy
of the ruling circles of that country. Everybody knows
whence, from what centre attempts to undermine the
forces of progress in various parts of the world emanate,
attempts which are responsible for the serious deterioration
in intemationsl relations.

100. The criminal, tragic, dirty war in Viet-Nam goes on as
before. As before, the world continues to witness the
stubborn refusal of the United States to put an end to the
bombing and other acts of war. Opposition to a peaceful
settlement in the Middle East continues as before. At the
same time-and this is no credit, let it be said, to the British
representatives-, they have now practically forgotten their
own resolution, which they submitted in the Security
Council on 22 November 1967. Just a few days ago, the
British representative, along with the American representative, exerted every effort to prevent condemnation of the
Israeli aggression and any mention of Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter in the resolution. Yet today he is
playing the part of “defender” of communist unity. The
British representative and his Government choose to overlook facts the whole world knows regarding the growth of
neo-fascism in West Germany. These forces are attacking
the status quo in Europe; they are demanding a revision of
borders; they are unwilling to give up the fantastic hope of
seizing the German Democratic Republic; they are making
every effort to gain accessto atomic weaponsfor purposes
of revenge; they oppose disarmament; they oppose the
banning of atomic weapons. But they are the allies of the
United Kingdom, the United States, Canada and Denmark,
and that is why the representatives of these capitalist
countries do not mention this. Yet, when the socialist
countries, in order to render assistanceto the Czechoslovak
people, to fraternal socialist Czechoslovakia which finds

97. The American representative has I spoken at great
length here about some sort of imaginary methods. But if
we are going to discuss that subject, we can refer to the
article published in The New York lTmes on the methods
employed by the American secret service in Bolivia. The
American representative would therefore be better advised
not to invent some sort of imaginary methods supposedly
employed by the socialist countries, but rather to examine
his own methods.
9

attention to this statement more extensively. The Tass
statement says that party and government leaders of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic requested the Soviet Union
and the other allied States to give the fraternal CzeehoSlovak people immediate assistance, including assistanceby
their armed forces. This appeal was prompted by the threat
to the existing socialist system and constitutionally established State regime in Czechoslovakia arising from
counter-revolutionary forces which have entered into cogusion with foreign powers hostile to socialism. The eventsin
and around Czechoslovakia have shown that a further
aggravation of the situation affects the vital interests of all
the socialist countries. Therefore the Governments of the
socialist countries, proceeding on the principle of indissoluble friendship and co-operation and in conformity with
existing treaty obligations decided to meet this request for
rendering the necessary assistance to the fraternal Czechoslovak people.

itself in a difficult position, have taken steps which the
imperialists do not like, then, right away, the leading NATO
members assumed the role of “defenders” of communism
and communist unity. This is a good theme for comic
strips, but not for serious policy,
101. In Europe, where enormous means of mass destruction have been stockpiled, the peace and security of the
peoples are maintained mainly thanks to the strength,
solidarity, and peace-loving policy of the socialist States.
And that is precisely why the representatives of the NATO
countries are unstinting here, at this table, in fabrications,
insinuations and slander, in order to prevent further
strengthening and consolidation of the power of the
socialist community. AU the countties participating in the
Warsaw Treaty, all the socialist countries bear joint and full
responsibility for the unity of the socialist countries, for
their joint activities in the consolidation of peace in
Europe, for their power, and for the fate of peace. They are
bound in solidarity and united in the defence of the
achievements of socialism, in defence of their security, of
their international position, and of the entire socialist
community .

105. This statement stressesonce again that this decision
is in complete conformity with the right of States to
individual and collective self-defence envisaged in the
treaties of alliance concluded between the fraternal socialist
countries. And this decision is in accord with the vital
interests of our countries in the safeguarding of European
peace against the forces of imperialism, aggression and
revanchism which have so often plunged the peoples of
Europe into war. The statement further says that the
fraternal countries firmly and resolutely oppose any outside
threat by their inseparable solidarity. Nobody will everbe
allowed to wrest so much as a single link from the
community of socialist states,

J’ 102. The events in Czechoslovakia concern the Czechoslovak people and the States of the socialist sphere of
collaboration, which are mutually bound by appropriate
reciprocal obligations, and them alone. Yet neither the
Czechoslovak Government nor the Government of any
other socialist country has submitted any request or
proposal to the Security Council or requested that the
Security Council be convened, considering this not only
unnecessary under the present circumstances, but as not
coming within the purview or competence of the Security
Cpuncil. The raising and discussion of this question here, as
all those present, can judge by the initial “keynote”
speeches of the representatives of the United States and the
United Kingdom, are being pursued for very specific
purposes. These representativesare very little affected by or
interested in Czechoslovakia. They are little affected by or
interested in peace in Europe, the security of peoples, or
the community of the socialist countries. On the contrary,
they dislike all that; they are conducting both an overt and
a covert struggle against it; all the powerful, vast monopofistic resources of American, British and West German
propaganda have been released against it. That is why they
have dragged this matter into the Security Council. And
that is exactly why the Soviet delegation resolutely opposes
this matter being raised in the Security Council, and
opposes a debate or inscription of this item on the agenda
of the Security Council,

106. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translatedfrom
Spanish): We are in a procedural stage in the present
discussion, and I shall therefore limit my statement to the
type appropriate to such a debate, that is, I shall be very
brief.
107. In view of the grave events which have occurredand
continue to occur in Czechoslovakia, and in the light of the
information possessed by my delegation-information
which is, moreover, broad common knowledge and to
which should be added that presented by the Permanent
Mission of Czechoslovakia to the United Nations-my
Government considers that certain principles and basic
tenets of the Charter have been violated by Member states
of our Organization. I refer in particular to the provisions
of Article 1, paragraph 2 and of Article 2, paragraph4 of
the Charter, which states:

“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any state or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.”

103. The representatives of the six countries may, of
course, add yet another matter to the endless list of dead
questions pending in the Security Council, a list which, by
the courtesy of the United Nations Secretariat, wasrecently
circulated to the members of the Security Council and the
Missions to the United Nations. But what’s the point,?

108. In these circumstances, my Government, which
represents a small nation, like those which form the
overwhelming majority of Members of our Organization,
and like them firmly adhering to the most scrupulous
observance of the principles of international law gOVeming
coexistence between States, regards the situation in Czeehom
Slovakia with consternation in the first place and, seeon&‘,

104. The American representative referred here to a Tass
statement, but he misrepresented it, he did not quote it in
full, he took individual lines which suited him out of
context, I am not condemning him for this, it is between
him and his conscience. But it gives me grounds for drawing
10

considers it an indispensable and urgent duty of the
Council, in conformity with the provisions of Article 24, to
examine this question without delay.

another circumstance should also be kept in mind. In
practice, the work of the Security Council has repeatedly
confirmed that when those who object do not insist on a
vote, the matter may also not be put to a vote. The person
who objected has set forth his position on this matter in his
statement, and that is sufficient.

109. On the basis of these considerations and in these
words, I am explaining the reasons for my delegation’s
decision to join five other members of the Council in
requesting this emergency meeting of the Council.

117. Mr. BALL (United States of America): May I recall
that at the time I made my statement a few moments
ago-in fact, it was an hour or so ago-at the conclusion of
my statement I requested that this matter be put to a vote?

110. With these words I am also replying to the comments
expressed a short while ago by the representative of the
Soviet Union. The adoption of our agenda, and therefore
the discussion of the question submitted, are opposed by
the representative of the Soviet Union. In these conditions,
and in this procedural stage, there is only one possible
course of action: that the Council should decide, by a
majority vote of its members, the course it wishes to
follow.

118. It seems to me that if the Council is going to
consume all of the time that we have consumed this evening
on this matter, a very large part of which was devoted to
the speech of the representative of the Soviet Union, which
certainly took a great many liberties with the principle of
germaneness which he had been urging earlier in the
evening, and with the principle that the statements at this
time should be confined to the question of inscription, I
think it would be quite frivolous procedure if we did not
now express the views of the Council on this matter.

111. I reserve my right to participate later in the discussion on the substance of this question.
112. The PRESIDENT: As no further speakers wish to
take the floor at this time on the question on the adoption
of the agenda and since objection has been raised to the
adoption of the agenda, I propose now to ask the Council
to vote on the adoption of the agenda.
113. Mr. MALIK

119. The PRESIDENT: The President is confronted with
objections to the adoption of the agenda and also objections to a vote on the agenda, and he is furthermore
confronted with a formal motion by the representative of
the United States that we proceed to the vote. Under these
circumstances, I think the normal way for us is to proceed
to the vote on the adoption of the agenda.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translatedfrom Russian): Mr. President, I have set forth in

detail in the Soviet delegation’s letter, and in my subsequent explanations, the Soviet delegation’s position
concerning the matter under discussion to the effect that
there is no basis for examination of this question in the
Security Council. But the Soviet delegation does not insist
on a vote on this matter.

120. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): Mr. President, with all due

respect to your remark, I would like to make a small
correction to its first part, If I have correctly understood
what I heard in the interpretation, you announced that
there is an objection to a discussion of this question and to
its inscription on the agenda, but also that there is an
objection to a vote. There wasno objection to a vote: but it
was not insisted upon. I repeat, I do not insist on a vote.

114. Mr. BALL (United States of America): The representative of the Soviet Union read a letter from his Govemment which made strong objections to the inscription of
this
item on the agenda. We have now consumed two or
three hours of the time ot the Council at a time when we <. 121. ’ The PRESIDENT: Since a formal motion has been
are facing a very serious crisis in the discussion of this
made that we vote on the adoption of the agenda, and since
question of inscription. I think it would be only
there are no objections to the vote on the adoption of the
appropriate, in spite of the last statement of the represen- agenda, I shall proceed to the vote.
tative of the Soviet Union, that the Council be asked to
express its views on this matter.
A vote wastaken by showof hands.
liz favour: Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America.

115. The PRESIDENT: I shall state the procedural situation as I see it now. As objections have been advanced to
the adoption of the agenda, the normal way for he Council
to proceed would now be to put the agenda to the vote.
That I understand to be the normal procedure since
objections have been raised to the adoption of the agenda.
Of course, if such objections are withdrawn, and if I may be
entitled to assume that there is a consensuson that, I might
forgo the vote. But normally, since the objections are
maintained-they are not withdrawn-it is my intention to
proceed to the vote.
116. Mr. MALIK

Against; Hungary, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The agendawasadopted by 13 votesto 2.

122. The PRESIDENT: The representatives of Algeria and
India have asked for the floor to explain their position on
the adoption of the agenda. I recognize the representative
of Algeria.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated porn Russian): Mr. President, you have quite

rightly referred to the existing practice by which, if there is
an objection to a question then it is settled by a vote. But

123. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): Our vote on the adoption of the agenda, in
13

accordance with the practice established and recognized in
this Council, should in no way be considered asconstituting
or implying acceptance, or even support of the explanations
given for the letter of the representatives of the six Powers.
124. As we know, everyone may inform the Council of a
problem which can be regarded as a threat to international
peace and security. However, we cannot help noticing a
certain contradiction in the facts, inasmuch as the parties
concerned have not judged it necessaryto appeal to the
Security Council. Some of those whose interests are
undoubtedly involved have hastened, at the emergence of a
serious situation, to revive a cold war atmosphere. From
some time, particularly since 5 June 1967, propaganda
actions, hysteria and provocation have not been followed
by a sincere desire to work for peace. Perhaps this is a
deliberate attempt to make the Security Council assume a
responsibility which might lead to unfortunate consequences.
125. Mr. MISHRA (India): At this stage of our deliberations my delegation should like to explain its vote on the
adoption of the agenda. In this connexion it would be
appropriate to put into the record of the Security Council
the statement of the Prime Minister of India which she
made in the Parliament today. The statement reads:

“Mr. Speaker, Sir, it is with a heavy heart and with a
profound sense of concern that I have to report to this
House certain events which are currently taking place in
Czechoslovakia. We have always been deeply committed
to the cause of freedom everywhere and we have stood
for certain principles as guiding and informing our
attitude to international events, The principle of
non-interference by one country in the internal affairs of
another constitutes the very basis of peaceful coexistence.
We have always believed that international relations
should be governed by respect for the sovereignty and
independence of nations, big or small. We have always
stood for the right of every country to develop its
personality according to its own traditions, aptitudes and
genius. India has always raised her voice whenever these
principles have been violated.

“Although it was only after our independence that we
were able to establish diplomatic relations with the
Republic of Czechoslovakia, we have a long history of
friendship towards Czechoslovakia and its valiant people,
I recall, as I am sure many of my colleagues on both sides
of the House will remember, the tragic and fateful events
of 1938 and 1939. Even then our sympathies were v&h
the people of Czechoslovakia in their travails, and my
father gave poignant expression to them. I am sure tbc
House will join with me in conveying to the people ef
Czechoslovakia the profound concern at the turn which
events have taken so soon after what appeared to be s
peaceful solution of problems and differences between
Czechoslovakia and its allies.
“Our relations with the Soviet Union, Poland, Hungary
and Bulgaria are close and many-sided. We value these
friendships and we wish to preserve and extend them.
However, we cannot but give expression to our anguishat
the events in Czechoslovakia. The House will no doubt
wish to convey to them our view that they should
carefully consider all aspects of the situation which has
arisen as the result of the action by their armed forces
and its possible consequences. We are deeply awareof the
fears which have gripped Europe and the conflicts which
have raged there, leading to two world wars. These fears
still haunt the minds of the European peoples,
“I am sure I reflect the opinion of the House when1
express the hope that the forces which have entered
Czechoslovakia will be withdrawn at the earliest possible
moment, and the Czech people will be able to ‘determine
their future according to their own wishes and interests,
and that whatever mutual problems there may be
between Czechoslovakia and its allies will be settled
peacefully. The right of nations to live peacefully sad
without outside interference should not be denied in the
name of religion or ideology.”
126. That was the statement of the Prime Minister of
India in the Indian Parliament this morning.
127. In concluding, it is necessary for me to emphasize
that our vote in favour of the adoption of the agendadoes
not prejudice the position of my delegation in regard to the
consideration in substance by this Council of the item,

“The House is aware of the reports which have come
through the world Press and Radio as to the nature of the
developments which have taken place in Czechoslovakia.
We have also made inquiries from the diplomatic missions
of the countries concerned as well as others, and continue
to be in close touch with them.

128. The PRESIDENT:
Pakistan.

I now call on the representativeof

129. Mr, YUNUS (Pakistan): The affirmative vote castby
my delegation in favour of the adoption of the agendadoes
not have any bearing upon and is without prejudice to the
views of my Government on the substance of the question,

“The armed forces of the Soviet Union and four of its
Warsaw Pact allies began crossing the Czechoslovak
border at about 0300 hours Standard Time. They are now
reported to be in Prague and other towns of Czechoslovakia.

Letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives of
Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8758)

“In the early hours of this morning the Soviet Govemment, through their charge d’affair in New Delhi,
informed us that the Governments of the Soviet Union
and four of its allied countries of the WarsawPact had
decided to send their armed forces into Czechoslovakia.
Honourable members have presumably seen the statement
which has since been put out by the Soviet newsagency,
Tass, stating the point of view of the Soviet Government.

130. The PRESIDENT: I wish to acquaint the memberscf
the Council with the fact that the Permanent Repn=stative of Czechoslovakia has addressed a letter te the
12

President of the Security Council, which was received a
short time ago. The letter reads as follows :

the Prime Minister, the First Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, or
those organs.

“Date: 21 August 1968

“In those hours, the Presidium of the Central Cornrnittee of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia had. a
session and discussed preparations of the Fourteenth
Congress of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia. The
Presidium of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia called upon all citizens of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic to maintain calm and not
to resist the advancing troops, becausethe defence of our
state sovereignty by force wasimpossible at that time.

“Excellency,
“In connexion with the request for an urgent meeting
of the Security Council and in accordance with Article 3 1
of the Charter, I have the honour to request that I be
invited to participate in the deliberations of the Security
Council.
“(Signed) Jan MUZAK,
“Deputy Permanent Representative of
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic”

“Therefore, the Czechoslovak Army, People’s Militia
and public security did not receive the order to defend
our country. The Presidium of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia considers this act
as contrary not only to principles of relations among
socialist States but aIso to the fundamental norms of
international law.

131. In accordance with the usual practice of the Council,
I propose, with the consent of the Council and if there is no
objection, to invite the representative of Czechoslovakia to
participate, without the right to vote, in the discussion,
pursuant to his request and the relevant provisions of the
United Nations Charter.

“All leading functionaries of state, the Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia and the National Front remain in
your functions to which you were elected as representatives of the people and members of your organizations in
conformity with the laws and other norms of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. J. MuzikJCzechoslcwakia)took a seatat the Council table.

132. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Czechoslovakia has signified his intention of addressing the Council
on this question, and I now call on him.
133. Mr. MUZIK (Czechoslovakia): I would like to stress
the following points, first of all.
134. First, that I am acting upon the explicit instructions
of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic, Dr. Hajek, whom many of you have
known as a former colleague.

“Constitutional representatives convoked immediately
the National Assembly and the Government of the
Republic. The Presidium of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Czechoslovakia convened a plenary
sessionof the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of Czechoslovakia to discuss the situation’ that has
arisen.”
138. Later during the morning of this day 21 August
1968, we received the following declaration of the Minister
of Foreign Affairs :

135. Secondly, I would like to express my gratitude to
Mr. President, and to those members of the Security
Council which made it possible for the Czechoslovak
delegation to participate in a discussion in which, as wasthe
case thirty years ago, the question of sovereignty of
Czechoslovakia is at stake.

“Today, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, with the
endorsement of.the President of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and on behalf of the Government of the
Republic, informed the Ambassadorsof the USSR, Polish
People’s Republic, German Democratic Republic, Hungarian People’s Republic and Bulgarian People’s Republic
accredited in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic to
transmit to the Governments of the USSR, Polish
People’s Republic, German Democratic Republic, Hungarian People’s Republic and Bulgarian People’s Republic
a resolute protest with the requirement that the illegal
occupation of Czechoslovakia be stopped without delay
and all armed troops be withdrawn from Czechoslovakia.

YOU,

136. In connexion with this invitation to the Security
Council, I have been instructed to inform the members of
the Council of the following messages the Czechoslovak
Mission received from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic in the course of this day.
137. The first message arrived during the early morning
hours today, and it is the declaration of the Presidium of
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, which reads as follows :

“In this historical moment we expressour hope that the
Governments and peoples of the USSR, Polish People’s
Republic, German Democratic Republic, Hungarian
People’s Republic and Bulgarian People’s Republic will
understand the seriousnessof the situation created by this
act which cannot be explained in shy way, and all the less
made stand to reason, and will make it immediately
possible for the Czechoslovak people and its legitimate
representatives to continue their activities without delay.”

“On 20 August, around 11 p.m., the troops of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Polish People’s
Republic, Hungarian People’s Republic, Bulgarian People’s Republic and German Democratic Republic crossed
the state borders of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
This happened without the knowledge of the President of
the Republic, the Chairman of the National Assembly,
13

This declaration by the Minister of Foreign Affairs has been
released to the press with the additional comment that the
text was received on the radio and may be incomplete but
corresponds to the senseof the message.

tions of the National Front and their representatives are
prevented from exercising their legitimate rights and
further from freedom of movement and assembly.

139. Thirdly, later in the day we received the following
statement by ten members of the Government:

“Thirdly, we categorically request immediate withdrawal of the armed forces of the five States of the
Warsaw Treaty and full respect for the State sovereignty
of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.

‘Since it was not possible to end the night sessionof
the Government, which should have continued this
morning to discuss the situation that has arisen, and to
agree on the letter addressedto the Governments of the
Warsaw Treaty countries, the group of undersigned
Ministers has met and declared that we all resolutely beg
all the legitimately elected constitutional and political
organs to firmly support today’s declaration of the
Presidium of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia addressed to all the people,
consider the occupation of Czechoslovakia, which took
place without accord or knowledge of the Czechoslovak
Government, as illegal, contrary to international law and
Socialist internationalism.
“The undersigned ministers who could meet will do
their utmost that the Government could continue in its
efforts to maintain the sovereignty of our Socialist
Republic. We urge all citizens to make it possible to this
Government by maintaining calm and order.”

“FourthIy, we appeal to Parliaments of all countries
and to the world public opinion and ask them to support
our legitimate requirements.
“Fifthly, we entrust the delegation of the National
Assembly composed of Marie Mikovl, Josef Macek, Jo&
Vallo, Pavol Repos, Josef Pospichal and VBclav Kucera to
contact Chairman of the National Assembly Josef
Smrkovsky, President of the Republic Ludvik Svobods
and Prime Minister Cemik in order to inform them about
this decision and agree with them on further proceedings,
The delegation of the National Assembly will report to
the Czechoslovak people on the result of the negotiations
without delay.
“Sixthly, we call on all people not to resort to forcible
actions against occupation armies, not to be provoked by
various forces, which try to get proofs justifying the
intervention, and to misuse the situation to arbitrary
actions.

The undersigned Ministers are Harms, Kadlec, Krejci,
Machacova, Rail, Sucharda, Stancl, Vales, Vlcek and
Hromadka.

“Working people, citizens ! Remain on your working
places and protect your enterprises! For further develop
ment of Socialism in Czechoslovakia make use of all
democratic means. If necessary, you will be able to
defend yourselves also by a general strike. We are .
confident that we will overcome these serious moments
with pride and character.”

140. On 23 August 1968, at 2p.m. local time, the
Permanent Mission of Czechoslovakia received the following declaration of the Presidium of the National Assembly :
“The deputies of the National Assembly met and
unanimously accepted the following declaration at a time
when the Government and other organs cannot exercise
their functions.

141. Through the Czechoslovak Press Agency, the Permanent Mission has received a report on a session of the
Czechoslovak Government:

“First, we identify ourselves with the declarations of
the Presidium of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia and the Presidium of the
National Assembly protesting against the occupation of
Czechoslovakia by armies of the five countries of the
Warsaw Treaty and considering it as a violation of
international law, provisions of the Warsaw Treaty and
the principles of equality among nations.

“The Government, in the absence of its Chirman and
Vice-Chairman, who cannot be reached for the time
being, met today in the morning hours to have its
extraordinary meeting, and, under the Chairmanship of
Comrade Machacova, adopted inter ah the following
decisions: The Government approves the position taken
by a group of its Ministers and issued today in the
morning hours. The Government decides to ask the
President of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic that he
receive immediately the Government to’ discussproblems
of internal and external policy and international effects
of the military occupation of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic as well as the questions connected with the
security of the proper functioning of constitutional and
political organs.

“Secondly, we request that the constitutional representatives, primarily President of the Republic Ludvik
Svoboda, Prime Minister Oldrich Cemik, Chairman of the
National Assembly Josef Smrkovsky, First Secretary
Alexander Dubcek, Chairman of the Central Committee
of the National Front Dr. Frahtisek Kriegel, Chairman of
the Czech National Council Cestmir Cisar and others be
released, from intemation and thus could exercise their
constitutional functions with which the sovereign people
of this country entrusted them, The delegation of the
National Assembly, which we sent to the Soviet Embassy
this morning, has not returned so far. We protest against
the fact that the National Assembly, Government, institu-

“The Government takes note, with approval, of the fact
that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, by means of its
Ambassadors in Moscow, Warsaw, Budapest, Berlin and
Sofia, transmitted a diplomatic note requesting the
withdrawal of armies of the countries of the Warsaw
Treaty from the territory of Czechoslovakia. At the same
14

-

times in recent weeks, the changesin Czechoslovakia since
January were aimed only at improving the socialist system,
to bring the Republic closer to the lofty goals of freer
socialism, to employ all human rights and liberties which
should be the integral part of any socialist system. We
believe that the unity of our people and their de&cation to
socialism will enable us to reach the aims which all
progressivemembers of human society desire.

time the Government recommends to the President of the
Republic to invite the Ambassadors of the abovementioned countries and to insist that the above request
be met, The Government decides to addressitself to the
Ambassadors of the countries of the Warsaw Treaty in
order that the Governments of the countries concerned
give instructions to the Commanders of the occupation
units to enable proper functioning of constitutional and
political organs, particularly of the Presidium of the
party, and to free immediately the members of the
Government who were detained.”

144. Mr. BALL (United States of America): The statements read here just now by the Acting Permanent
Representative of Czechoslovakia, the statements of the
authoritative leaders and organs of the Government of
Czechoslovakia, speak more eloquently than can any of us
of the situation that exists there and of the need for this
Council to take appropriate action to try to bring about a
return to a condition of peace and to redress, so far as we
can,
the violations of the Charter which have occurred.
They make clear more eloquently also than any of us, they
make clear beyond any misunderstanding, the cynicism and
the perfidy that surrounded the sneak military attack which
is the subject of our proceedings here this evening.

142. Finally, I would like to read the appeal made by the
President of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Ludvr%
Svoboda, which statement I received just before I left for
this meeting. The statement of the President of the
Republic delivered on the radio on 21 August at 22.30
hours reads as follows:
“Dear Fellow Citizens,
“I speak to you on this fateful day. We live through
exceptionally serious moments in the life of our nations.
Military units of the USSR, together with the units of the
Polish People’s Republic, the Bulgarian People’s Republic,
the German Democratic Republic and the Hungarian
People’s Republic entered the territory of our Republic.
This took place without the consent of the constitutional
organs of the State, which, however, proceeding from
their responsibilities towards the nations in our country
must expeditiously solve the situation that has arisen and
attain an early withdrawal of foreign troops.

14.5. For we meet here at a grim and anxious moment.
Once again, as all too often in history, a small nation,
seeking only to live in peace and freedom, has been brutally
attacked by more powerful neighbours. Once again this has
happened at the centre of Europe, that history-haunted
heartland of greatness and tragedy. Once again the victim of
this primitive act is that unfortunate country whose name
was once the shining symbol of the principle of selfdetermination, Czechoslovakia. The name Czechoslovakia
has for generations held a special place in the affections of
the American people. Not only has it sent many of its sons
to our shores, but during the First World War it was
President Woodrow Wilson who gave the most energetic
support to the aspirations of the Czech and Slovak peoples
for independence, and for all too brief a time they
achieved it.

“In this respect, I have developed efforts, today,
permitted me by the current conditions. Among others I
convoked a plenary session of the National Assembly. In
the evening I discussed with members of the Government
some most urgent problems concerning the restoration of
normal life in the country and the ensuring of its
integrity.
“Tomorrow, the negotiations will continue and, as I
believe also with the Prime Minister, Oldrich Cernfk. I am
conscious of all problems and difficulties caused by the
present situation. However, I appeal to you my dear
fellow citizens with an urgent request to maintain greatest
calm and to avoid anything which might bring about
regrettable actions with unfortunate consequences.

146. With lovers of freedom throughout the world,
Americans rejoiced when the peace settlement finally
affirmed the creation of Czechoslovakia as a new republic.
But little did we know then what tragic days lay in store for
this new nation. First came the subversion and military
pressure of Hitler, leading to the partition and ruthless
subjugation of Czechoslovakia in 1938 and 1939, and
finally to the holocaust of World War II. Then, following
the war, when men had high hopes that the Czechoslovak
Republic woula once again be restored to independence
and given the guarantees of security implicit in the United
Nations Charter, new pressure and new subversion came
from another quarter. A campaign systematically mounted
from Moscow led to the overthrow of the free Government
of Czechoslovakia. Freedom wasbanished asthe nation was
transformed in what has come to be known in the
upside-down vocabulary of communism as a people’s
democracy.

“I sincerely ask that particularly from you, our young
people ; I call upon all workers, farmers, intelligensia, to
prove again by your attitude your relation towards
socialism, towards freedom, towards democracy.
“We have reached the point of no return. The action
programme of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia
and the Declaration of the programme of the Government
of the National Front express the vital interests and needs
of a.lI people in our country and, therefore, we must
continue the started work. Have faith, let us all unite and
together with the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia
and the National Front we will go on In unity and in the
efforts for the better life of our nations.”

147. No one who lived through that period can forget the
sinister chill of the sudden death in 1948 of the dkthguished and widely beloved Czech Foreign Minister, Jan
Masaryk. It is a little ironic that in recent weeks-it is only
in recent weeks-when freedom once again began to reflect

143. At the conclusion of my speech, I would like to
stress once again that, as our Government has stated many
15

,>
,.i

What we have witnessed, as the President of the United
States put it today, was “a resurgence of ordinary human
freedom”. It is what every nation and what every people
have a right to. What is extraordinary and what is indeed
repugnant to civilized standards of international conduct is
the invasion of a sovereign nation, however small, by
another sovereign nation, however strong, to impose an
order of things which the people of the invaded nation
abhor.

itself in the Czechoslovak press,that there appeared for the
first time within that country published evidence that Jan
Masaryk wasbrutally murdered.
148. Thus, Czechoslovakia, wedged between more powerful States, has been the victim of two foreign tyrannies in
succession: first that of Hitler and then that of the Soviet
Union. Hitler’s oppression, savagethough it was,lasted for
the comparatively brief span of seven years and ended with
the downfall of the tyrant himself. But the Soviet tyranny
that followed has lasted from 1948 to the present, for
twenty years. And in this year 1968, when at last the
national spirit of the Czechoslovak people began to flame
anew, the world waited through anxious weeks to see
whether these first few modest manifestations of freedom
could be accepted by MOSCOW.

I
/
1

153. It is instructive to note certain of the eventsthat led
to this tragic dhzouement, for the sequence spells out
unmistakably a lesson in Soviet perfidy.
154. From 25 July to 1 August 1968, at the request ofthe
Soviet leadership, the top leaders of the communist parties
of the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia met at the
Czechoslovak town of Cierna Nad Tisov. On 1 August their
meeting ended with the issuance of a communique which
reported thorough and frank discussions of “questions
interesting both sides” and of “detailed information on the
situation in their countries”. Both participants agreed on s
further meeting, to be attended also by party leaders of
Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany and Poland. This further
meeting was held at Bratislava, Czechoslovakia, on
3 August. It resulted in the communique on that date which
has been the subject of some comment and discussion
tonight-a communique that contained not the slightest
hint of disagreement between the leaders of Czechoslovakia
and those of the Soviet Union and its other WarsawPact
allies.

149. Now we know the answer,which was written for ail
the world to read not in words, but in the streets of Prague
by the treads of Soviet tanks. Lamentably, this is not the
first time that the Security Council has been obliged to
consider an act of naked force by the Soviet Union against
a weaker State in Europe. In 1956, the people of Hungary
sought to loosen the shackles of Moscow-style dictatorship
and to find a new freedom, and they obtained a new
Hungarian leadership which appeared disposed to help them
find it. Immediately from Moscow came a response
compounded of troop movements, dark accusations, and
still darker threats; then, at the last moment, seeming
conciliation. The world breathed more easily in the last
days of October and the beginning of November ,1956.
Then, in the middle of the night of 3-4 November, Soviet
forces poured acrossthe border, and Hungary’s few fleeting
days of freedom were ended by Soviet guns. This act of
international treachery and lawlessnesswas rightly condemned by the United Nations General Assembly on 10
September 1957.3

155. Indeed, it contained a common expressionof resolve
by alI participants “to do everything in their power to
deepen the all-around co-operation of their countries on the
basis of the principles of equality, respect for sovereignty
and national independence, territorial integrity, and fraternal mutual assistance and solidarity”. That does not sound
like the language of countries that are about to engagein
armed invasion.

150. The grim parallel between Budapest in 1956 and
Prague in 1968 is only too apparent. Who among us has not
hoped against hope that these twelve years had worked a
change for the better in the minds of the Soviet leadership?
Surely there were grounds for believing that as the Stalin
156., Following the Bratislava meeting, nothing extraera receded year by year the leaders in Moscow would
ordinary took place for nineteen days. Then, last night, the
shake off the political fears and frenzies of the past, would
blow fell. Armed forces of the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, East
cease to hear the voice of the enemy in every free Germany, Hungary and Poland streamed acrossthe Czech
expression of opinion, and would stop demanding slavish borders in a display of massive and indeed overwhelming
conformity as the price of friendship. But all these hopes / power. Millions of leaflets were dropped on the streets of
now appear shattered by the invasion of Czechoslovakia, by
Prague and other Czechoslovak cities. A dummy Czecho
its own WarsawPact allies led by the Soviet Union. Clearly,
Slovak radio station and even a puppet newspapernamed
allies of the Soviet Union live under a harsh and simple
Mtavu suddenly sprang into action. It was a textbook
code: Conform or perish.
exercise in stealth and sneak attack, complete with the
15 1. The question before us tonight is a vital one that has ! trappings of psychological and political warfare.
haunted mankind through the ages: Will the relations
between men and nations be governed by the rule of main
157. It must certainly have taken weeks to prepare this
large-scale operation and to set it into motion. This would
force and of rigid ideological conformity, or will they be
indicate that the Soviet leaders who met and embraced
governed by rules of fair play and tolerance which find
their Czechoslovak party comrades at Ciema and B&lava
their highest expression in the Charter of the United
Nations?
in the last days of July and the first days of August msY
well already have been planning the invasion asa last resort
152. This is all that the people of Czechoslovakia and their
in case the leadership in Prague did not Yield to brutal
Government have been seeking in these past few months.
threats. The hand that so warmly embraced the Czeche.
slovak leaders concealed a dagger. And now that daggerhas
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Heventh Session,
struck.
Plenary Meetings, 669th meeting.
16

158. Now, of course, there is a rationale for what the
Soviet Union has done. There is always a rationale in such
cases. For many weeks the Soviet bloc press poured forth
evident fantasies, unsupported by a single fact, to the effect
that Czechoslovakia WAS the target of dark plots for a
counter-revolution from the West. When the signal for
invasion was given yesterday, the Soviet press agency Tass
picked up this theme in its official statement, saying that
the threat in Czechoslovakia was one of “counterrevolutionary forces which have entered into a collusion
with foreign forces hostile to socialism”. It is the same old,
stale hobgoblin of communist propaganda-the arch-fiend
of imperialism-and I sometimes think that the Soviet
Mission must maintain a machine which simply inserts the
word “imperialism” every four lines in all the speechesthat
my colleague from the Soviet Union makes. I suspect that
the Moscow propagandists who have had to resort to it
once again must blush with embarrassment.

freedom, has been squashedunder the heel of Moscow. This
has been done without the knowledge, and against the will
of the people of Czechoslovakia and their Government. It
wasplanned in secret,at a time whenthe public air wasfull
of smiles and embraces. It wasa grossact of perfidy. It is
contrary to every canon of international law. It shouId be
universally and rightly condemned by world opinion, no
matter where in the world it occurs,
165. The ravaging of Czechoslovakia that we have witnessed is, of course, not evidence that, by nature, the
people of the Soviet Union and its four Eastern European
,$lies are any more aggressive than anyone else. It is
irrefutable ‘evidence, however, that the harassedand nervous leaders of the Soviet Union and its four Eastern
European allies fully realize that the brand of communism
they insist on maintaining in their own territories is
incapable of surviving in an atmosphere where there is even
the most rudimentary of fundamental human freedoms, It
is further evidence, reinforcing that which the world
witnessed in the Posnar?riots, in the Hungarian rebellion in
1956 and in the obscene reality of the Berlin Wall, that the
communist system is, in short, a fungus that will die once it
is exposed to the sunlight of freedom. And they know it. It
can live only in the dark, only in the dark of ignorance and
repression.

159. But there is more. We find in this same Tass
statement an assertion that the armed invasion wascarried
out because “the party and Government leaders of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic have asked the Soviet
Union and other allied States” for this kind of assistance.In
short, this is no invasion; it is a fraternal helping hand. That
is what Moscow saysit is,
160. That is also what Moscow said in November 1956,
when the Hungarian nation was dragged backinto subjugation by Soviet tanks.

166. This is a sad conclusion-sad for all of us, sad in its
implications for the future. As far as my country and
people are concerned, this tragedy is particularly grievous
not only in itself but for the shadow it casts on the future
of world peace. My Government has made clear in many
ways, here in the United Nations and elsewherein recent
years and months, its earnest desire that great-Power
tension should diminish, that the arms race should be
brought under control, and that the foundations of peace in
the world should be more firmly established. HOW severea
blow to these hopes has been dealt in the past twenty-four
hours it is too early yet to tell. But much may depend on
developments in the immediate future. President Johnson
has already spoken for the United States in calling publicly
on the Soviet Union and its associatesin these events “to
withdraw their troops from Czechoslovakia”, and he added
what must surely be in all our minds at this moment: “It is
never too late for reasonto prevail.”

161. But who are these “party and Government leaders”
in Czechoslovakia? I think any of us who listened tonight
to the statements which were read by the Acting Permanent
Representative of Czechoslovakia must realize that they are
either fictional characters or non-entities. There is not a
single name that has been mentioned-unless it is the most
discredited name of all, that of Mr. Novotny, who was
Moscow’s favorite friend in Prague until he was removed
from leadership by his compatriots last January. This is a
vital point,
162. The Soviet armed forces were not invited into
Czechoslovakia by anybody-not by anybody in a position
to speak for the Czech nation or the Czech people. They
are uninvited guests. This fact has been made clear, as I say,
by the statement we have heard tonight, and I need not
dwell on it.

167. Therefore, the United States strongly appeals for
immediate action by the Council, which, under the Charter,
is the body primarily responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is also, as a matter of
reality, a principal instrument by which world public
opinion can be given expression in moments such asthese,
moments of danger and crisis. In both capacities, we who
sit on this Council have a responsibility to act and act
quickly. The invasion of Czechoslovakia casts a shadow
acrossthe world, It says to every small nation which has a
big communist neighbour: When might alone makes right,
you too may be in danger.

163. But what is important to us is not only these
facts-and they are unassailable facts: it is that the Soviet
invasion of Czechoslovakia, supported by several of
Moscow’s obedient Warsaw Pact satellites, including, with
tragic irony, Hungary itself, which certainly should know
better, is contrary to the United Nations Charter, and it is
contrary to all of international law. It is likewise contrary, I
might add, to the terms of a resolution which has been read
here tonight, which wassponsored exclusively by the Soviet
Union itself, and even contrary to the language of the
Warsaw Pact. All of those instruments, all of that language,
has been openly mocked today by the action which has
been taken in the armed invasion of Czechoslovakia.

168. Let us therefore reassertthe law of the Charter and
urgently call upon the Soviet Union, in the interests of that
.world peace to which it so frequently appeals, to remove its
troops from Czechoslovak soil and to ceaseinterference in
that country or anywhere else in a manner contrary to

164. A small independent nation, seeking once again the
simple right to assert its own national personality and
17

I
I

have embarked and withdraw all their forces from Czecho.
Slovakia forthwith and without delay.

those international principles of freedom, sovereignty and
self-determination on the integrity of which the peace of
the world depends.

173. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated fimrz French): It
was with pained surprise and emotion that the French
Government and French public opinion learned of the grave
events which have just occurred in Czechoslovakia.

169. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): I believe we were all
moved by the ungarnished, factual report of the Acting
Permanent Representative of Czechoslovakia based upon
the statements of the President of the Czechoslovak
Republic and of the other properly constituted bodies of
the Communist Party and State organs of Czechoslovakia.
In reply to Mr. Muzak and, through him, to the people of
Czechoslovakia, I would like to tell what the Canadian
Government’s response wasto the deplorable events in his
country in the last twenty-four hours, as expressed by the
Foreign Minister of Canada, The Honourable ‘Mitchell
Sharp. This is what he said:

174. With surprise, because after the Ciema and Bratislava
Conferences an agreement seemed to have been reached
between the Czechoslovak Government and the Govern.
ments of the neighbouring socialist countries, and the
misunderstandings which may have arisen seemed to have
been dispelled. Nothing led us to foresee, and obviously
nothing can justify, the military coup just carried out by
the Governments of Moscow, Warsaw, Budapest and Sofia
and the P.mkow authorities.

“The Canadian Government views the invasion of
Czechoslovakia with shock and dismay. We condemn this
use of force. All Canadians feel the deepest concern for
the courageous people of Czechoslovakia in this hour of
trial.

175. With emotion, because this coup by force of arms
represents open intervention in the internal affairs of s
State, occupation of its territory, an infringement of its
independence and of the right of peoples to self-determina.
tion. It constitutes a violation of the norms of international
law and of the Charter of the United Nations, The emotion
of the French Government and the French people is all the
more understandable when we recall that Czechoslovakiais
a friendly nation linked for centuries to France by many
cultural and sentimental ties.

“The invasion and occupation of Czechoslovakia constitute a flagrant breach of the principle of non-intervention
to which the Soviet Union itself professesto subscribe. It
is also a tragedy for all peoples who prize human freedom
and national independence and I am confident that its
significance will not be lost on the people of Eastern
Europe, and even the Soviet Union.

176. This armed intervention appears all the more deplor.
able to us because it reveals a situation which we had hoped
and believed belonged to the past. It shows that the
Government of Moscow has not dissociated itself, as wehad
hoped, from the policy of blocs which was unfortunately
imposed on Europe as a consequence of the Yalta Agree
ment. That policy could not and cannot lead to anything
but international tension, and this new event threatens to
give still further proof of this.

I am sure that all of us will be anxious to keep in
mind our ultimate goal of seeking a durable East-West
accommodation, but no one can doubt that the Soviet
occupation of Czechoslovakia constitutes a serious setback to a rational dialogue . . .“.
“

.

.

I

170. It was in pursuance of this official position of the
Canadian Government that the Canadian delegation has
associated itself with bringing this vital matter to the
Council and seeking its prompt and serious consideration.

177. AS is known, France, which did not participate in
these Yalta agreements, does not adopt arid cannot approve
such a policy, which is incompatible with the rights of
peoples to self-determination.

171. The representative of the Soviet Union has endeavoured in his statement to portray the Soviet intervention in
Czechoslovakia as an exercise of the right of self-defence.
But surely this is the essential point with which we are
concerned in this Council. There is no evidence that we can
see that the Government of Czechoslovakia, headed by
President Svoboda, Prime Minister Cernik, and the Party
Secretary, Mr. Dubcek, made any request whatsoever for
the sort of defence which the Soviet Union and its allies
have seen fit to offer to and impose upon a fraternal
socialist State. In fact, I submit that this claim has been
specifically contradicted by the Deputy and Acting Permanent Representative of Czechoslovakia to this Council. And
perhaps I might be permitted to remind the Ambassador of
the Soviet Union that fraternity has traditionally been
associated with the concepts of liberty and equality.

178. Finally, France deplores these events all the more
inasmuch as they are of such a nature as to run counter to
the easing of tension in Europe which my country hasbeen
particularly concerned to encourage, which it resolutety
practises, and towards which it endeavours to lead the other
nations.
179. It was natural, it was inevitable that such events
should have been raised in the Security Council. The
military action which has just been carried out by the
Governments of Moscow, Warsaw, Sofia, Budapest and the
Pankow authorities is obviously contrary to the aims and
principles of our Charter which, in Article 1, paragraph2
provides for the development of “friendly relations among
nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples . . .,” and which enjoins
upon the Members of the Organization to “refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independenceof
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
Purposes of the United Nations”.

172. We must move quickly in this situation. We must
insist, as indeed the representative of Czechoslovakia has
suggested through the statement of his Government, that
the Soviet Union and its allies desist immediately from the
armed intervention in Czechoslovak affairs on which they
18

180. The French Government hopes that the abovementioned Governments will immedi;ately withdraw their
troops from Czechoslovakia, put an end to their unjustified
intervention, cease trying to impose a change of government on the Czechoslovak people, and allow the latter
freely to determine its own future.

Affairs of States and the Protection of their Independence
and Sovereignty. This declaration (resolution 2131 (XX)/
states the following:
“No State has the right to intervene, directly or
indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the internal or
external affairs of any other State. Consequently, armed
intervention and all other forms of interference or
attempted threats against the personality of the State or
against its political, economic and cultural elements, are
condemned.”

181, Mr. MELLBIN
(Denmark): First of all, I wish to
thank the Deputy Permanent Representative of Czechoslovakia
for his sober and moving statements made in this
meeting and based upon declarations emanating from the
lawful Czechoslovak authorities. In doing so, I nourish no
sinister intentions, imperialist or otherwise. It is simply an
expression of sympathy from one small European country
to another European country, concerned about its freedom
and independence.

187. It seems to me that this is very clear language; no
State has the right to intervene for any reason whatever.
There are no exceptions, not one single exception which
could be invoked to justify the armed assault on Czechoslovakia. The plain fact is that this action is not only
unjustified, it is inexcusable, And it will impose upon
Czechoslovakia and its people sufferings and perhaps
tragedy a

182. When the shocking news reached Denmark that
Czechoslovakia had been invaded and occupied by the
amied forces of the Soviet Union, Poland, Hungary,
Bulgaria and the Soviet Zone of Germany, the Danish
Government issued a declaration which in substance reads
as follows: The events in Czechoslovakia last night must
arousedeep concern also in Denmark. By all freedom-loving
peoples these events must be considered a tragedy. We
followed the developments in Czechoslovakia with expectation, confident that they would lead to a further thaw of
frozen fronts which could give us hope of further steps on
the road towards a dhente.

188. The Government of Denmark has played a most
active role in the efforts to bring about a dttente in Europe,
Therefore, our disappointment is great. What has happened
today can only poison the atmosphere and the political
climate in Europe and indeed beyond that coritinent.
189. We hope that the deliberations on this matter may be
brought to a speedy conclusion, corresponding to the
seriousnessand the urgency of the situation. We think that
in order to live up to its responsibility, it is a prerequisite
that the Security Council should call upon the Government
of the Soviet Union and those of its allies which are
involved in the intervention in Czechoslovakia to desist
forthwith from this intervention and to withdraw all their
forces without delay from the territory of Czechoslovakia.

183. The military action against Czechoslovakia undertaken last night is a serious blow to all those positive forces
at work all over the world which hope for a detente, for
increased freedom for all peoples and for a gradual
rapprochement between East and West.
184. Those were the terms, highly responsible and adequate, I would venture to say, in which my Government
expressedits view of what has happened in Czechoslovakia.
And I wish to assure you that the people of Denmark
stands firmly and united behind its Government in this
matter.

190. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): It is no wonder that the
Western Powers are trying to gain as much political profit as
possible by raising this question very hastily here in the
Security Council and that they press for a discussion of this
matter. One can understand the United States representative and some others-that they are happy that this time
they have a chance .to divert the attention of th.e Council
from many deliberations, many issues here in the United
Nations, in which they were the focus of attention for their
support of the Israeli aggression, for their support of the
exploitation of the people of Rhodesia and Namibia, and a
good number of other issues.

185. The intervention by the Soviet Union and certain of
its allies in the internal affairs of Czechoslovakiais without
any justification. The Government of the Soviet Union and
those allies claim that their intervention has taken place at
the request of the Czechoslovak people. There is no
evidence to substantiate such assertions, On the contrary
they are belied by a number of irrefutable facts, among
them most recently and, I would say, most strongly by the
declarations contained in the statement of the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Czechoslovakia in this very
meeting of the Security Council. To our mind, what has
happened is a flagrant violation of the most elementary
rights of Czechoslovakia, its Government and its people.

191, This situation is a very serious one, and I must state
that the whole issue is being used for propaganda purposes
mainly by the United States. The United States representative made a number of references to events in Hungary in
1956. He failed to mention that those events were
influenced to a very large extent by the forces-subversive
forces-of the West, and at that time they also tried to
capit&ze on that issue. The United States representative
referred to the “regime” established after the Soviet
intervention in Hungary, but that “regime” to which he
referred has diplomatic relations with the United States and
an American ambassador is in Huhgary. For the last twelve
years, I think that the record of the Hungarian Government
speaks for itself.

186. The armed intervention in Czechoslovakia is contrary
to international law and morality and certainly to the good
order of international behaviour. It violates the Charter of
the United Nations, the principles for which this Organization stands and, among other things, the Declaration
adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth session
on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention in the Domestic
19

198. However, inasmuch as this question has nevertheless
become the object of examination in the Council, we
intend to give a clear-cut and detailed presentation of the
facts concerning the events inCzechoslovakia and around
that country, as well as the position of the Soviet
Government in connexion with these events. Of course, we
shall speak plainly and call a spade a spade, especially ia
view of the torrent of slander and insinuations with which
the new American representative to the Security Council
has spoken here.

192. Therefore it is not very fortunate, from the point of
view even of the United States, to raise this issue now here.
But if we talk of 1956, I would like to state that the
Hungarian counter-revolution in 1956 gave US a lesson, and
certain developments in Czechoslovakia concerned us.
193. The Bratislava statement of six nations’ COmiIUniSt
parties declared that the defence of the socialist achievements is the common causeof the socialist countries, and it
is an international obligation for all of US. The decision to
use our forces certainly was not a very easy one. Our
political leaders are not so trigger-happy as those in other
countries. It will be proven that this action now will help
not only the Czechoslovak people and the commonwealth
of the socialist countries, but also world peace.

l99. The stinking breath of the cold war exuded from ins
statement and, naturally, the Soviet delegation will not
leave his statement unanswered.
200. It is well known that after the end of the Second
World War and the defeat of the Hitlerite invades
occupying an enormous part of Europe, the Czechoslovak
people decided once and for all to free itself of capitalist
exploitation and ties with foreign monopolies, to establish
its own independent people’s State, and to devote its forces
to the building of socialism.

194. The tone of the statement of the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Czechoslovakia and the tone of the
statement of the United States representative are quite
opposite. It seems to us that the Government of the United
States is now trying to make some political capital and with
this hasty action could even deepen the crisis further, which
will not serve the causeof international peace and security.

201. By carrying out the positive objectives of socialist
construction in close fraternal co-operation with the other
socialist States, the Czechoslovak people, following this
course, has achieved splendid successeswhich are widely
acknowledged throughout the world. And no matter what
slanderous statements the American representative makes
here, saying that Czechoslovakia has supposedly been in
bondage to Moscow for twenty years, he will not succeedin
drawing attention from these great successesachieved by
the Czechoslovak people during the existence of socialist
construction, in these twenty heroic years..A new statehood was created in Czechoslovakia; the Czechoslovak
people was given every opportunity for the political and
economic strengthening of its country, for the development
of its creative initiatives. Czechoslovakia entered the world
socialist community of States as an equal partner.

195. There were some other allegations concerning my
country and I reserve the right to speak in detail later
regarding them.
196. The PRESIDENT: As I have no speakers on the list,
and although I intend to addressthe Council at a later stage
of our proceedings, I hope that, speaking asthe representative of BRAZIL, I may be allowed to bring to the attention
and consideration of the Council an appeal made today by
the President of the Republic of Brazil. It is as follows:
“The invasion of Czechoslovakia and the occupation of
its territory by forces of socialist countries under the
leadership of the Soviet Union constitute a graveattempt
against the freedom and the sovereignty of the CzechoSlovak people and frontally violates the fundamental
norms of behaviour among States, contained in the
Charter of the United Nations.

202. Obviously, this development of the Czechoslovak
people and this country, its determination to rid itself once
and for all of the chains of capitalism aroused and continue
to arouse the frenzied rage of the imperialist powersand
prompted their efforts, in collaboration with the remnants
of internal reaction, to divert the Czechoslovak people from
their chosen course, to wrest Czechoslovakia from the
world socialist system and return it to the bosom of the
so-called Western world.

“The efforts towards the strengthening of international
peace and security, which lately appeared to be so
promising, are thus damaged by the disrespect to the
fundamental rights of a people.
“The Brazilian Government deplores and condemns this
attempt perpetrated against Czechoslovakia and, inspired
by the lofty sentiments of peace and harmony among
nations which are so dear to our people, makes an earnest
appeal for the cessation of interventionist activities in
that country.”

203. Who does not know what “benefits” to the people,
-especially the people engaged on the road of socialist
construction, the road of free creative’life without exploitas
tion, without the domination of monopolies, without the
presence of the rich and the richest, such as takes place in
the United States, without the debasement of man by man,
without racial discrimination,-what “benefits” go with the
notorious imperialist way of life.

197. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
porn Russian); The Soviet delegation has
already had occasion to declare the fictitiousness and
groundlessness of the proposal to involve the Security
Council in an examination of the question of the situation
in Czechoslovakia, since this is a purely internal affair of
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic itself, and the common
business of its allies through the socialist community and
the WarsawTreaty.
(translated

204. Mr. Ball dislikes the word “imperialism”, but this
word is used all over the world, it is found in all the world’s
languages, of which I believe there are over 2,800 by
linguistic scholars’ reckoning, and imperialism is ahays
imperialism everywhere. And everywhere the people cum
20

American imperialism. Whether the American representative likes it or not, such are the facts of life today. The
notorious American way of life brings with it social and
racial inequality, the merciless extraction of profits and
superprofits in the interests of the gigantic octopuses of
the monopolistic concerns which a book recently published
in America calls “The rich, the richest, the super-richest”.
Therefore no slander and insinuation against the lofty, new,
noble, progressive social system of communism by the
representatives of imperialism and monopoly capital can
diminish the great historical significance of Communism
and socialism.
205. The rabid spite of imperialism and its representatives
against communism is understandable, but the history of
mankind develops not according to their will, but to its
own objective laws and discards all that is obsolete,
including imperialism. All these ill-willed attempts grew
particularly virulent in relation to Czechoslovakia recently,
with the result that within the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic and around it a real and highly dangerous tension
was created, open manoeuvres began to be carried out
aimed at liquidation of the existing socialist system in
Czechoslovakia and doing away with the State order
established by the people of Czechoslovakia and secured in
its constitution.
206. The Soviet Union has irrefutable data that the
threads of the events occuring in Czechoslovakia reach
beyond that country’s borders. In fact, a dangerous
conspiracy of the internal and foreign forces of reaction is
taking place aimed at restoration of the order brought
down by the popular revolution. As I have already pointed
out, the same line is being followed here as that which we
see in Vie&Nam where American imperialism-I
repeat:
imperialism-is
trying by force to crush the Viet-Namese
people’s struggle for national liberation. This is also
apparent from the events in the Middle East where the
American imperialist line is being pursued, where it
attempted at the hands of Israel in last year’s aggressionto
liquidate the progressive regimes of advanced Arab States.

security of the socialist States and constitutes a threat to
the general peace. Determination was unanimously expressed to reject any attempts to revise the results of the
Second World War and disturb the borders established in
Europe. In connexion with the continuing aggressive
activity of the imperialist forces of the United States, West
Germany and other countries with their persistent attempts
to weaken the socialist community, the Communijt party
and Government of the Czechoslovak Republic together
with the other participants in the Bratislava Conference
considered it necessary to stress once more the special
significance of the Warsaw Treaty which wasand remains a
powerful factor in the peace and security of the peoples of
Europe.
209. The Czechoslovak leadership regardsthis Treaty as an
insuperable obstacle for those who would like to revise the
results of the Second World War, asa sure means of defense
of the achievements of socialism, the sovereignty and the
independence of the fraternal states. Obviously, the latest
events in Czechoslovakia have created not only a danger to
the existing socialist social system in that country, but also
a direct threat of upsetting the established balance of forces
in Europe in favour of imperialism, which would inevitably
not only undermine European peace, but would also
menace international security as a whole. In view of this
direct threat to the legitimate authority in the country, a
group of members of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, of the Government,
and of the National Assembly appealed to the allied States,
including the Soviet Union, with a pressing request that
they render direct, immediate assistance to the CzechoSlovak people, including assistanceby armed forces.
210. We have just received the appeal of this group, which
reads as follows :
‘Citizens of Czechoslovakia, workers, peasants, representatives of the working intelligentsia, men and women,
youth;
“TO all, regardless of political affiliation, nationality,
creed and social status, to all who cherish our socialist
motherland and to whom it is truly a motherland, we
appeal to all of you at this moment when the country’s
fate is being decided, at a moment which will forever
remain a crucial moment in our history and our future
socialist and democratic development, a moment when
for us there arises the question of the values won by our
efforts of twenty years, our sacrifices, our labour, a
moment when everything is at stake.

207. The peoples and Governments of the Socialist States
have closely followed the situation taking shape in the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic in connexion with the
combined conspiracy of internal and foreign reaction. The
events in and around that country have frequently been the
subject of an exchange of views among the leaders of the
fraternal socialist countries, including the leaders of
Czechoslovakia. In the course of these conferences the
Communist Party and the Government leadership of
Czechoslovakia-as is apparent from the signed Bratislava
Declaration of the Communist and workers’ parties of the
socialist countries (which the American representative liked
so much that he has already quoted it for the third
time)-were concerned by the serious danger of reactionary
acts aimed against the Czechoslovak people and their
socialist State.

“We appeal to you at a time when the results of our
socialist system are threatened by forces which abuse the
progressive steps initiated by the Party itself at the
January plenary meeting of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, and sincerely implemented since then by the Party in the interests of
achieving genuine democracy and genuine humaneness,
the ideals dear to all honest citizens of our country.

208. Together with the other Communist parties and
Governments of the Warsaw Treaty nations, the CzechoSlovak leadership noted, as indicated in that Declaration,
that the reactivation of the forces of revanchism, militarism
and neo-Nazism in West Germany directly affects the

“At the Party’s initiative we embarked in January upon
a new course of seeking and finding a new look in
socialism which would suit the way of life and thought of
21

our people and within which all the perspectives of
society and the individual would be linked. The Party
openly criticized past mistakes. It emphatically dissociated itself from the period of the regime of personal
power which had actually deformed the humane and
democratic nature of socialism. With the active participation and support of all honest-minded patriots it resolutely entered a new period with the most honest
intentions to remedy the mistakes of the past and to
create the conditions for a full-blooded, rich and happy
life in our country.
“The fundamental civil rights, which have always been
vitally associated with our people’s concepts of democracy and humanism, were again restored in the ideas and
progressive spirit of a programme of action, that long
term platform of our socialist development programme
which has received the unprecedented msss support of
our people.
“Above all, this unanimous support confirmed the
justice, strength and magnetism of our new course. This
fact proved, in particular, that despite all the shortcomings of the preJanuary period, the ideas of socialism
had become deeply rooted in our people; that our people
regards socialism as the natural medium of its life; and
that our people’s profound aspiration to rights and justice
found its true expression precisely in the progressive
concepts outlined by the January plenary meeting of the
Central Committee. With the aid of these ideas, society
was drawn out of a state of unwholesome indifference,
and the gates were thereby fully opened to a powerful
current of wholesome untapped initiative. Our people
passed this historical test brilliantly and once again
proved its high maturity.
“Unfortunately, this period of search and transformation of our society wasabused for their own purposes, for
active entry into the political arena, by forces which had
waited for many years for such a propitious moment to
discredit the party and challenge its political and moral
right to guide society. These right wing forces were
actually met halfway by certain forces within the Party
and in Party bodies who thus showed themselves to be in
contradiction with the principles and aims of the Party
and the ideas of proletarian internationalism. Together
they directed their joint forces towards a systematic
violation of the constitutional nature of our political
reform and concentrated on a fight against the positive
efforts of the Party and the State organs to achieve the
goals set in January.
“They organized a smear campaign designed to compromise individual functionaries, including some from the
new leadership of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, who had had the courage to draw attention
publicly to the threatening danger and to see the real
situation in all its complexity, They violated put&z order,
they aroused base nationalist passions; they did not even
disdain slander against our Czechoslovak socialist motherland, slander against the honest labour of our people, our
Party, the army, and our security agencies; they demanded changes in our foreign policy. This smear
campaign of theirs even went so far as to attack the

Soviet Union, particularly in connexion with the staff
exercises of the armed forces of the Warsaw Treaty, and
also reached the point of attacking our friend&p with
the socialist countries. In doing so they created an
atmosphere entirely unacceptable to socialist countries,
“The Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, the Govern.
ment of the Republic and the National Front maintained
exceptional patience and understanding. However, it was
emphasized more than once, especially at the May
plenary meeting, that the first and most immediate task
was ,to thwart the plans of the rightwing anti-socialist
forces; to prevent any false step from placing the
programme of action in jeopardy; to ensure that the
question of the future Party line be settled not by t&e
advocates of extremist views, but by the sound, progres.
sive nucleus of the Party; to give publicly full support to
the Party and state machinery, the army, the security
agencies, the procurator’s office, the judiciary, the pco.
ple’s militia-in short, to consolidate the situation.
“However, the right-wing extremist forces, who re.
garded this magnanimity and patience and truly demo.
cratic way of settling a serious political problem on the
Party’s part not as its strength but as its weakness,further
intensified their activity. In Prague, as is well know,
during spontaneous meetings attended by many thoo.
sands, matters came to the point of gross indecencies
when various elements attacked the Party and insulted its
representatives whom they themselves repeatedly obliged
to participate in these meetings. In the centre of the city
a public campaign was started to collect signatures ia
favour of liquidating the people’s militia. Communists
who expressed their point of view in the discussionsat
these spontaneous street meetings were rudely silenced
and physical force was frequently used against them.
Many of those who signed the letter at the Auto-Praha
works were persecuted in a shameful manner, even to the
point of dismissal from their jobs. The press continues,
although indirectly, publicly to defame leading functionaries by other more sophisticated means, and this
organized subversive activity reached its climax in the last
few days: a group of right-wing extremists quite openly
attacked 4he premises of the Secretariat of the Central
Committee of the Czechoslovak Communist Party in
Prague. Thus, the extremist forces have not heeded the
Party’s appeal, but have further intensified their subvep
sive activity, attempting to provoke conflict in our
country regardless of the consequences. Thus a situation
has arisen in which the obligations deriving from the
Bratislava Declaration of six fraternal communist and
workers’ parties, which also bears the signature of our
Party’s representatives, are being publicly, systematically
violated.
“Citizens! All that our working people have created in
the last twenty years, all the achievements of socirdism
are at stake today. Not only our path of socialist
democracy, on which we embarked in January, but the
very foundation of socialism, our Republic itself is placed
in jeopardy.
“Aware of our supreme responsibility toward out
people, fiRed with true patriotic feeling, with the feel@

22

of international socialist solidarity, aware of our international commitments, we have assumed the initiative of
rallying all patriotic forces in the name of our socialist
future and our homeland, The danger of fratricidal strife,
which has been prepared by the reaction and which
would be a tragic repetition of Lipan (this refers to the
battle of Lipan in 1434) has confronted us with the need
to make the historic decision of appealing to the Soviet
Union and to the other fraternal socialist countries for
assistance. Our allies have granted us this assistance, as
they did in 1945 when it was a question of our very
existence.

uprising of 1945, and with the revolutionary appeal of
February 1948: ‘Forward, not a step back! ’ We shall
guard as the apple of our eye our fraternal bonds of
alliance and friendship with the Soviet Union, its people,
the peoples of all the countries of the world socialist
community, and with all the forcesof peace, democracy,
progress and socialism-these values which guarantee us
our self-reliance, independence, national and State sovereignty, without which we should again come face lo face
with a new Munich and with those who causedit in 1938.
“Czechoslovakia can only develop as a socialist country,
and,,as an inseparable, organic part of the socialist
community. Its strength and stability constitute the bases
for the future prospectsof the international revolutionary
movement. Any weakening or breach of the socialist
camp would deal the causeof revolutionary progressand
socialism an Inconceivable blow.

“We call on all citizens to give every support to the
military units of our allies. After the danger of a
reactionary coup has been eliminated the allied troops
will leave Czechoslovak territory. All foreigners who
happen to be on Czechoslovak territory at present may
continue to enjoy our hospitality; their security and
immunity will be fully guaranteed provided they abide by
our laws.

“We appeal to you, distinguished citizens, fully confident that by common action we shall block the danger
that threatens, that by our common efforts we shall
overcome the present difficult situation and ensure a
happy present and future for our homeland and our next
generation,

“Guided by a feeling of profoundest responsibility
towards our people, towards our working class, towards
the peoples of our country, towards the international
working class and the world communist movement, at
this crucial moment we appeal to you, citizens of the
Republic, to rally around the realistically-minded core of
the Party which cherishes the cause of socialism, progress,
the new post-January path, which holds dear the cause of
friendship with the people of the Soviet Union and of the
other fraternal countries,

“We appeal to all of you, from the greenhouse of the
Sumava mountains to the Cierna Nad Tissov, from
Karkonosze to the shore of the Danube, to realize the
magnitude and seriousnessof these days when everything
we associate with the meaning of ‘democracy’ and
‘socialism’ is at stake, to recognize your responsibility and
maintain the unity and mutual confidence with which we
must enter the days ahead.

“Believing firmly in your common sense, maturity and
political consciousness,we urge you, all honest citizens of
our homeland, workers, peasants, representatives of the
Intellectuals, men, women, youth, the wholesome forces
of the National Front, servicemen, workers in the security
agencies, Communists and non-Communists, all honest
people, to prevent by your concrete deeds and concrete
actions any further onslaught by any reactionary forces,
be they outside or within the Party. Do not permit any
spontaneous outbursts, acts of destruction, anarchy;
maintain calm and order.

“Our guiding principles are and shall continue to be
farsightedness, order, progress, truth, and the socialist
perspective, State sovereignty and firm solidarity.
“Long live and flourish democratic socialist Czechoslovakia!
“(signed) Group of members of the Central Committee

of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia,
the Government and the National Assembly,
who have appealed for assistance to the
Governments and Communist Parties of the
fraternal countries.”

“We reject application of the pre-January policy. We
shall not permit any sign of a return to the self-discredited pre-January methods which have been decisively
rebuffed by the overwhelming majority of .our people,
and which placed the leading role of the Party and the
socialist gains of our working people in jeopardy and
helped create a situation really fraught with conflict
involving the use of force. On the contrary, we wish to
defend and fully implement the progressive ideas of
January which are leading us to a really modem,
regenerated, humane socialist society, the society envisaged by the founders of Marxism-Leninism and th,osewho
began to carry them out after the October victory.

211. This is the appeal constituting the basis for extending
collaboration to the Czechoslovak people. We are convinced
that nobody except, of course, the imperialists, can
entertain the slightest doubt as to the right of the
Government and the wholesome forces of a sovereign
socialist State to appeal for assistanceto its allies, to whom
Czechoslovakia is bound by the WarsawTreaty and other
existing treaty commitments. In connexion with this appeal
by Czechoslovakia, the Soviet Government and the Govemments of the allied countries-Bulgaria, the German Dem.
ocratic Republic, Hungary and Poland-, following the
principles of inviolable friendship and co.operation, and in
conformity with the above-mentioned treaty obligations;
decided to respond to the fraternal Czechoslovak people
and give it the necessaryassistance.

“We are and shall be loyal to the end to our progressive
national traditions associated with the fiftieth anniversary
of the Republic, with the precepts of the anti-fascist
struggle, national and democratic values, with the traditions of the Slovak national uprising, the ‘Prague May
23

212. The decision by Czechoslovakia and the action of the
Soviet Government and those of the other socialist coun
tries which are Czechoslovakia’s allies is wholly in accord.
ante with the right of States to individual and collective
self-defence provided for in the treaties of alliance con
eluded between the fraternal socialist countries, and in
conformity with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter. This action is the expression of the firm determination of the fraternal countries to oppose any external threat
by their inviolable solidarity and comradely mutual assistance.
213. We declare here with all our determination that
nobody will ever be allowed to wrest so much as a single
link from the community of socialist States which hasbeen,
is and shall remain an unshakeable bastion against all and
any imperialist attacks, conspiracies, provocations and a
firm bulwark of the right of all peoples to struggle for their
freedom, and their national and social independence.
214. As is well known, the Soviet Government has
officially announced that the Soviet troops will immediately be withdrawn from Czechoslovakia as soon as the
existing threat to the achievements of socialism in that
country, the threat to the security of the countries of the
socialist community, is eliminated and the legitimate
authorities consider that the further presence of these
military units is no longer necessarythere.
215. Thus I stress once again that the measures taken are
not directed against any State, nor against the independence and sovereignty of Czechoslovakia or of any other
country, they are in no way a threat to anybody. In no way
do they infringe upon anybody’s state interests; they serve
only the objectives of peace and are dictated by a concern
for its consolidation.
216. We are firmly, completely convinced that had there
not been a firm and timely rebuff of those who are making
a deadly attempt to destroy the socialist achievements of
the Czechoslovak people, the aggressiveforces would only
have been encouraged to new actions against the peoples
who have already attained or are struggling for their
independence and freedom. The measures taken by the
socialist States which are Czechoslovakia’s allies were taken
at the request of Czechoslovakia itself, and in accordance
with the interests of countries developing on the soil of the
ruins of the colonial system of imperialism; they perform
the task of strengthening the independence and sovereignty
of all non-aligned countries, safeguarding them against the
attacks and plots of imperialism. By rendering assistanceto
the Czechoslovak people the allied socialist States are
performing their international duty not only towards the
fraternal Czechoslovak people but towards all forces acting
for peace, democracy, and the national liberation of
peoples.

the responsibility certain imperialist States bear for the
encouragement of internal counter-revolution in Czcho.
Slovakia; for the attempts to contribute to forcible char,@
of the socialist system and statehood established there: [cl
the obvious desire to bring back the old order by aI and
any means, and to deprive the Czechoslovak people oj
those real liberties it has achieved in the course of iu
socialist revolution.
218. In this connexion we can not fail to note that, so far,
the official figures and Governments of these countries IrsbY
pretended that they are not involved in this matter.
However, there is a distinct impression that a remarkabIp
strict division of roles is being effected between the offi&l
government organs and those of the mass information md
propaganda media. The former have emphatically tried ril
dissociate themselves from the slightest suggestion that thV
participated in the incitement of anti-socialist elements &
Czechoslovakia, and have avoided commenting on h
events in any way. The latter, that is, the propaganda
organs, assumed the function of launching a vast ar-,u.
communist, anti-Soviet campaign; everyone of you here ha
seen this with his own eyes in the pages of the America?
newspapers, on television, and has heard it on the r&c.
The whole powerful arsenal of misinformation, slander, &
falsification has been employed in the presentation arjj
interpretation of the events in Czechoslovakia along a veq
definite line, along the line of incitement to a further attaik
on the socialist order in Czechoslovakia.
219. Today we have heard the same kind of falsificaticc
from the American representative here as well, His speech
can only be regarded as an incitement to the anti-socialbr
elements in Czechoslovakia.
220. The hostile attitude to socialist Czechoslovakia a%
the part of the capitalist Powers, all of which beIong to ~clr;
aggressiveNATO bloc (except Paraguay, and France, wIti&
has withdrawn from that bloc’s military orgamzation) ti
well known. And it is precisely under pressure from them,
and above all pressure from the United States, that kkr
so-called Czechoslovak question has been included tinn
1948 on the list of dead questions pending examination by
the Security Council.
221. The United States and its relevant agencies are
exerting every effort to use the events in Czechoslovakisi?
their own interests; they are trying to put anti-socialilr
forces in power in that country. No matter how they may
try to conceal their real aims in their official declaratior%
these aims come to the surface, and none but the bliid ~;gli
fail to perceive them.
222. The statement made as early as 28 April of dnsYea
by Eugene Rostow, Under-Secretary of State, who declared
that the United States followed the events in CZ&Z*
Slovakia “with sympathy and hope” can only be termed
open incitement. That was over three months ago.

217. In the light of all these circumstances the question
automatically arises: what motivated those who sponsored
the raising of this question in the Council which, under the
United Nations Charter, is called upon only to consider
such situations as constitute “a threat to peace, any
violation of peace or act of aggression”. Obviously, their
intentions can only be considered as an attempt to shift all

223. Moreover, on 1.5 May, Senator Walter Mondale cf
Minnesota, obviously counting on a rapid victory of
reaction, declared in the Senate: “In recent weeksit la
become clear that Czechoslovakia has taken a remarka%
course. This country needs new contacts with the West.‘l%
24

time has come for the United States to reconsider its
reaction to these changes in Eastern Europe.”
224. Congressman Dante Fascell of Florida stated on
9 May in the House of Representatives: “The Government
of the United States will undoubtedly wish to do everything in its power to encourage these trends towards
liberalization in Czechoslovakia and everywhere in Eastern
Europe. The time is probably approaching when the
President’s proposal for building bridges to the East may be
put in practice.”
225. What bridges? Imperialist bridges. Promises of economic advantages were used openly to encourage internal
reaction in Czechoslovakia. The plans of the American
ruling circles find their frankest expression in the comments
of the American press. Recently, an editorial in The Wall
Street Journal, the organ of large-scale monopoly capital,
stated:
“In terms of the U.S. world-wide struggle against
international Communism throughout the world, the
development of the events in Czechoslovakia is of vital
significance to the interests of the United States. Europe
is logically at the centre of the interests of the United
States abroad, and if real strides were to be made there
towards self-determination in Eastern Europe, this would
be a gain for Washington and a blow to Moscow. This
might change the entire balance of power in Europe.”

23Q. Incentives and promises, incitement and “aid”. The
West German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeiner, of 19
July wrote: “Everything which has given rise to an
impression of participation on our part has been attended
by disastrous consequences. Where essential aid must be
given, it is done as unostentatiously as possible and in every
casethrough the mediacy of West European friends,” Here
is an open admission of aid being given to the reaction in
Czechoslovakia.
231. What has touched off such a heightening of interest
by imperialist circles in Czechoslovakia’s internal affairs, if
not the hope for a political reorientation of that country,
for breaking through the borders of the socialist system in
the centre of Europe? However, Mr. President, the people
who are now pretending-particularly here at this table-to
bum with anxiety over some alleged non-interference in the
affairs of the Czechoslovak State know very well that a
change in the balance of power in Europe would at present
be an extremely serious threat to the security of its peoples.
It could lead to whetting the appetite of the militarist
revanchist elements of West Germany, providing food to
nurture the rebirth of a charge on the East, the “Drang
nach @ten ” of Hitler’s time. As a result, the world might
be drawn into the abyss of even greater trials than those it
was plunged into by German militarism during the last two
world wars.
232. Under these circumstances the Soviet Union and the
other socialist countries, in the interests of their own
security and the maintenance of the general peace, could
not fail to show concern over the safeguarding of Czechoslovakia’s western borders, which are the western borders of
the entire community of socialist countries, of all the
member States of the WarsawTreaty.

226. That’s what Wall Street, monopoly capital, and
imperialism dream of, and it is confirmed by the American
representative’s speech today.
227. The important place assigned to Czechoslovakia in
the so-called “new Eastern policy of the Federal Republic
of Germany” is also well known. This policy is designed to
shatter the unity of the countries of the socialist community, and it pursues the goal of attaining by other means
the revanchist objectives which the West German militarists
are unable to achieve by armed force.

233. The peoples of Eastern Europe suffered too great
bloodshed and heavy losses (the Soviet Union alone lost
twenty million people) during the Second World War
against German fascism to be able to maintain a passive
attitude to the attempts of the imperialists and revanchists
to revise the borders established in post-war Europe. On the
European continent,’ where enormous means of mass
destruction have been stockpiled, the peace and security of
the peoples are maintained thanks above all to the
solidarity, forces, unity and peace-loving policy of the
socialist States. This strength and unity, the fate of peace,
are the common responsibility of all the socialist countries,
of the whole community of these countries including, of
course, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union.

228. The political leaders of West Germany are tying their
hopes and calculations with Increasing frankness to the
possibility of the achievement of a counter-revolutionary
coup in Czechoslovakia. Facts have already been brought
out in the world press indicating direct interference by the
Federal Republic of Germany in the internal affairs of the
Czechoslovak people. The West German ruling circles are
making every effort to warm up the activities of the
internal reaction in Czechoslovakia by their promises of
loans, credits, etc.

234. The progressive forces of Czechoslovakia, as is
obvious from the appeal I have read, are firmly resolved to
continue the course indicated by the Party at the January
plenary meeting of the Central Committee of the Czech@
slovak Communist Party and confirmed by the Bratislava
Conference. This appeal constitutes an important political
document. It has the support of all those who have the
matter of freedom, independence and the sovereignty of
socialist Czechoslovakia at heart.
I

229. The West German leaders, who have always stubbornly refused to recognize the invalidity of the Munich
Pact from the very outset, have now begun to drop
unequivocal hints that, in the event of a change of the
social system in Czechoslovakia, they would be prepared to
extend such recognition. At a press conference in Bonn on
18 June, the Foreign Minister of the German Federal
Republic, Brandt, stressed that it will be “not only
desirable, but also possible in the final analysis to remove
this question (Le., the Munich Pact) from the agenda as not
being at issue from the standpoint of the relations between
the German Federal Republic and Czechoslovakia”.

235. We are confident that the Czechoslovak people, with
the support of the peoples of the fraternal socialist
countries, will be able to oppose the onslaught of internal
25

patent example of open and direct incitement of the
counter-revolutionary elements to new efforts to bring
down the socialist system in Czechoslovakia, to an opea
236. I cannot leave some of the orators who spoke before struggle to seize power; it is the si@al for organizing
bloodshed, for unleashing fratricidal strife in the Czech~a.
me unanswered. First of all, Mr. President, we have listened
very attentively to the statement of the Acting Represen- Slovak Socialist Republic. This statement reeks with a
pathological hatred of communism and socialism. But there
tative of Czechoslovakia who wasinvited, at his request, to
is
nothing surprising in that. After all, who is speaking?
the table of the Security Council.
The representative of large-scale monopoly capital. Canhe
be expected to like communism and socialism, to defend
237. The Soviet delegation would not wish to analyse his
them?
It is quite understandable that his speech describes
statement line by line or argue with him about the texts of
declarations by individual groups of Czechoslovak person- the bloody deeds of the Hungarian counter-revolution, The
alities which he heard on the radio, especially since, as he representative of Hungary gave the American delegatea
said himself, possibly these texts are not entirely accurate fitting answer on that score. And it wasnot fortuitous that
or may be distorted. No, we won’t go into that now. We Ambassador Ball so tenderly recalled the old Czechoslorak
want to draw attention to something else. The statement of I clique of yes-men, which was swept from the political scene
the representative of Czechoslovakia, especially the state- by the Czechoslovak people long ago. Of course, he did not
ment of the President of the Czechoslovak Republic, I like my using the word “imperialism” in my statement. Bur
Ludwfk Svoboda which he read out shows that complex ! I have already pointed out that this word exists in L
languages of all peoples, and often repeated by them witi
processes of an internal order are taking place in that
country, involving many of the figures of the Czechoslovak the addition of the word “American”.
Government, the Party, the Parliament, and the Czecho239. The point, of course, is not my statement, but that
Slovak people. These processesare indeed complex, and the
future direction of the Czechoslovak Socialist Renublic’s ! imperialism is and remains imperialism. And this cank
seen in Viet-Nam, in Africa, in the Middle East, andis
development depends to a great extent on the way they will
conclude. And in order that these processes may be manifest in Czechoslovakia as well. The representative of
concluded in the interests of the Czechoslovak people, its the United States’ position in the discussion of this
question is the best proof of this. Naturally, the imperi&u
freedom, independence, sovereignty, elimination of the
threat of imperialist enslavement, in order that these do not like the fact that the Czechoslovak people and the
processes may conclude in the interests of socialism in
healthy forces of Czechoslovakia wish to remain free,
independent, in collaboration and fraternal unity with the
Czechoslovakia, in the interests of the entire socialist
other socialist forces. As to the fact that external forcesare
community in Eastern Europe, it is extremely important
inciting anti-socialist elements in Czechoslovakia, we pes,
that ,they be allowed to run their course in an atmosphere
of calm, which is what the President of Czechoslovakia is sessvisible confirmation of it in the Tass report we hare
calling for too. But what has this got to do with the
just received, which states:
Security Council and the American delegate here? What
possible relation does the Security Council have to the
“AS reported previously, the Soviet Union and the
internal affairs of Czechoslovakia? The answer, based on
other allied countries are acceding to the request ofstate
the United Nations Charter, Article 2, paragraph 7, can be
leaders of Czechoslovakia for rendering the fratemsl
one only: none. The Security Council has no relation
Czechoslovak people immediate assistance,including aiwhatever to the internal affairs and processesoccurring in
sistance by the armed forces.”
Czechoslovakia. And it is not fortuitous that the representative of Czechoslovakia, speaking here in this room, has 240. The communication then reports the entry of the
not asked the Council to intervene in the internal affairs of
military units of those countries, and that the military units
this country? They can be settled by the Czechoslovak of the Czechoslovak People’s Army are remaining in the
people, the Party, and all the wholesome forces of
areas of their deployment. The population remains calm.
Czechoslovakia, with the support of the fraternal socialist
Many Czechoslovak citizens are expressing their appreciacountries, without the Security Council’s participation and
tion to the soldiers of the allied armies for their tin+
without the “advice” of the American delegate.
arrival in Czechoslovakia to assist in the struggle againstthe
counter-revolutionary forces. At the same time, in Prague
238. Who is it, then, who wants the Security Council,
and other population centres, right-wing anti-socialist ele
despite the Charter, despite the fact that it has no right to
ments are trying to organize hostile attacks against ibe
do so, to interfere nevertheless in Czechoslovakia’sinternal
healthy forces of Czechoslovakia and the allied troops
affairs? And in whose interests is it that there be such which have come to their aid. These hostile activities have
interference? The United States representative’s statement
found expression in organized provocatory speechesin the
has shed full, we might say absolute light on this question.
streets, in the circulation of malicious rumors and false
The whole point of the slanderous, far:fetched statement of
hoods, and the distribution of slanderous leaflets. Inciting
the United States representative, now that certain con- statements have been made by radio, television, and in the
ditions have arisen for reducing the activities of internal and
press. The subversive activities are conducted by the same
external reaction in Czechoslovakia, is to bolster the morale
anti-socialist elements which in recent months have corl~
of the reactionaries, to, give added confidence to the
out daily against the mainstays of socialism in the CXX~O~
counter-revolutionary forces, to show them that they are Slovak Socialist Republic, against the Communist Party Of
not alone, that their protectors are continuing to give them
Czechoslovakia, against friendship with the Soviet Union,
all possible aid. In fact, Ambassador Ball’s statement is a and against friendship with all the other socialist countdt’r.
and foreign reaction successfully, to defend its socialist
system and to strengthen its independent State still further.

26

Behind all this counterrevolutionary activity we can feel
the guiding hand of the imperialist circles, and today the
Security Council has become convinced of this.
241, Resorting to methods of provocation and blackmail,
the anti-socialist elements are trying to spread distrust
among the population towards the aims the fraternal
countries have set in fulfilling their national duty to defend
the socialist achievements in Czechoslovakia. At today’s
meeting of the Security Council new watchwords and
grounds for incitement have been given these anti-socialist
counter-revolutionary elements in Czechoslovakia. Thus,
notwithstanding the clear-cut declaration of the allied
countries that their military units do not mean to interfere
in Czechoslovakia’s internal affairs, rumors are circulating
to thi: effect that the intention is to return former President
A. Novotny to leadership of the country. These same
slanderous fabrications have been repeated here today by
the American delegate as well. At the same time, the
fraternal parties and Governments of the allied countries
have repeatedly expressed their support of the decisions of
the January plenary meeting of the Central Committee of
the Czechoslovak Communist Party, aimed at the consolidation and development of socialism in the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic, the guiding role of the working class and
of its vanguard-the Communist Party. The progressive
forces of Czechoslovakia-as is obvious from the appeal by
a group of members of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, of the Government,
and of the National Assembly of Czechoslovakia, published
today-firmly intend to continue the measures outlined by
the Party at the January plenary meeting of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia.
This appeal, which is an important political document, is
supported by all those who hold dear the cause of the
freedom, independence and sovereignty of socialist Czechoslovakia. All day on 21 August there were broadcasts
throughout Czechoslovakia of the statement by the President of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Ludvik
Svoboda, calling on the people to display reason and calm,
to be aware of their civic responsibilities, and, in the
interests of the Republic, not to permit rash actions.
242. A few words in conclusion. I cannot fail to draw
attention to the slanderous statement made here by the
American delegate with regard to Masaryk. However, this
slander has long since been unmasked by the official organs
and leaders of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. Moreover, this slander has been publicly refuted by Masaryk’s
former secretary, who now lives in London and who makes
no pretence of sympathy for socialism and the Soviet
Union.
243. One remark concerning the statement of the representative of France. If I have understood the interpretation
correctly, he referred to the fact that the policy of blocs in
Europe was thrust upon it by the Yalta Agreement. This is
not in keeping with the facts. At Yalta, agreement was
reached on the creation of the United Nations Organiza
tion, of which we all have the honour of being Members.
This, not the creation of blocs, was one of the significant
decisions of the Yalta Conference, The blocs came later.
And as former Ambassador of the Soviet Union to Great
Britain, I can tell the meeting of the Security Council that

the founder and creator of the blocs himself told me the
reasons for this policy. The eminent political leader of
England, the late Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill, in
his official residence, ChequeIs, told the Soviet Ambassador
that after the Second World War he considered the
development of friendship between Russia and America to
be the most terrible danger to himself and to his country.
That is why he decided to make a speech at Fulton in
January 1946 and explain to the Americans who were, as
he put it then, newcomers to international relations, the
threat to America on Russia’s part, so as to prevent
friendship between the Americans and the Russians. But, he
added, explaining this to the Soviet Ambassador, the
Americans “were carried away too much by my counsels,
and started such a frantic armaments race and such a
stockpiling of gigantic nuclear atomic weaponry that by
now it has become a threat to you, to them, to England, to
the whole world.” These wereliterally the words of the late
Sir Winston Churchill, whom, in my presence in London at
state dinners, high official leaders of England, including the
then Prime Minister, Macmillan, repeatedly termed the
greatest living Englishman of that time. He also said that
the tragedy is that in our time there is no difference
between the front and the rear, there is nowhere to escape.
What Churchill evidently meant wasthat England had often
been saved in the past on its island, that neither Napoleon
nor Hitler could reach. But those times are over and
Churchill, as a great political leader, understood this; that is
why at that time (this was in July 1953) he said he was
developing the idea of a summit meeting. That wasthe first
proposal made concerning a summit meeting. I won’t go
into this in detail, but I have certain information as to why
it wasnot held then but later, in the summer of 1955.
244. That is who started the blocs, who laid their
foundations. Here they were seized on by President Truman
and many others. And I was particularly struck, distinguished colleagues, by the fact that the Fulton speech of
the late Churchill has been quoted by our distinguished
colleague the American delegate in his book The Discipline
of Power as though it were the Bible, and that is dangerous.
Even at the time Churchill himself subjected his position to
criticism, yet Mr. Ball still believes in it today as though it
were the Gospel.
245. Here is the information for the French representative
as to where the blocs started.
246. Mr. BALL (United States of America): As the
representative of the Soviet Union has devoted a great part
of his speech, in fact of his speechestonight to the views
that I have expressed on behalf of my Government, I
should like to exercise the right of reply, but very briefly.
247. The Soviet representative has paid me the compliment of saying that I make an honest effort to carry out
my instructions, and I certainly endeavour to do so. One of
my instructions is to try to understand the position of the
Soviet Union, I have therefore listened with great patience
and attention to the statements of the Soviet representative. They are very impressive statements from a quantitative point of view. They are very impressive also in the
astonishingly wide range of irrelevance which they contain.
From the point of view, however, of trying to find in those

and moving statements which have been made to us thi!
evening by the representative of Czechoslovakia,

statements a coherent justification for the position which
the Soviet Government has taken in its invasion of
Czechoslovakia, I can only distil1 out a few small pearls, but
they seem to add up to the following.

255. I would make only one other comment on the
statements of the representative of the Soviet Union. J
speak with respect of course, but I must say that I regardit
as the height of impudence that the representative of the
Soviet Union, after the evil invasion for which his country
has been responsible, should come here and lecture tom
about Article 2, section 7, of the Charter of the United
Nations dealing with the right of any people to ma&&
their own sovereignty and to order their own affairs.

248. First, that in the view of the Soviet representative
-which I assume is the view of his Government-there is
the apparent assumption that Czechoslovakia either is or
should be a colony of the Soviet Union. I say this in part
because I have been inspired by the long lecture on
imperialism which I received tonight and I have taken it
very much to heart. For what the Soviet representative
describes as an internal matter of Czechoslovakia becomes
for him a matter in which the Soviet Union is not only free
but has some obligation to interfere. Thus, if it is in fact an
internal matter for Czechoslovakia, then I find it very hard
to understand how one reaches this extraordinary conclusion without any request from the Czechoslovak Govemmerit. The Soviet representative has made no attempt at all
that I can find to document the fact that there was any
such request. He has read a very long and somewhat
incoherent statement from a nameless group, but I do not
know who they are and he has not told us. They are
certainly not the Czechoslovak Government and no one can
pretend that they are. So that without any permission or
request from the Czechoslovak Govemmeht this interference, this invasion did take place, Unless one assumessome
colonial hypothesis on the part of the Soviet representative,
I find it impossible to understand the very tortured logic
which he has put forward.

256. I would say at this late hour that I believe there3
one thing on which we are all agreed and that is the urgency
of proceeding to a conclusion and coming to the stageof
action. I myself would be perfectly prepared to go throu&
the night if necessary, if we could reach,a conclusion, ‘l’l,~
urgency has been shown by the vote by which all of usin
this Council, except two, agreed that we should at letit
urgently consider this matter and deaI with it promptly,
The sense of urgency has been reinforced I am sure by the
very remarkable statements coming from the representatiw
of Czechoslovakia, who spoke to us with all the forceof
dignity and courage.
257. Therefore I would suggest that if we are now to
adjourn, we should be ready to meet as early as possible
tomorrow morning, and that in the interval we should all be
prepared to give whatever time may be necessaryto bring
OUT
deliberations tomorrow to an end as quickly as
possible.

249. The Soviet representative does say, however-and he
makes quite a point of this-that what the Soviet Union has
succeeded in doing for Czechoslovakia and hasendeavoured
to do is to bring it some tranquillity.

258. The PRESIDENT:
Czechoslovakia.

I call upon the representativeof

259. Mr. MUZIK (Czechoslovakia): Being the representa.
tive of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, may I be
permitted to refer briefly to points which concern directly,
or very closely, my country?

250. I have just been handed a report of a radio broadcast
from Radio Prague tonight which ascribes to the commander of the Soviet forces in Prague the order that any
person seen on the streets before 5 o’clock-0500 hourswill be shot without warning. Now that is one way to bring
about tranquillity, because if this order is carried out
faithfully it is quite certain that a number of very
unfortunate Czechs are likely to become very tranquil
indeed because they will be dead.

260. First, February 1948. We Czechsand Slovaks areno1
ashamed of February 1948. On the contrary, we are very
proud of it, because February 1948 meant victory overthe
efforts of the reaction to reversethe trend of developments
in post-war Czechoslovakia.
261. The new leadership of the country and of the
Communist Party of Czechoslovakia has often stressedthat
we shall not, in any case, come back to the times prior to
February 1948 or to the times prior to .5 January of this
year.

25 1. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I believe we are
approaching the end of our proceedings for today and I
intend to be extremely short.
252. I would say that, having listened to the several
speeches of the representative of the Soviet Union, I am
sure that we are all anxious to proceed from words to
action.

262. Secondly, concerning the death of the late Foreign
Minister of Czechoslovakia, Jan Masaryk, an investigation,
which was ordered by the Government of Czechoslovalda
and completed approximately a month ago, came to the
conclusion that it was a suicide. This conclusion wasmainly
based on Western sources, particularly that which w
already mentioned here tonight, the testimony of twoVerY
close personal aides to the Minister Jan Masaryk, whollad
left Czechoslovakia in 1948 and have lived abroad sincz
then.

253. As to his speeches?I wovld only say that they were
as relevant in matter as they were restricted in length and as
clear as they were concise,
254. As to the statement he read purporting to come from
the people of Czechoslovakia, I would only say that the
Council will have no difficulty at all in choosing between
this turgid and apparently anonymous document on the
one hand, and the authenticated, authoritative, convincing

263. Third, I think it is erroneous to compare develop
ments in Czechoslovakia nowadays with Hungary in 19%.
28

There may be one thing in common, namely, mistakes
committed by the leadership of the country and the Party
due to lack of experience and the non-existence of a
precedent of building socialism in that kind of country; but
what happened in Hungary was a counter-revolution which
was crushed by the Soviet Army. I was not in Czechoslovakia at the time. Being a civil servant, I wasattending a
conference abroad, but my family, which lived in Prague
very close to one of its soccer stadiums, told me upon my
return what had happened on Sunday, 4 November, when
the soccer public, the full stadium, which cannot be
suspected of any political indoctrination I think, broke into
applause when it learned of the victory over the counter=
revolution in Hungary,
264. In this connexion, I should like to stressthat, apart
from the factors I have mentioned in the deformations
which developed in Czechoslovakia, and which the Party
and the Government recognized, there were also some
external factors which in a very substantial measure helped
to create such deformations, in particular the cold war
which at that time waspurposely increased by the forces of
imperialism which wanted to decreasethe economic power
of the socialist countries in a competition of arms, which
led to distortions in our economy together with the
discrimination and embargo applied by some imperialist
countries and their allies which led to some autarkic trends
in the economy of Czechoslovakia which contributed to the
deformations of our economy, for example, and we have
the consequences still to challenge at present.

nations, to impose their will on them, who do not treat
countries as a sort of banana republics, or who do not wage
aggressivewars against poor but freedom-loving people in
other continents far from their own country.
[The speaker continued in Russian.]

266. Mr. President;as I have been given the floor, I should
also like to comment on the statement of the representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Ambassador
Malik. I have tried to give an account of the facts. In my
opinion, there is nothing to add or repeat. But in connexion
with/some of his remarks to the effect that it was as if
Czechoslovakia had lately been preparing to liquidate all
socialist achievements of the working people and as if a
threat to the security of the other socialist countries were
arising, I should like to assureAmbassador Malik once more
that the Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, and the
Party of the National Front of Czechoslovakia have always
striven and will strive in the future to defend the security of
the socialist camp, to truly protect it. This is a common
cause, as has been stated here, but above all it is the
obligation and cause of each socialist country which must
know,‘better than the other socialist countries, the concrete
conditions for the construction and development of socialism in its own country.
267. The PRESIDENT: I have no other speakers for
today. After informal consultations it is my understanding
thst the members of the Security Council are agreed to
meeting tomorrow, 22 August, at 10.30 a.m.

265. FinaIly, I should like to thank the representatives of
those countries whose record has always been clean and
clear, or, if it is not possible to eliminate history, who have
once and for ever given up the intention to manage other

The meeting rose at 11.5 p.m.

29

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

$OMME,NT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

Les publications
des Notions
Unies
sent
d&positaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
Notions
Unies, Section
der venter, New York

HAH

COMO

IlOIlY’lMTb

MBAAHWR

CONSEGUIR

PUBlJCACtONES

Las publicaciones
en todar
porter
Venter,
Nueva

Litho

in United

Natibns,

New York

de 10s Nacioner
del

York

mundo.
Cons&e
o Ginebro.

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles
Section,

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
dans
les libroiries
et fer ogencer
oupr&s
de votre
librairie
ou odrerscz-vous
6:
ou Genbve.

OPTAHM3AUHH

DE LAS
Unidas

throughout
New York

OSbEAMHEHHblX

NACIONES

est6n

en vento

a su librero

o dirijase

Price: $U.S. 1.50 (or equivalent

HAu,IIA

UNIDAS
en tibrerios

in other

a: Nociones

currencies)

y coxes
Unidor,

dirfribuidoras
Secci6n

de

351~3 -October

1972-2,0~~
