United Nations

S/PV.9277

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9277

th meeting
Wednesday, 8 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fernandes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Osei-Mensah
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2023/151

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-06935 (E)
*2306935*

S/PV.9277

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2023/151)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Pakistan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; and Ms. Zubaida Akbar,
Afghanistan Programme Officer, Freedom Now.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/151, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Ms. Otunbayeva.
Ms. Otunbayeva: Today is International Women’s
Day, but I have few comforting messages to the women
and girls in Afghanistan. The bans against women
working, studying, travelling without a male companion
and even going to parks or baths remain in place. The
Taliban claim to have united the country, but they have
also severely divided it by gender. At a moment when
Afghanistan needs all of its human capital to recover
from decades of war, half of the country’s potential
doctors, scientists, journalists and politicians are shut
in their homes, their dreams crushed and their talents
confiscated. Afghanistan under the Taliban remains
the most repressive country in the world regarding
women’s rights.
The Taliban tell us that this gender segregation is
not a significant issue and is being addressed. They
say they should be judged on other achievements.
The reality is that the 20 December ban on higher
2/23

08/03/2023

education and the 24 December ban on women
working for non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
have serious consequences for the Afghan population
and for the relationship between the Taliban and the
international community.
Funding for Afghanistan is likely to drop if women
are not allowed to work. NGOs run by women, for
example, have had to cease activities. If the amount
of assistance is reduced, then the amount of dollarcash shipments required to support that assistance
will also decline. Discussions on providing greater
development-style assistance, including with regard
to small infrastructure and policies to mitigate the
effects of climate change, as well as planned political
engagements, have halted as a result of those bans.
We understand that the Taliban have a highly different
worldview than any other Government, but it is difficult
to understand how any Government worthy of the name
can govern against the needs of half of its population.
Our focus has always been on the Afghan people.
Indeed, our support for women’s rights, human
rights and girls’ education is because that is a clear
expectation of the Afghan people. They rightly expect
that their country should not be the most retrograde on
the planet regarding women’s rights. They understood
by the assurances that the Taliban gave during the Doha
negotiations that those rights would not be curtailed.
Some women have told us that they even welcomed
the Taliban coming to power because it ended the war,
but very soon they began to lose hope. They say their
elimination from public life is no better than fearing
violent death.
The Afghan people continue to suffer deeply in other
ways. Afghanistan remains the largest humanitarian
crisis globally. Two thirds of the population, 28 million
people, will need humanitarian assistance this year to
survive. That will cost $4.62 billion, the single-largest
country appeal ever. Almost half of the population,
20 million people, are experiencing crisis levels of
food insecurity. Six million are one step away from
famine-like conditions.
Our humanitarian action is challenged by an
increasingly complex access and security environment.
The bans against women working for NGOs are not
the only serious obstacles to reaching vulnerable
populations, but we are also concerned that national
women staff working for the United Nations will also be
banned. To date, we have seen efforts by the Taliban to
23-06935

08/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

prevent female staff from going to United Nations offices
in five provinces. NGOs experience such restrictions to
a much greater degree. In some provinces, we have had
to temporarily suspend providing assistance because
local officials have placed unacceptable conditions
on its distribution. In general, there has been a recent
deterioration of the humanitarian space.
In 2022, before the constraints were put in place,
the United Nations and NGO partners were able to reach
26.1 million people, in large part thanks to greater access
to the country due to improved security situation. I fear
that, in 2023, the bans on women and other restrictions
that the Taliban have wilfully applied will hinder future
access. December 2022 witnessed the highest number
of access constraints. With the Taliban ban on women’s
NGO employment in place, our humanitarian workers are
forced to make uncomfortable and imperfect compromises
in order to continue to save Afghan lives. The absurdity of
this situation requires no comment.
Our ability to deliver is also affected by growing
concerns about the looming threat posed to our own
security and that of our NGO implementing partners by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan. We are
grateful for the security provided so far, but are concerned
that the de facto authorities do not have the capacity to
fully address emerging threats. Mitigating those threats
will require more concerted and more united Member
State attention and is clearly an issue that the international
community has in common with the de facto authorities.
Apart from the constriction on the rights of women
and girls, we are also witnessing an erosion of other human
rights. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/151) notes
ongoing extra-judicial killings, arbitrary arrests, detentions
and torture carried out by the de facto authorities against
former Government officials and security forces. Those
are violations of the Taliban’s amnesty decree. There is no
transparency regarding investigations of violations, and
violations appear increasingly allowed to occur.
We have also seen the continued implementation of
the instruction by the Taliban leader calling for judicial
corporal punishments, often carried out in public.
According to international law, those acts constitute a
form of torture and ill-treatment.
There is also greater stifling and repression of the
media sector and civil society. Any society needs the voices
of its citizens and constituencies to find compromises
through dialogue, not intimidation and repression.

S/PV.9277

One year ago, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) proposed to the
Security Council that the end of the general conflict in
2021 was an opportunity to build positive peace. Our
initial engagements with the de facto authorities were
relatively constructive and gave us reason for cautious
hope. We began devising a pathway that would build
confidence and clarify to the Taliban the international
expectations regarding their stated desire to rejoin the
international community.
Yet a year ago, the Taliban leadership began
consistently taking decisions that negated that stated
goal. The accumulation of those decisions has been a
form of Government that is simply unacceptable to the
international community — something that could not
have surprised the Taliban. Our collective statements of
condemnation and the imposition of sanctions have not
had an effect; they may have hardened certain Taliban
positions. On the other hand, I believe that there is a
faction within the Taliban leadership, and across the
movement, that does not agree with the current direction
the leadership has taken. That faction understands that
attention must be paid to the real needs of the people.
Perhaps it can eventually execute a change of direction,
but time is running short. Global crises are proliferating.
Demands on donor resources are multiplying as the
availability of those resources diminishes.
I see those dynamics with growing concern. I
fear history repeating itself, with Afghanistan taking
decisions that increase its isolation. Unlike in the
1990s, however, the world is much more focused
on Afghanistan. UNAMA’s strategy is to preserve
whatever political space exists for honest and
straightforward discourse between the Taliban and the
international community, both the region and donors.
We are at a moment of political impasse where trust is
in short supply.
UNAMA is in Afghanistan on the Council’s behalf,
engaging every day with the de facto authorities,
with the local political opposition, with civil society,
with private sector actors and, increasingly, with
Afghanistan’s youth, who will inherit the future now
being shaped. Our field offices carry out road missions
reaching all corners of the country, not only to provide
assistance but to remain connected with the people to
provide the Council with the best possible information
regarding the situation on the ground. That situation
is extremely complex, and sometimes there are greater
grounds for hope than it appears. But there is no doubt

23-069353/23

S/PV.9277

The situation in Afghanistan

that the larger and most visible trends are worrisome
and negative. They make it harder to preserve that
necessary space for dialogue.
The international community, inside the region and
without, has called for the decrees to be reversed for
the sake of the international community. That is a clear
and unified position. We hope that the Taliban will give
greater consideration to the fact that this is in their
interests and, above all, in the interests of the Afghan
people. At the same time, the international community
must begin building an agenda for discussion with the
de facto authorities that includes issues that matter to
the Taliban. Those two elements can form the basis of
a process that can help build confidence and lead to a
mutually acceptable outcome.
Finally, in order for UNAMA to play its part in
implementing that approach on behalf of the Council,
we hope that we will be given a mandate for another
year. As I mentioned in my previous briefing (see
S/PV.9227), UNAMA commissioned an independent
review of its mandate, led by a former Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The general
conclusions are that UNAMA’s current mandate is
sufficiently robust, balanced and comprehensive for the
current situation. Despite the setbacks I described, we
continue to assert that there is no alternative to unified,
patient and principled engagement that puts the needs
and rights of the Afghan people first.
The President: I thank Ms. Otunbayeva for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Akbar.
Ms. Akbar: I am Zubaida Akbar, a woman
human rights defender from Afghanistan. I deliver
my statement today on behalf of Freedom Now, an
organization that defends human rights and works
directly with 20 grass-roots, mostly women-led,
movements inside Afghanistan.
It is my honour and responsibility to brief the
Security Council today, on International Women’s Day,
on the worst crisis for women’s rights in the world. As
the Council is aware, since the Taliban seized power in
August 2021, the rights of Afghan women and girls have
been decimated. Through over 40 decrees, the Taliban
have sought not only to erase women from public life,
but to extinguish our basic humanity. Let me share with
members a few examples of what life is like for Afghan
women today.
4/23

08/03/2023

It has now been 534 days since teenage girls could
go to school, and 78 days since women were banned from
universities, making Afghanistan the only country in the
world where women are prohibited from accessing most
forms of formal education, which will be catastrophic for
generations to come.
The Taliban have done everything they can to
curb women’s freedom of movement and expression.
Women cannot travel more than 75 kilometres without
a male guardian. Women are banned from public baths,
restaurants and parks. Even the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and the Executive Director of UN-Women were
told by the Taliban on their recent visit to Afghanistan
that they should not be there without their mahrams and
that it was haram for them to sit with the Taliban. They
experienced a fraction of what the Taliban is imposing
on millions of Afghan women every single day.
The total collapse of the legal system — and the
exclusion of women from what remains of it — means
that women facing domestic violence have no access
to justice.
Most recently, Taliban fighters prevented the sale of
contraceptives. In a country that already has one of the
highest maternal mortality rates in the world, women
will not only have little choice about whether to have
children, but will risk their lives to do so.
A variety of restrictions have been placed on women’s
right to work. The recent decision to ban women from
working for non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
has led to more than 100 civil society organizations being
unable to fully function. While some have resumed work
in health and education sectors, it is clear that nothing
less than an immediate and unconditional reversal of the
ban will ensure that the 28 million Afghans depending
on humanitarian assistance, especially women and girls,
are able to survive. I want to underline that point.
We keep hearing the international community say
that it confronts a dilemma in Afghanistan — to save
lives, or to call out the Taliban for its violations of
women’s rights. But I ask members: whose lives are they
saving? And at what cost? Pursuing humanitarian action
without women, or delivering aid that does not reach
women, serves only to further eliminate women from
society. Humanitarian action must be rights-based and
without discrimination. I urge the Council to remember
that, while it may save lives now, it is not a substitute for
finding a durable solution to the current crisis.
23-06935

08/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

Women inside Afghanistan tell me they feel
suffocated and hopeless. Young girls talk to me about
ending their lives. That cannot continue.
There is one term that appropriately describes the
situation of Afghan women today: gender apartheid.
Afghan women and experts — and even SecretaryGeneral Guterres — have condemned the systematic
discrimination against Afghan women and girls as
gender apartheid. Furthermore, the Taliban’s human
rights violations on the basis of gender amount to
gender persecution, a crime against humanity for which
United Nations experts have called for the Taliban to be
investigated and held accountable.
Outspoken international condemnation is critical,
but it is not enough. Such flagrant violations of
international law, including the provisions on equality
and non-discrimination as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, require a proportional, coordinated
and meaningful international response that makes
clear that violations of women’s rights are intolerable
and unjustifiable and that the Taliban will face
consequences. If members do not defend women’s rights
here, they have no credibility to do so anywhere else.
Since August 2021, there have been two narratives
about Afghanistan — one of the Taliban’s return, but
another about women’s resistance. Grass-roots, womenled movements have been the most visible and vocal
civic opposition to the Taliban so far and risk their lives
daily to advocate for the human rights of all Afghans.
In the words of one protester, those women are our
ambassadors of freedom.
The Taliban’s response to peaceful protests has
been violent attacks, imprisonment and torture. Nargis
Sadat, a woman protester, was arbitrarily arrested mere
weeks ago, on 12 February; her fate remains unknown.
Tamana Zaryab Paryani and Parwana Ibrahimkhil were
abducted and disappeared after protesting in Kabul,
and held for weeks in detention. Nayera Kohistani was
arrested, along with her child, and has detailed abuse
and torture in a Taliban prison. Hazara women who
protest are treated even more harshly.
The brave civic resistance of Afghan women
urgently needs the Council’s support. They need the
Council to say their names and take up their cases
in their engagement with the Taliban. They need the
Council to demand their release. They need it to grant
them asylum. They need members to fund them. And
they need them to hold the Taliban accountable when

S/PV.9277

they are detained, tortured, disappeared or killed for
demanding their rights. The lack of consequences only
emboldens the Taliban to expand their crackdowns with
total impunity.
The Taliban’s all-male, majority Pashtun caretaker
Cabinet signals that they have no intention of forming
an inclusive Government that represents either the
ethnic diversity of Afghanistan or women, or protecting
marginalized ethnic and religious groups.
The Taliban have not only failed to investigate or
punish attacks on the Hazara community, they have
been directly responsible for mass killings of Hazaras,
which may amount to war crimes. In November 2022,
the Taliban raided a village in Daikundi province and
killed 11 Hazaras, including children. Other groups, such
as the Sikh community, have been forced to abandon
their homes due to targeted attacks, and members of
Tajik, Uzbek and Turkmen communities continue to be
forcibly displaced and to have their lands redistributed
to Kuchis and Taliban members. Women in Daikundi
and Jawzjan also tell me that the distribution of aid in
their communities has been unequal.
The Taliban’s brutal return to extrajudicial killings,
public floggings and executions is clear evidence that
they have not changed since they were last in power.
They have no respect for the rights or aspirations of the
Afghan people. And they have no plans to change. They
are imposing an extremist, patriarchal interpretation
of Islam that relies on the repression of women and
marginalized groups.
This is not the path to peace — this is the road to
another civil war, one that will not be contained in the
region. I therefore call on the Security Council to take
the following actions.
The Council should demand that the Taliban respect
the human rights of all Afghans, including women, girls,
LGBTQI+ people and all other marginalized groups,
and end all restrictions on women’s rights. That means
not only ending the bans on education and working
for NGOs, but all restrictions on women’s rights that
violate Afghanistan’s obligations under the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women.
The Council should be clear that there will be no
unconditional engagement with the Taliban unless these
basic conditions are met. That includes no high-level
visits by the United Nations to Afghanistan without a

23-069355/23

S/PV.9277

The situation in Afghanistan

clear objective informed by the priorities and concerns
of Afghan women. I urge the Council to continue not
to grant the Taliban formal recognition of any kind,
including a seat at the United Nations.
The Council should renew the current mandate for
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) as outlined in resolution 2626 (2022), without
any changes, for one more year. UNAMA is already
required to address key dimensions of the crisis that
are critical for Afghan women and girls, but it has so far
not met the expectations of the people of Afghanistan
in fulfilling that mandate. The focus must now be on
ensuring that UNAMA fully implements all aspects of
that mandate, including on monitoring human rights
and prioritizing women’s rights throughout its work. I
urge all United Nations leaders, especially the Special
Representative Otunbayeva, to be outspoken advocates
for our rights and ensure that, in her case, her briefings
to the Council prioritize reporting on the situation of
women and marginalized groups.
The Council should ensure that the full, equal and
meaningful participation of diverse Afghan women
civil society and other marginalized groups is front and
centre in any decision-making regarding the future of
Afghanistan, including the Council’s own.
The Council should continue to regularly issue
strong statements and resolutions condemning the
Taliban’s abuses against women and girls, and ensure
that there are no exemptions to travel bans for Taliban
leaders. If Afghan women are imprisoned in their
homes, the Taliban should not be able to travel.
The Taliban have violated the rights of my people
for over a year with no consequences. I therefore
urge the Council to support initiatives to strengthen
accountability for human rights violations, including
all forms of gender-based violence, as well as attacks
against ethnic and religious communities and other
marginalized groups.
The people of Afghanistan deserve their human
rights regardless of their gender, ethnicity, religion
or sexual orientation. If the Taliban are allowed to
continue down this path, it will be generations before
Afghanistan recovers. As members of the Council
deliberate on the future of my country today, I urge
them to think of their own daughters, wives and sisters,
and ask themselves: why do the women of Afghanistan
deserve anything less?
6/23

08/03/2023

The President: I thank Ms. Akbar for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special Representative Roza Otunbayeva and Ms. Zubaida Akbar for
their briefings.
Japan is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
human rights situation that the Afghan people,
especially women and girls, are facing. We strongly
condemn the Taliban’s measures to restrict the rights of
women and girls. Unfortunately, since seizing control,
the Taliban have not been fulfilling their commitments
to either the people of Afghanistan or the international
community. The Afghan people are losing hope for the
future and are continuing to flee the country due to the
Taliban’s repressive policies.
We are also seriously concerned about the dire
economic and humanitarian situation. With over
28 million Afghans estimated to require humanitarian
assistance in 2023, the international community must
not be idle. Our assistance to the Afghan people should
continue to enable them to not only survive, but to
have lives whereby they can receive medical care and
education, obtain jobs and rebuild their livelihoods in a
sustainable manner. Otherwise, the humanitarian crisis
will persist. Youth will become radicalized in despair.
And we will see history repeat itself.
The Security Council must continue to urge the
Taliban to reverse their repressive human rights policies.
But at the same time, it is important to avoid isolating
the Taliban, as was done in the 1990s when Afghanistan
became a hotbed of terrorism. What is required of us is
not only to condemn the Taliban’s actions, but also to
continue our engagement to change their course.
Japan has been conducting dialogues in Kabul
with Taliban leaders to deliver messages from the
international community. In that regard, the bridging
role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is critically important to
promote inclusiveness through dialogue with the people
of Afghanistan. Japan has continuously supported
the efforts of UNAMA in addressing the complex
challenges faced by the Afghan people. At the same
time, we hope that UNAMA will play its part in moving
the political process forward in Afghanistan. We need
to be ready to support UNAMA’s efforts.
23-06935

08/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

As co-penholder on Afghanistan, we appreciate the
constructive engagement of Council members in the
ongoing negotiations on the renewal of the UNAMA
mandate. We look forward to expressing our unity
towards our common objective for a secure, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank Special Representative
Roza Otunbayeva for her updates, as well as and today’s
briefer, Ms. Zubaida Akbar, for her powerful testimony.
The Security Council last met in this setting in
December (see S/PV.9227). While in the Chamber,
we received news of the Taliban’s decision barring
girls from attending university. Restrictions on
the employment of Afghan women by national and
international non-governmental organizations swiftly
followed that announcement. We unreservedly
condemned those decisions then, and we condemn them
now. They systematically deprive women and girls of
their fundamental human rights simply because they
are women and girls. I want to say again here that those
decisions have nothing to do with Islam or Afghan
culture and risk further entrenching the country’s
international isolation.
In the 19 months since the Taliban’s takeover,
the hope of a stable, secure and prosperous future for
Afghanistan has been hanging in the balance. Since
that meeting in December, Council members and
the broader international community have been on a
quest to identify the most effective ways to respond
to this deterioration in Afghan society. It is against
that backdrop that we are considering the renewal of
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), which is due to expire in a
little more than a week from now.
Around this table and during consultations,
by myself and the co-penholder, it is clear that we
all strongly support UNAMA and the robust and
comprehensive work it is tasked with, as configured
by resolution 2626 (2022). It provides the space for
the Mission to work with stakeholders on the ground
in an attempt not only to alleviate suffering, but also
to improve lives. There is no doubt that the Mission is
delivering to the best of its ability in what is a highly
challenging political and security environment.
Nonetheless, it is undeniable that the overall
situation in Afghanistan is worsening. There has
been little to no progress in terms of the expectations

S/PV.9277

set out by the Council on human rights, inclusive
governance and counter-terrorism. The SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2023/151) points to increasing
humanitarian needs, shrinking political space and the
continued presence of foreign terrorist fighters. The
report of the Special Rapporteur describes in grim
detail the deterioration of the human rights situation
in the country, due in large measure to the systematic
discrimination against women and girls — “among the
most draconian in the world” (A/HRC/52/84, para. 14).
As members of the Security Council, we bear
the responsibility for ensuring that the international
approach supports a more prosperous, more selfsufficient Afghanistan that is neither a threat to its
people nor its direct neighbourhood or beyond. With
that in mind, our support for UNAMA should be
unwavering and must remain the centrepiece of the
Council’s engagement on Afghanistan.
But what we have been hearing over the past two
months from within the United Nations and from
individual countries, and what the developments since
August 2021 have borne out, is that we lack a political
strategy for Afghanistan. And that sentiment is echoed
in the discussions that I have had with many Afghan
women, including this week during the session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, asking us not
to abandon the fate of Afghan women to those forces.
Today, on International Women’s Day, there is no better
time to express our solidarity in that respect with the
women of Afghanistan. We must do more than that.
Often in times of crisis, we mistake activity for
good policy, when what we actually need is a strategic
reassessment of the way forward. As co-penholders, we
believe the Council needs to reconsider and initiate a
more strategic overview of international engagement
in Afghanistan. We need to articulate a well-defined
pathway that serves to advance the well-being of all
Afghans. The ultimate objective of that process would
be creating the forward-looking, unified and integrated
international approach that we so clearly lack today.
What is certain is that, when it comes to
Afghanistan and its people, we are too often trapped
in a cycle of re-litigating the past, when we should be
creating a new path to move forward. UNAMA is the
face of the international community on the ground and
deserves our continued support. However, by not taking
action and not seeking to change the current course, the
Council is failing to live up to its responsibilities and

23-069357/23

S/PV.9277

The situation in Afghanistan

failing the Afghan people. The situation in Afghanistan
is exceptional, and it demands an exceptional response.
We can acknowledge that and work on coalescing the
international community’s integrated and coherent
approach, coordinate our efforts and reinforce
UNAMA; or we can proceed with business as usual, to
the detriment of Afghanistan and its people.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3), Ghana,
Mozambique and my own country, Gabon.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Otunbayeva for her informative briefing,
and I listened closely to Ms. Akbar’s statement. The
report of the Secretary-General under consideration
(S/2023/151), on the situation in Afghanistan and the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), gives us an opportunity to
consider the most recent developments in the political,
security, economic and humanitarian situations
in Afghanistan.
On the political front, we take note of the
developments in the restructuring of the State apparatus
and the Taliban’s establishment of institutions. A
decree issued on 13 December 2022 re-established the
National Procurement Commission, which the Taliban
Government had previously abolished. On 10 January,
the de facto authorities confirmed the completion of
the transfer of authority from the de facto Ministry of
Justice to the de facto Supreme Court, in line with an
order by the leader of the Taliban Government issued on
13 October. On 29 December, the de facto Ministry of
Interior announced the establishment of 25 additional
districts across the country, bringing their total to 419,
according to the de facto authorities, with the stated
intention of improving access to services.
We have taken particular note of the call by elements
of the political opposition inside and outside the country
for an intra-Afghan dialogue, and of the announcement
on 16 January by the Commission for Return and
Communication with Former Afghan Officers and
Political Figures that 475 individuals had returned to
Afghanistan thanks to the opposition’s efforts. Despite
the various measures taken, the diversity of the Afghan
people continues to be underrepresented in the political
landscape, with very little progress at either the ethnic
or social level. Above all, the inclusion of women in
governmental structures remains a major challenge of
8/23

08/03/2023

its own. We strongly encourage the de facto authorities
in Afghanistan to positively respond to the calls for an
intra-Afghan dialogue from various elements of the
political opposition both inside and outside the country
and from the international community. We believe
firmly that it will lead to wider participation by all
political actors in Afghanistan, which is in the interests
of all Afghan people.
The announcement in December 2022 of the
decision to suspend higher education and employment
in national and international non-governmental
organizations for women has further restricted the
fundamental rights of women and girls. The issue
of women and girls’ education and their access to
secondary and higher education is a vital prerequisite.
The de facto authorities in Afghanistan have expanded
the restrictions on women to include almost the entirety
of social, political and professional life. If progress is
to be made on the condition of Afghan women and
girls, the international community must remain firm
and demonstrate solidarity on that front. The country
cannot be rebuilt without the education, qualifications
and inclusion of Afghan women. The A3 has noted the
announcement on 5 February by the de facto Deputy
Minister of Higher Education, Lutfullah Khairkhwah,
that work has begun on a strategy to find a solution for
girls’ higher education that conforms to sharia law.
(spoke in English)
On the security front, the situation on the ground
remains fragile. Security violations related to the armed
opposition and attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant-Khorasan are worrisome. The A3 condemns
all the security incidents that have been observed,
particularly in the western, southern and eastern
regions, which accounted for 58 per cent of all recorded
incidents. We encourage the de facto authorities to take
concrete measures to prevent all forms of terrorism in the
country. Illicit drug trafficking, coupled with frequent
clashes between the opposition and security forces,
the presence of foreign forces on Afghan territory and
continuing border tensions, has increased the volatility
of the situation on the ground. We commend UNAMA’s
work in combating the illicit trafficking, accumulation
and diversion of small arms and light weapons and their
ammunition, as well as explosive materials.
The continuing violence in Afghanistan is affecting
the economic and humanitarian situation, which has
continued to deteriorate. On the economic front,
23-06935

08/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

although the de facto authorities, in continuing to focus
on economic autonomy, have reported an increase in
revenue collection, including through trade, most of the
factors that have been adversely affecting the economy
since August 2021 persist — the sharp reduction in
development assistance and difficulties related to
international financial transactions and their impact on
the banking sector. The freezing of Afghan assets has
contributed to a major financial crisis that is affecting
the population. Those sanctions, coupled with mistrust
on the part of donors and banking institutions, are
increasing the precariousness of the people’s situation,
and we call on donors to continue their various efforts
to rebuild the Afghan economy.
The worrisome humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan is a result of the various sociopolitical,
economic and security crises, but also of the
consequences of climate change, which exacerbate
vulnerabilities. A lack of medical supplies and
inadequate salaries for health workers make it difficult
for humanitarian personnel to act. At the same time,
drought, food insecurity and malnutrition persist. The
numbers speak for themselves. The humanitarian needs
continue to rise. More than 28 million people will
need humanitarian assistance in 2023, and the ban on
aid workers has reduced or interrupted the activities
of several organizations by as much as 70 per cent
of their potential. The international community must
continue its efforts to make the Taliban aware that the
marginalization of women and girls has implications
for humanitarian assistance, development and stability
in the country. We note the approach of the de facto
authorities to the people. They have been visiting the
provinces and districts with the aim of promoting unity
and discussing educational reform. The assessment of
water sources by the de facto Minister of Agriculture,
Irrigation and Livestock in the country’s northern
provinces is to be welcomed.
The A3 welcomes the efforts of UNAMA, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the United Nations country team and Afghan and
international non-governmental organizations. We
support initiatives for dialogue with the de facto
authorities aimed at promoting women’s rights and
their integration into society. UNAMA’s participation,
through its field offices, in more than 170 subnational
advocacy meetings, in particular the pilot legal
aid project in Bamyan and Herat provinces with
the United Nations Development Programme, is

S/PV.9277

significant. We encourage the work undertaken by
UNAMA, notwithstanding the challenges it is facing
on the ground. Monitoring the situation in the country
and interacting with the various relevant actors remain
crucial to the promotion of peace and stability in
Afghanistan. Accordingly, we support the extension of
UNAMA’s mandate for another 12 months and urge the
international community to strengthen its political and
financial support for the Mission’s work.
We applaud the multiple meetings and advocacy
efforts on Afghanistan that have been organized by
countries of the region and by UN-Women, in particular
those that have been held in Russia, Kazakhstan, Qatar
and Indonesia, focusing on regional connectivity
and economic cooperation, border security, counterterrorism, drug trafficking, inclusive governance,
women’s and girls’ rights and access to education for
Afghan girls. We particularly welcome the 29 December
call by the Secretary-General of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, Hissein Brahim Taha, on the
International Islamic Fiqh Academy to launch a global
campaign to unite scholars and religious authorities in
the Islamic world against the decision by the de facto
authorities to restrict female education.
In conclusion, we reiterate the demand for dialogue
between the Afghan forces. We wish to reiterate that a
stable, prosperous Afghanistan cannot be built without
women or other sectors of society. As SecretaryGeneral António Guterres said in Doha, Qatar,
during the summit of the Least Developed Countries,
of which Afghanistan is a member: “the countries
with the least capacity need the most support”. The
international community must maintain its engagement
in Afghanistan in support of the legitimate aspirations
of the Afghan people for security and dignity.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): We wish to
extend many thanks to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Otunbayeva for her briefing and
for the work for her team. We also thank Ms. Akbar for
her powerful account.
Recent months have seen a rapid deterioration in
Taliban behaviour, with women and girls in particular
facing unprecedented denial of their human rights:
restrictions on their access to employment and education
and to their freedom of movement, expression and dress.
The Taliban have all but erased women from society.
The trajectory remains negative. So, what can the
Security Council and the international community do?

23-069359/23

S/PV.9277

The situation in Afghanistan

First, we should remain unwavering and united in
our expectations of the Taliban. The Council set these
out in resolution 2593 (2021), including on honouring
counter-terrorism commitments, respecting human
rights and ensuring humanitarian access.
Secondly, as the Deputy Secretary-General said
following her visit to Afghanistan, we should be clear
on the consequences should the Taliban continue on
this path: international acceptance of the Taliban will
not be on the table.
Thirdly, the Council should ensure that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan retains its
strong mandate. The United Nations must continue to
engage the Taliban, not least to reinforce the Security
Council’s expectations, which include progress toward
representative governance.
Fourthly, we should continue to make clear to
the Taliban that their decisions are self-defeating.
Afghanistan’s economy will continue to suffer when 50 per
cent of its population are excluded from society and the
workplace. There will be no stable or durable peace when
ethnic groups and large swathes of society are excluded.
Finally, as we navigate these challenges, we should
hold firm in our solidarity with Afghan people. The
United Kingdom is continuing to work closely with the
United Nations and partners on the ground to ensure
aid continues to reach those most in need, including
women, while holding firm on the principle of
neutrality and non-discrimination. We will not abandon
the Afghan people.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I thank you for convening today’s meeting,
and I thank Special Representative Otunbayeva for her
testimony on the worrisome developments in Afghanistan
and for her valuable work. I also thank Ms. Zubaida
Akbar for her briefing and for her commitment to and
with those who struggle for human rights every day and
who, as we have heard, often risk their lives.
It is a sad coincidence that today we are celebrating
International Women’s Day around the world, while
women and girls in Afghanistan are the focus of our
attention. Earlier this year, the Executive Director of
UN-Women reminded us that
“Afghan women have left us in no doubt about
their courage and their refusal to be erased from
public life. They will continue to defend and fight
for their rights, and it is our duty to support them in
this endeavour.”
10/23

08/03/2023

The full, equal and meaningful participation of
women was repeatedly called for in this Chamber
during yesterday’s open debate on women, peace and
security (see S/PV.9276). Yet we cannot rely on words
alone. Whether in Afghanistan or elsewhere in the
world, making the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) a reality is our obligation.
In Afghanistan, women and girls see their human
rights and fundamental freedoms violated on a daily
basis. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/151)
and the briefing of the Special Representative show us
that the situation continues to worsen. The list of violent
incidents against women and girls includes murders,
honour killings, forced marriages and beatings that
can lead to disabilities. At a time when their access to
education and work is virtually non-existent, we call
on the Taliban to immediately reverse the prohibitions
against women and girls. Switzerland condemns all
human rights violations committed by the Taliban, in
particular violations of the rights of women, but also of
children and ethnic minorities.
We are currently negotiating the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Switzerland joins the
Secretary-General in calling for an extension of the
current mandate, which will allow the Mission to
continue its vital activities for the Afghan people. In
the near future, two areas of action seem to us to be
priorities for commitment of the United Nations.
First, the Security Council and UNAMA must
support all efforts aimed at promoting an Afghanistan
where all of society participates in public life without
discrimination or reprisals. The protection of human
rights is essential to the stability of the country. Women
and girls must have access to education, work, politics
and social and economic life. We defend the right of
women to participate in all decision-making processes.
This is essential for immediate humanitarian needs,
but also for economic and social development, as well
as for building sustainable peace. The work of Afghan
women in many non-governmental organizations on the
ground is essential to achieving these goals.
Secondly, we must address humanitarian needs and
find sustainable solutions to Afghanistan’s endemic
food insecurity. Decades of environmental degradation
have increased desertification and worsened drought.
The resilience of Afghans is stretched to the limit. Some
28 million people depend on humanitarian aid to survive.
23-06935

08/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

But beyond the immediate delivery of aid, we
must continue our long-term support. In the face of
increasing challenges from climate change, the Afghan
people must be supported to adapt their agriculture and
make natural-resource management more sustainable.
In addition, basic public services must be able to
function, especially in the areas of education and public
health. A stable economy is needed to create prospects
for a dignified future.
Afghanistan is facing multiple mutually reinforcing
crises that have plunged it into deep insecurity. We
must rally around a common strategy and support the
people in their efforts to regain security. However,
these efforts can succeed only if the Taliban reverse
their misogynistic actions and recognize the key role
of women in society, the economy and politics. We
call on them to rescind their recent decrees banning
women from higher education and from working for
non-governmental organizations. More generally, they
must recognize the importance of inclusive Government
and the rule of law. To support those goals, the United
Nations must maintain its presence on the ground,
in safety and security, through a strong mandate for
engagement. We assure the Council of our continued
support for this cause.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Otunbayeva for her briefing,
and I thank Ms. Akbar for her important information.
We hear her call.
As the world comes together to celebrate
International Women’s Day while the Commission on
the Status of Women is meeting to advance women’s
rights globally, today, sadly, Afghan women have
little to celebrate. Their hard-won rights have been
obliterated since the Taliban takeover. They are being
denied the most fundamental rights that every human
being is endowed with by virtue of their humanity. The
de facto authorities are not only denying women’s and
girls’ right to education, but they are also normalizing
honour killings, forced marriages, child marriage and
beatings, while severely restricting other basic rights,
including freedom of movement.
Stubborn in their pursuit of undoing every
achievement of the past two decades, the de facto
authorities have decided to invest in ignorance, causing
devastating psychological harm to women and girls and
irreparable damage to the society. By doing so, they
are also undermining the much-needed overall social

S/PV.9277

and economic development of the country, which will
suffer greatly if half of the population is excluded from
participating meaningfully. The Taliban are and will be
responsible, because this is a catastrophe of choice. It is
a predictable drive over a precipice.
We strongly condemn such policies and express
our sincere and full solidarity with all Afghans,
women and girls in particular, and support all action
at the regional and global levels to lift all arbitrary
restrictions. That includes lifting the absurd ban on
female aid workers, which is severely affecting the
delivery of vital aid to two thirds of the population in
dire need, who are also victims of economic hardship
and humanitarian disasters.
The obliteration of women’s rights by the de facto
authorities is part of a general deleterious policy of
alarming reactionary measures that are driving the
country backwards. Since the takeover, the Taliban
have shown that they hate women, education, rights and
freedoms, social progress and individual fulfilment.
They are now tolerating extrajudicial killings and
inciting corporal punishment, both strictly prohibited
under international law. They are suppressing peaceful
protests and progressively reducing the space for media
workers and civil society, thus outlawing any form of
democratic dissent.
The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is due in a few
days. We strongly support its role and efforts to provide
vital support to the people of Afghanistan despite
the very challenging conditions. We encourage the
United Nations team on the ground to continue to
work constructively for the full implementation of the
mandate, keeping a strong focus on the respect of human
rights for all Afghans and continuing to prioritize the
protection and advancement of women’s human rights.
The Council and the international community must
be united and coherent in asking the de facto authorities
to comply fully with the relevant Security Council
resolutions as the only way to bring security, peace and
stability to the country and to normalize relations with
the international community.
Finally, we once again call on the Taliban to honour
their obligations, keep their promises and recognize
that a stable Afghanistan can be built only with rights
and freedoms and the participation and contribution of
all, including women.

23-0693511/23

S/PV.9277

The situation in Afghanistan

In our view, sustainable peace and security and
the development and prosperity of the country can be
achieved only through inclusivity, not exclusion and
segregation, and through genuine national dialogue by
establishing a constitutional order, with a representative
and inclusive political system. Any other course will
generate the worst scenario, lead to conflict and keep
Afghanistan in the past and away from the future its
people so desperately deserve.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I am grateful for the information provided by Roza
Otunbayeva, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and for the testimony of Ms. Zubaida Akbar,
civil society activist and representative.
Every year, 8 March is a renewed opportunity to
reflect on women’s struggle for equality, justice and
respect for their rights. On that date, as some countries
pause to reflect on the coordination of public policies
towards the achievement of that goal, we cannot
but deplore the critical situation of women and girls
in Afghanistan.
January’s visit to Kabul by Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed did not yield the expected
results in the face of the expectations generated by that
plausible high-level management. In fact, SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, just two days ago, at the
inaugural meeting of the Commission on the Status of
Women, reminded us that in Afghanistan “women and
girls have been erased from public life”.

08/03/2023

In this stark situation, in which the need for
humanitarian assistance is growing exponentially,
Ecuador expresses its appreciation for the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
will support, in the coming days, the renewal of its
mandate for 12 months, with a view to maintaining and
strengthening its presence in the field, particularly in
its efforts to promote an inclusive dialogue among all
actors in Afghan society.
Given this critical humanitarian situation, we also
commend the bilateral and multilateral cooperation
initiatives promoted by countries of the region and by
regional and international organizations, especially
those aimed at providing funding for education for
girls and boys, as well as job opportunities for Afghan
women, as such initiatives convey clearly the sentiment
of the majority of the international community with
respect to the regressive policies of the de facto regime.
As a signatory to the Paris Commitments, the Paris
Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration, Ecuador
would like to express its regret for the grave violations
perpetrated against Afghan children, who continue
to be killed, maimed, abducted and victimized by
improvised explosive devices and unexploded ordnance.
Ecuador also unequivocally rejects the extrajudicial
executions, arbitrary arrests and detentions, torture and
ill-treatment committed by the Taliban regime. These
incidents are included in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/151) and have also been relayed to us today by
Ms. Otunbayeva.

As signatories of the statement of shared commitments of the women and peace and security agenda, my
country therefore rejects the Taliban authorities’ decisions, which severely limit women’s access to work,
justice, health services, public space and the education
system, and leaves them in a situation of helplessness
and hopelessness.

It is deplorable to note that, since the installation
of the de facto Government in August 2021, we see no
signs for optimism. On the contrary, the information
that we have received leads us to believe that all the
factors further undermining the social fabric of the
country — the growing humanitarian crisis, human
rights violations and abuses, discrimination, isolation,
impunity, violent extremism and terrorism — are
converging in Afghanistan.

Continuing with the implementation of institutionalized policies of discrimination and the annulment of
women is an attack on Afghan society, as a whole, and
makes it almost impossible to imagine a future of peace
and development. How can we envision such a future
when more than half of the population is deprived of
contributing to its realization? That is why my country
commends the courage and resilience of Afghan women
and girls in the face of this unacceptable situation.

In conclusion, I express our conviction that the
complexity and gravity of the situation in Afghanistan
require coordinated and accelerated work among all
the bodies of the United Nations system, as well as the
genuine solidarity of the international community as a
whole, so as to strengthen the strategies for building
a sustainable peace architecture and comprehensive
economic development for the long-suffering
Afghan people.

12/23

23-06935

08/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We take this opportunity to congratulate all the
women present in this Chamber, as well as the women of
Afghanistan, on International Women’s Day.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva, for her assessment of the situation in the
country. The Russian Federation supports the work of
UNAMA under her leadership in the context of the
Mission’s mandated tasks. It is positive that the United
Nations is committed to maintaining a presence and
to providing the necessary assistance to the people
of Afghanistan. We are ready to continue to engage
constructively with all Security Council members with a
view to renewing UNAMA’s mandate as soon as possible.
We also listened carefully to Ms. Zubaida Akbar’s
briefing. We are glad that representatives of the region
were also given the floor in this discussion. We took
note of the Secretary-General’s report on the situation
in Afghanistan (S/2023/151). We would like to make the
following points.
A year and a half ago, 20 long years of war in
Afghanistan ended with the Taliban coming to power
again and foreign troops hastily fleeing the country.
The long-standing problems, unresolved for years by
the corrupt Ghani regime, were compounded by new
challenges. Instead of the long-awaited peace that had
been promised, the Afghan people received sanctions,
an unprecedented humanitarian and economic crisis, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and American
weapons left behind, to the joy of terrorists.
At the same time, in their usual fashion, our American
colleagues, with the support of their allies, hastened to
apportion full responsibility for ruining the country and
the consequences of their ignominious military campaign
to the de facto authorities in Afghanistan. They continue
to do that now, blackmailing the population with
humanitarian aid and manipulating assistance on various
far-fetched pretexts. Under the guise of a benefactor and
a champion of the rights of women and girls, Washington
conceals its true face. Under the threat of sanctions,
the many war crimes committed by United States and
NATO troops continue to be erased from the pages of
history as if they never took place. The real reasons for
being in Afghanistan for so long are being hushed up, not
to mention the issue of stolen Afghan assets, which may
now be used for other purposes in other conflict areas.

S/PV.9277

Against that backdrop, the high-sounding rhetoric
of our Western colleagues about the deteriorating
situation in the country and the suffering of the Afghan
people, as well as calls to take up the sanctions baton
and increase political and economic pressure on the
de facto authorities, seems immoral. They lack the
courage to admit that their preferred methods are no
longer effective. The consequences of such steps will
only burden ordinary Afghans but will not change
the situation on the ground. However, that approach
does not surprise us. They also seem to realize that in
Kabul, which is seeking its own path of independent
development for Afghanistan without regard to
Western assistance.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment as to
the complex domestic political situation in Afghanistan.
We are particularly concerned about the security threats
posed by the terrorist activities of ISIL-Khorasan. We
can see that, over a period of 20 years, terrorists have
strengthened their influence in the country and are
now deliberately destabilizing the situation by carrying
out more attacks and spreading a climate of fear and
despair. They target representatives of religious and
ethnic minorities, including women and children. The
safety of UNAMA staff and humanitarian workers
on the ground may also be at risk. Unfortunately, the
efforts made by the de facto authorities in that regard
are not sufficient.
Related to terrorism is the drug problem. It is clear
that, amid the widespread hunger and poverty, it will be
difficult for Afghanistan to overcome the challenges by
itself without comprehensive international and regional
assistance. Support for Afghan farmers is now more
important than ever.
We are closely following socioeconomic
developments in the country. We note the efforts of the
United Nations and regional organizations to provide
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. We particularly
commend the selfless work of humanitarian agencies
and their staff, who are ready to remain on the ground
in any circumstances to help Afghans. At the same time,
we see that those steps are insufficient. Western donors
continue to block United Nations efforts to expand
assistance beyond basic needs. They categorically reject
the possibility of providing assistance for development,
the reconstruction of schools and hospitals and the
building of roads to connect provinces and cities with
agricultural areas.

23-0693513/23

S/PV.9277

The situation in Afghanistan

Building long-term and sustainable peace in
Afghanistan is not possible without ongoing tolerant
and pragmatic engagement with the new authorities
on a wide range of urgent issues, including political
inclusiveness, combating terrorist and drug threats and
respect for human rights, including those of women and
girls. That comprehensive approach will also determine
the effectiveness of UNAMA’s efforts.
Russia has consistently supported promoting
cooperation with Afghanistan on issues relating to a
comprehensive settlement. Together with our regional
partners, we are working to develop a common approach
to the situation in the country. The Moscow format also
serves that goal. Its most recent meeting took place in
Moscow on 8 February.
We also note the potential of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO)-Afghanistan Contact
Group. The Collective Security Treaty Organization
and the Commonwealth of Independent States also
regularly serve as platforms for the alignment of
positions.
We continue to provide humanitarian assistance to
the Afghan people and to promote cooperation on the
socioeconomic track.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): Let me begin by thanking Special
Representative Otunbayeva for her briefing. We also
thank Mozambique for inviting Ms. Zubaida Akbar to
brief us on the challenges, or rather the struggles and
humiliations, with which women in Afghanistan have to
contend on a daily basis. Her message on International
Women’s Day has special significance, and I assure
her that Malta will remain committed to keeping the
spotlight on this fundamental issue during its term on
the Security Council and beyond.
Afghanistan
remains
the
world’s
largest
humanitarian crisis, with approximately 28.3 million
Afghans in need of emergency humanitarian assistance.
According to the United Nations, in just 18 months,
Afghanistan’s gross domestic product declined by
approximately 30 per cent. The cost of a basic food
basket rose by 30 per cent, and unemployment by 40 per
cent. All that has tipped the country into yet another
cycle of impoverishment.
Against that backdrop, Malta reiterates its full
support for the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Our focus
remains on supporting the needs and rights of all
14/23

08/03/2023

Afghans. We are pleased that the European Union has
re-established its physical presence in Kabul to support
humanitarian operations.
Malta deplores the Taliban’s systematic gender
persecution and discrimination against women and
girls across all political, economic and social spheres.
Their systematic aggression against women violates
international law and contravenes fundamental human
rights and gender equality norms, as well as the Charter
of the United Nations itself. As the international
community, we are obliged to respond to abuses of
governance that institutionalize discrimination.
Afghan women and girls must be given access to
education and work and be able to participate in political
life without fear of reprisals. Afghanistan’s economic
recovery and development cannot be realized without
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation.
Women are critical leaders for change. Without
them, there is little hope for a brighter tomorrow
in Afghanistan.
Malta is also deeply concerned about the
restrictive edicts with which the de facto authorities
targeted women in December 2022. They are not only
reprehensible but threaten to undermine the crucial
humanitarian operations across Afghanistan. As
the Secretary-General states in his quarterly report
(S/2023/151), those edicts have effectively put the
development of the three-year Strategic Framework
for Afghanistan on hold. We welcome the work of the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee and Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in engaging with
the de facto authorities to find new parameters and
protocols for humanitarian operations in Afghanistan
that will allow aid to continue reaching the people of
Afghanistan without compromising the humanitarian
principles of independence, neutrality, impartiality
and humanity.
As the humanitarian and political crisis in
Afghanistan continues, much progress has to be made
in supporting the functioning of the Afghan economy
and local markets, especially in the face of mass acute
hunger. The Council must remain vigilant and united
to respond swiftly to any further repressive measures
by the de facto authorities. The latest report of the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in Afghanistan (A/HRC/52/84) illustrates the state of
the shrinking space for civil society in the country. We
23-06935

08/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

support the recommendations outlined in his report
and call on the de facto authorities to implement them
in full.
As the causes of the current crisis are multifaceted
and diverse, we strongly support the renewal of
UNAMA’s mandate, which includes robust protections
and advancements for the full spectrum of women’s
rights. We look forward to actively engaging with
and further supporting the Mission in accomplishing
its priorities.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Allow me to begin
by thanking the briefers for their informative remarks
and updates, which have enriched our discussions and
enlightened our perspectives on the matter at hand.
This first quarterly meeting of the Security
Council on the work and activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and on the situation in Afghanistan in 2023 represents
a crucial opportunity to lay fundamental groundwork
as part of our shared responsibilities, especially in
the light of the Mission’s imminent mandate renewal.
Based on our long-standing support for the essential
role that UNAMA plays in Afghanistan and for the
broad endorsement of the mandate established by
resolution 2626 (2022), including from key actors with
deep knowledge of the situation on the ground, Brazil
intends to favour its extension, and we count on the
guidance of the co-penholders in that regard. We very
much hope that once it is approved, the mandate’s new
cycle will contribute to progress across all sectors of
Afghan society.
As we have said on previous occasions, Brazil
firmly believes that a stable, economically viable and
peaceful Afghanistan is attainable only if all people
of Afghanistan, including women and girls, have
access to and receive education and fully, equally
and meaningfully participate in and contribute to
the country’s future and development, in line with
resolutions 1325 (2000), 2593 (2021) and 2626 (2022).
Similarly, the future we all seek for the Afghan people
depends on the necessary respect for human rights law,
as well as on maintaining the full scope of humanitarian
assistance on the ground.
In that context, there can be no doubt that
imposing restrictions on the work of humanitarians
and non-governmental organizations, both national and
international, and denying the rights of Afghan women
and girls and erasing their presence from public life,

S/PV.9277

can lead only to further desperation and instability. We
urge all parties to allow and facilitate rapid, safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian assistance to all in
need in order to protect civilians, including humanitarian
personnel and people in vulnerable situations,
especially children. For that reason, Brazil reiterates
its appreciation to Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths,
UNAMA’s leadership and all partners and stakeholders
for their recent and ongoing efforts to safeguard both the
maintenance of crucial humanitarian assistance and the
fundamental rights of women and girls in the country.
At this critical juncture, we once again urge the
relevant authorities in Afghanistan to show the necessary
goodwill and flexibility needed to urgently reverse the
restrictive approach they have adopted so far. At the
very least, we call on them to remove obstacles to the
delivery of aid and to widen the civic space for women
and girls. That said, we firmly believe in the need for
continued engagement with the de facto authorities,
and that symbolic gestures, such as acknowledging
improvements in the fight against corruption and drug
trafficking, can go a long way to building bridges of
mutual understanding and trust between Afghanistan’s
leaders and the international community. Above all,
ensuring that all channels of communication are open
and running is key, not only to upholding the rights of all
Afghans but also to promoting long-term peace, stability
and development.
In line with its long-standing tradition in
international protection, Brazil’s Government has
decided to authorize humanitarian visas to people
affected by the crisis in Afghanistan. Since September
2021, we have already authorized more than 8,000 visas
for Afghans in need, paying special attention to requests
from women and children. As Brazil has remained
one of the few countries in the world to grant visas
without major requirements, we would like to remind
the Council of the central importance of the principle
of responsibility-sharing in ensuring effective protection
for displaced populations, with due consideration for the
fundamental role of host countries and communities.
Both the maintenance of humanitarian operations and the
welfare of women and girls must remain at the heart of
our efforts to build a stable, functioning and self-reliant
Afghanistan. Brazil reaffirms its steadfast commitment
to continuing to pursue the imminent task of bringing
peace and development to Afghanistan through our
joint work and collective responsibility.

23-0693515/23

S/PV.9277

The situation in Afghanistan

08/03/2023

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Roza Otunbayeva and Ms. Zubaida
Akbar for their very informative briefings. I would like
to highlight two points.

international community, as set out in resolution 2593
(2021). The requirements outlined in the resolution,
including with regard to counter-terrorism, continue
to make any potential engagement with the Taliban
conditional on their honouring of their promises.

As we are celebrating International Women’s
Day today, I would like to emphasize how vital it
is to address this issue. The situation of women
and girls in Afghanistan continues to deteriorate.
They are still being deprived of their most basic
rights and freedoms. The ban on women working in
non-governmental organizations continues to have
disastrous consequences, and the same is true for the
ban on women and girls’ access to secondary education,
university and many jobs. The Taliban are responsible
for the grave deterioration of the humanitarian,
economic and social situation in Afghanistan, and
especially as a result of the policies they have instituted
that systematically exclude women. We call on the
Taliban to rescind their measures, which undermine
any possibility of the country achieving sustainable
and balanced development. We are also concerned
about the continuing violence against children and
about the increase in incidents of corporal punishment
and other inhumane and degrading treatment of the
population generally. The situation is complex, and the
challenges are many and multidimensional, particularly
with regard to the security situation. However, we
must continue our demands on the Taliban in terms of
safeguarding human rights, especially those of women
and girls. As we know, in actual fact all those issues
are interlinked, when we consider that the country’s
recovery will be impossible without the participation of
half its population.

In that context, we will continue to support the
work of UNAMA, whose overall mandate remains
entirely pertinent to the situation and in accord with the
previous relevant resolutions of the Council. We also
commend the efforts of the Under-Secretary-General
in support of Afghanistan and remain committed to
contributing to efforts to support the Afghan people.

France reiterates its support for the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and remains determined to provide every
possible assistance to the people of Afghanistan.
France has steadfastly reaffirmed its support for the
Afghan people and will continue to provide them with
humanitarian assistance in full respect for humanitarian
principles and international law. We will continue to
help the Afghan population, with a special focus on the
needs of women and girls. As one of the major donors
to Afghanistan, the European Union is also continuing
its response. Needless to say, we will continue to
engage with our partners, including neighbouring
countries and other countries in the region. They have a
key role to play in helping meet the expectations of the
16/23

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Otunbayeva and Ms. Akbar
for their briefings. I am grateful to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
its work to advance the Security Council’s goal of a
stable, prosperous and secure Afghanistan. The United
States fully supports UNAMA and its mission, and we
welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendations
on strategic objectives and priorities for UNAMA
(S/2023/151).
As we know, today is International Women’s Day,
when the United States and countries around the world
honour the achievements and valour of women and
girls everywhere. And on this occasion, we must also
highlight the immense barriers facing women and girls
Nowhere is that more pronounced than in Afghanistan.
The Taliban have continued to prevent women and girls
from exercising their human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Regrettably, in late December the Taliban
announced an edict forbidding women from working
for national and international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). Later that month, on top of an
existing ban on girls attending secondary school, the
Taliban suspended permission for women to attend
public and private universities. Those obstacles add to
the numerous edicts and restrictions that the Taliban
have disproportionately placed on women and girls
since August 2021. By preventing women from working
for NGOs, including humanitarian organizations, they
are jeopardizing the lives of Afghans who depend on
the aid that many women deliver. That aid is a matter
of survival, particularly for women-headed households
that are already among the most vulnerable.
UNAMA’s mandate will soon expire. The United
States underscores its strong support for the Mission’s
comprehensive mandate, including its vital work on
23-06935

08/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

human rights, the protection of children and civilians
and women’s empowerment. It is critical to working
for the peace and stability that we all agree is so
important for Afghanistan and the world. The Security
Council must act to preserve UNAMA as a lifeline
for the people of Afghanistan. The United States
opposes — I repeat, opposes — any effort to interfere
with a simple technical extension, which would be
entirely unwarranted. It would negatively affect both
UNAMA and the Secretary-General’s plan to convene
special envoys for Afghanistan. The Council should
preserve UNAMA’s mandate through a simple technical
extension without delay. We have only days left. More
broadly, the Taliban’s grave restrictions demand a
strong response from Afghanistan’s neighbours and
the rest of the international community. We cannot sit
silently by and watch the Taliban erase women from
public life.
When the Deputy Secretary-General travelled to
Afghanistan this year, she noted broad unity among
the States of the region on the belief that edicts
restricting women’s education and employment should
be repealed. The United States supports the regional
efforts to enshrine that unity in the form of a General
Assembly draft resolution and will continue to do its
part to support the people of Afghanistan. We expect the
Taliban to allow unhindered humanitarian access for aid
workers of all genders, safe conditions for humanitarian
personnel and the independent and impartial provision
of assistance. We urge the Taliban to establish a credible
process to support representative governance that fully
reflects Afghanistan’s rich diversity, including the
full, equal and meaningful representation of women
and minority communities. We stand firm in our longstanding commitment to advancing gender equity
and equality and the empowerment of women and
girls everywhere.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Otunbayeva and Ms. Akbar for their briefings.
Today is International Women’s Day. On this
special day, as we consider the situation in Afghanistan,
we cannot help turning our attention to Afghan women.
They are a vulnerable segment of Afghan society and
the victims worst affected by the country’s many years
of war and turmoil. They are in urgent need of global
attention and assistance. Afghan women yearn for a
peaceful and tranquil homeland and a future full of
hope. They should be well integrated into Afghanistan’s

S/PV.9277

economy and society and become important drivers
and primary beneficiaries of the national peace and
reconstruction process. And their rights and interests
should be effectively protected in that process.
Security and stability are vital to the protection
of the rights and interests of Afghan women and girls.
Since the beginning of this year there have been several
vicious terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, resulting
in significant casualties. Terrorist forces such as the
Islamic State-Khorasan and the Eastern Turkistan
Islamic Movement have colluded with one another in
plotting and staging terrorist attacks in Afghanistan,
and we have recently been seeing a resurgence in their
activities. The international community should follow
those developments closely, take a zero-tolerance
approach to combating all forms of terrorism and urge the
Taliban to take resolute and robust measures to prevent
the build-up of terrorist forces in Afghanistan and
effectively ensure the safety and security of the Afghan
people, as well as foreign citizens in Afghanistan.
Economic and social development is key to
safeguarding the rights and interests of Afghan women
and girls. The Afghan economy showed positive signs
in the past year, and its fiscal revenues have increased
considerably, which is encouraging. Afghanistan
should further develop its domestic markets, restore
economic growth, expand connectivity, deepen
regional cooperation, promote alternative agricultural
cultivation and continue to increase people’s income so
that they can live happy lives and the root causes of
turmoil and instability can be eliminated. That is the
only way to ensure that Afghan refugees and displaced
persons will be able to return to their homeland and that
women and girls can truly enjoy peace and dignity as
soon as possible.
Protecting the rights and interests of Afghan
women and girls goes hand in hand with assistance
from the international community. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/151) indicates that the Afghan
humanitarian situation is worsening, with countless
women and children lacking access to food and warm
clothing. Their very survival is at stake. This year,
28.3 million Afghans — two thirds of the country’s
population — will require humanitarian assistance.
According to recent news reports, developed donor
countries are considering cutting back on international
aid to Afghanistan, which is a worrisome development.
In the current circumstances, humanitarian assistance
to Afghanistan must not be reduced, let alone

23-0693517/23

S/PV.9277

The situation in Afghanistan

stopped. Developed donor countries should maintain
humanitarian aid to Afghanistan and explore more
direct and effective ways to ensure that such resources
are actually invested in the Afghan people, especially
women and girls.
The rights and interests of Afghan women and
children cannot be protected without the lifting of
external constraints. Unilateral sanctions have seriously
undermined Afghanistan’s economic foundations and
have exacerbated the humanitarian situation on the
ground, becoming a huge drag on the survival and
development of local women and children. They should be
lifted immediately. Afghanistan’s $7 billion in overseas
assets belong to its people and should be used for their
benefit. Last month, the United States District Court for
the Southern District of New York ruled that the United
States has no right to divert Afghanistan’s overseas
assets for other uses, in yet another demonstration that
the freezing of Afghan assets is unjustified and illegal.
The United States and other countries concerned should
immediately return the assets of the Central Bank of
Afghanistan to the Afghan people so that the women and
children of Afghanistan can benefit from them, instead
of making various excuses to delay their handover.
China is concerned about the recently enacted bans
on access to education and work that target Afghan
women and about their potential impact on the basic
rights and interests of Afghan women, as well as on the
humanitarian situation in the country. We hope that the
interim Government of Afghanistan will take concrete
actions to guarantee women’s education and employment.
Where the international community is concerned, mutual
respect and effective engagement are prerequisites for
exerting influence and finding solutions to problems.
Mere condemnation and pressure can be not just futile
but counterproductive. A peaceful, stable, developing
and prosperous Afghanistan is what all Afghan people
aspire to and is in line with the common interests of the
countries of the region and the international community
as a whole. As a neighbour of Afghanistan. China has
always been committed to supporting Afghanistan in
achieving peace, stability and development. China will
work together with the international community to
support the Afghan people in finding a path out of their
current predicament at an early date in order to create a
better future.
Last but not least, I would like to commend
Special Representative Otunbayeva and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
18/23

08/03/2023

for their work. We support UNAMA in the active
implementation of its mandate, which plays an important
role in alleviating the humanitarian situation, promoting
economic development and improving governance
capabilities in Afghanistan. China stands ready to
continue engaging with other members of the Security
Council to make proper arrangements for the renewal of
UNAMA’s mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Faiq (Afghanistan): I thank you, Sir, for
convening us today and I congratulate Mozambique on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month.
I also want to thank Special Representative Otunbayeva
for her accurate but depressing update and to Ms. Akbar
for her bold and powerful remarks.
This International Women’s Day, I join the
international community in sending a message of
solidarity and support to all courageous women and girls
around the world, particularly the brave and resilient
women and girls of Afghanistan, who fearlessly fight
against the oppressive rule of the Taliban to restore their
social, economic and political rights. In just over a year
and a half, the Taliban has systemically stripped Afghan
women and girls of their fundamental human rights and
effectively erased them from society. Under Taliban
rule, women and girls have faced gender apartheid
and gender-based discrimination, including forced
marriage, depriving them of health care, education and
freedom of movement. In just over a year and a half,
the doors of science, technology and knowledge have
been closed to Afghan women and girls. The quality of
Afghans’ once-modern education, from primary school
to university, is being radicalized and has descended
into extremism. As a result, millions of young Afghans
are facing educational uncertainty.
In just over a year and a half, essential services,
including those in administrative, electronic, banking
and Internet sectors, have been dismantled. In just over
a year and a half, poverty and unemployment have
increased. Starvation and hunger have driven some of
our people to resort to selling their body parts. Some
28 million Afghans are suffering from food insecurity,
while the Taliban boast that domestic revenue has
increased without explaining where that revenue is
spent. Contrary to the Taliban’s claims, they have
fostered corruption in Afghan institutions, going so
far as to resort to robbery by collecting taxes under
23-06935

08/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

different names and false justifications. In just over a
year and a half, natural and human-made disasters have
caused immense human casualties and financial losses
without effective preventive action. In just over a year
and a half, millions of Afghan refugees and migrants
have fled the country and been trapped by human
traffickers. Those Afghans are often tortured, killed
or imprisoned, or even lose their lives crossing borders
and seas. We have recently seen numerous Afghans
lose their lives in Italy and Bulgaria. In just over a year
and a half, despite the Taliban’s claims that they are
ensuring domestic security, the blood of hundreds of
our innocent people has been spilled by terrorist groups
in Afghan homes, schools and religious centres without
transparency or accountability.
In just over a year and a half, the Taliban have
reversed all of Afghanistan’s achievements over the past
two decades and have abolished mechanisms for the
protection of human rights. In the absence of an effective
judicial system, the country is being ruled from the barrel
of a gun without any national legitimacy. In just over
a year and a half, Afghanistan has been politically and
globally isolated because of the Taliban’s barbaric and
un-Islamic policies and behaviour. In just over a year and
a half, our national security forces have been dismantled,
with thousands of personnel arrested, tortured, forced to
leave the country or extrajudicially executed.
In just over a year and a half, competence,
professionalism and merit-based recruitment have
lost their value. Thousands of skilled and experienced
professionals, including doctors, engineers, military
leaders, journalists, schoolteachers, university professors
and activists specializing in agriculture, art, literature,
economy, law, political science, history and philosophy
have left the country as refugees. They are living in dire
economic straits in neighbouring countries, waiting for
assistance from the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.
Finally, it has been just over a year and a half since
an extremist group took Afghanistan by force and
against the will of the Afghan people. In that context, the
people of Afghanistan have continued to live their lives
with resilience and in hope of change. The dark regime
will never be able to suppress the Afghan people’s desire
for freedom. The Taliban’s oppressive regime is a tragic
reality for Afghans today, but it does not represent the
Afghan people. Without public support and national
legitimacy, the Taliban regime will not endure. The
Taliban have placed Afghanistan on the brink of a

S/PV.9277

social, economic and political precipice. If their policies
continue they will lead to further misery and to the
destruction of Afghanistan. Their refusal to establish an
inclusive and accountable system based on the rule of
law, justice and the will of the people is indicative of
their lack of interest in putting Afghanistan on a path to
peace and prosperity. Furthermore, their justification of
their strict policies and actions is largely due to a lack of
proper Islamic knowledge and modern management and
governance skills. I fully agree with the Ambassador of
the United Arab Emirates that the actions of the Taliban
do not represent the culture of the people of Afghanistan
or Islamic values. The Taliban’s practices defame
Islamic principles and disseminate Islamophobia. Their
actions and policies are a biased propagation and false
interpretation of Islam derived from religious teachings
in madrasas beyond Afghanistan.
In addition, the Taliban are either unable or unwilling
to respond to national and international calls to reverse
their oppressive policies towards women and girls.
Contrary to their claims to be serving the impoverished
people of Afghanistan, they are using the people’s dire
economic and humanitarian situation as a bargaining
chip for their demands and the consolidation of their
power. That is especially true with regard women and
girls’ right to education and work. They are implementing
a distorted policy that runs counter to the interests of
donor countries and the people of Afghanistan. By
banning female workers at the non-governmental
organizations, the Taliban are interfering with the
delivery of aid and obstructing the distribution of and
access to humanitarian assistance.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General, the
international community and donor countries for
their patience and continued support to the people of
Afghanistan through strong statements, life-saving
services, including the delivery of aid, and the funding
of the United Nations humanitarian response plan. While
we appreciate the cash flows to the people of Afghanistan,
we also would like to underline that there should be a
mechanism to make sure that the funds are delivered to the
country’s vulnerable people. I welcome the decision and
judgment of the United States District Court with regard
to the $3.5 billion in assets belonging to Afghanistan’s
Central Bank. We hope that those funds — the national
reserves of Afghanistan — will be used by a legitimate
Government with strict, transparent monitoring for the
long-term benefit of the Afghan people.

23-0693519/23

S/PV.9277

The situation in Afghanistan

We commend the recent visit to Afghanistan by
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths to express
solidarity and support for Afghan women, engage with
diverse groups and stakeholders, and build momentum
for a political track. Let me emphasize that we welcome
principled engagement with the Taliban without
concessions or compromises on the legitimate demands
and rights of the people of Afghanistan, as well as the
Charter of the United Nations and universal human
rights, norms and principles. We must be careful not
to help the unacceptable become a norm. Engagement
must not create obstacles to the social, economic and
political rights of progressive Afghans or democratic
forces inside and outside Afghanistan.
I would like to ask the United Nations, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and our international partners to support and provide
platforms for progressive and democratic movements
of Afghans inside and outside Afghanistan. They are
against the current situation and would like to find a
solution. Their voices must be heard, and they must
be engaged in all discussions about Afghanistan. The
Taliban are not the only representatives of Afghanistan.
The United Nations has all the right tools, such as
targeted sanctions, and the Security Council should use
them to pressure the Taliban to comply effectively with
their commitments. In addition, we need a collective
approach and united response from all international
partners, including Security Council members,
the countries of the region and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
It is very alarming that the Taliban have recently
increased their crackdown on and targeted killings
of former security and defence forces. Despite their
amnesty announcement, there are credible reports of
extrajudicial killings, the detention of former security
forces and requests for money for their release. Last
month, Mr. Sirat, a former special forces member, was
taken out of a public bus in Sheberghan, after which
the Taliban tortured him and cut his body in two.
Just recently Taliban fighters released a video of the
merciless execution of Commander Badruddin. Shir
Mohammad, another former national police officer in
Bala Karz in Kandahar, was taken from his home at
midnight and killed. That happened in the capital of the
Taliban and the city of its leader Mullah Haibatullah
Akhundzada. Those are crimes against humanity and
should be prosecuted by the International Criminal
20/23

08/03/2023

Court. I want to express our appreciation to Mr. Richard
Bennett, Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Afghanistan, for documenting those human
rights crimes and reporting them to the Human
Rights Council.
In conclusion, as we are discussing the UNAMA
mandate extension, I want to first of all express our
appreciation to the co-penholders for their efforts
to extend the UNAMA mandate, and to UNAMA
itself, especially for its coordination and delivery of
humanitarian assistance and its documenting and
reporting of human rights violations. We would like
to support UNAMA’s strong mandate. We urge for the
implementation of all mandate components, particularly
the political aspect, which focuses on a political
solution with the engagement of all Afghans. In that
regard, we would like to once again highlight the robust
role of the United Nations leadership in addressing
the current crisis and dilemma in Afghanistan by
initiating a political process, supported unanimously
by the Security Council and under the auspices of
the Secretary-General, to bring all stakeholders
together to achieve a truly representative and inclusive
political system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank Mozambique for convening this meeting. We
welcome the presence of Ms. Otunbayeva, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, at this meeting
and appreciate her updated and insightful briefing. We
also thank Ms. Akbar for her views.
Since August 2021, Afghanistan has been grappling
with a multitude of challenges. Despite the efforts of
the United Nations to alleviate the humanitarian crisis,
the situation remains dire, with an estimated 28 million
people projected to require humanitarian and protection
assistance in 2023. Furthermore, the threat of terrorism
persists with the presence of Da’esh and Al-Qaida
affiliates. In the meantime, the recent restrictions and
bans imposed on Afghan women and girls that prevent
them from accessing education are deeply concerning.
However, we must beware of politicizing or
exploiting humanitarian aid for political purposes,
which would harm the Afghan people who depend on
the aid for their survival. It is also crucial to ensure
that the release of the frozen assets belonging to the
Afghan people is expedited and not subject to political
23-06935

08/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

conditions. That is critical to restoring the Afghan
economy and saving lives. In order to ensure that
the Afghan people receive the support they need,
their humanitarian aid must remain impartial and
unconditional. We must prioritize the well-being of the
Afghan people above everything else.
As neighbours of Afghanistan, we are deeply
concerned about the potentially disastrous consequences
of the ongoing situation there. The presence of Da’esh
and Al-Qaida affiliates, as well as drug cultivation and
trafficking, poses a significant threat to the security of
Afghanistan, its neighbours and the entire region. If it is
not addressed effectively, the situation has the potential
to lead to widespread destitution and a massive influx
of migrants into neighbouring countries, which are
already overburdened by having to host millions of
displaced Afghans.
We strongly support the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). UNAMA has a critical role to play in
promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan, and
it is essential that its mandate is extended to ensure
continued support for the Afghan people during this
challenging time.
Iran hosts more than 5 million Afghan people,
making it one of the largest hosting countries. Despite
receiving minimum support from the international
community and donor countries and facing challenges
caused by the inhumane unilateral sanctions of the
United States and Western countries, Iran has continued
to provide essential services to Afghans living in Iran
for over four decades.
Iran has provided free education and training to all
Afghan students living in Iran. The Iranian education
system has welcomed 670,000 Afghan students,
including 3,700 students with special education needs
or mental disabilities and over 33,000 students enrolled
in Iranian universities. Iran has taken further steps to
support Afghan women and girls who have been affected
by the recent restrictions imposed by the Taliban. Iran
has streamlined the visa process for women and girls
seeking to continue their education within Iran.
Since the Taliban took control of Afghanistan in
August 2021, the Islamic Republic of Iran has taken
a clear, consistent and unequivocal position. It has
repeatedly urged the de facto authorities in Afghanistan
to establish an inclusive government that represents all
Afghan ethnic religious, linguistic and political groups.

S/PV.9277

Iran has reiterated that recognition of the current de
facto authorities is contingent on compliance with their
obligations, including the establishment of an inclusive
and truly representative government. This position has
not changed and remains valid, and we are committed
to upholding our principles. However, we recognize
the importance of ensuring that our position does
not negatively affect the lives and livelihoods of our
Afghan brothers and sisters or exacerbates the already
dire humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.
We are committed to working collaboratively
with all neighbouring countries of Afghanistan
and other relevant partners to support the Afghan
people during this challenging time. Recently, on
7 March, the neighbouring countries of Afghanistan,
along with Russia, held their first meeting of special
representatives for Afghanistan in Tashkent. The
discussions at the meeting centred around the current
situation in Afghanistan and how the parties can
collaborate to improve its condition and establish
long-term peace and stability in the region. Our goal
is to achieve comprehensive and durable peace in
Afghanistan, as well as sustainable development in
the country. We believe that this can be achieved only
through joint efforts and collective cooperation among
neighbours, the countries concerned in the region and
the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to congratulate
Mozambique and you, Mr. President, on an active and
successful presidency of the Council during this month.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report on Afghanistan (S/2023/151) and the Special
Representative, Her Excellency Ms. Roza Otunbayeva,
for her briefing today. We also heard from two Afghan
citizens. The Security Council’s proceedings would
have been more productive if we were able to interact
with the people who actually control the territory
of Afghanistan.
As Afghanistan’s immediate and closest neighbour,
Pakistan has suffered enormously from the four
decades of conflict in the country. Pakistan desires
peace and stability in Afghanistan as a strategic
compulsion. Pakistan is deeply concerned by recent
developments in Afghanistan, reflected in the report of
the Secretary-General. We join others in expressing our
deep disappointment at the further restrictions placed

23-0693521/23

S/PV.9277

The situation in Afghanistan

by the Afghan interim Government on the rights of
women and girls to education and work. We hope that
the Afghan interim Government will soon find a solution
to restore these rights in the light of Islamic injunctions.
Pakistan commends Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, United Nations Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffith and Special Representative
Roza Otunbayeva for their efforts and engagements with
the Afghan interim Government to create space for the
continuation of humanitarian assistance to the people
of Afghanistan. We continue to believe that ending or
reducing humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan would
be morally wrong and politically counter-productive.
As the report of the Secretary-General outlines,
28 million Afghan women, children and men face
abject poverty and need urgent assistance. Halting or
reducing humanitarian assistance would hurt the very
people — women and children — whose human rights
the international community seeks to uphold. It would
also create more refugees, more drugs and more violence
in and from Afghanistan. We therefore urge the full
funding of the Secretary-General’s $4.2 billion recovery
plan for Afghanistan.
On the other hand, what is needed is a more
comprehensive international effort to revive the Afghan
economy. Although the Afghan interim Government
appears to have mobilized resources to manage itself
through trade and customs revenues, the Afghan
people continue to suffer because of the collapse of
the Afghan economy after external assistance was
eliminated following the withdrawal of foreign troops
from Afghanistan. It is therefore essential to revive the
Afghan banking and financial sector, productively utilize
Afghanistan’s national resources and assets, finance
desperately needed reconstruction of infrastructure and
implement the several shovel ready connectivity projects,
including the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
gas pipeline, the Central Asia South Asia electricity grid
and the Uzbekistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan rail project.
All of Afghanistan’s neighbours support such steps for
the revival of the Afghan economy.
Pakistan’s major concern is the terrorist attacks
within and from Afghanistan by Da’esh, Tehrik-e
Taliban Pakistan (TTP) and other terrorist groups. In
recent months, Pakistan has endured a series of such
terrorist attacks emanating from the TTP and other
associated terrorists from sentry posts in Afghanistan.
These terrorist actions also have external sponsorship
and financing.
22/23

08/03/2023

The Afghan interim Government has repeatedly
assured us and others that Afghanistan’s territory
will not be used for terrorism against neighbouring
countries, including Pakistan or any other country.
The Afghan interim Government needs to demonstrate
more effectively that it has the intent and the capacity
to fulfil these assurances.
Pakistan has continued its patient engagement
with the Afghan interim Government to address our
concerns with regard to terrorism, border incidents
provoked by local Taliban commanders and other
issues. Pakistan’s Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
Hina Rabbani Khar visited Kabul on 29 November last
year to promote these objectives, including respect for
the rights of Afghan women and girls and to assure the
Afghan interim Government of Pakistan’s continued
support for humanitarian, economic and technical
assistance to Afghanistan. In addition, our Defence
Minister led a delegation to Kabul on 22 February to
discuss the threat of terrorism and other security issues.
It would be unrealistic and indeed dangerous
to believe, as we have just heard, that the Afghan
interim Government can be replaced or destabilized by
force. That would be a recipe for further conflict and
instability in Afghanistan and throughout the region.
We have just ended 40 years of conflict. We must not
repeat the mistakes that have been made in the past.
Despite the challenging environment, Pakistan
believes that the continuing engagement with the
Afghan interim Government is the best means to
achieve the international community’s objectives for
the observance of human rights, especially women’s
rights, inclusive governance and an end to terrorism
within and from Afghanistan.
We value the role that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and Special
Representative Otunbayeva are playing in Afghanistan.
Pakistan supports the renewal of UNAMA’s mandate.
It is essential for Afghanistan’s immediate neighbours
to move in concert with the efforts to restore normalcy
and stability in Afghanistan. We also believe that the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation has a vital role in
supporting Afghanistan’s active revival of its economy
and in helping to restore human rights, especially the
rights of women and girls, in accordance with Islamic
injunctions by presenting best practices. Despite current
geopolitical tensions, Pakistan believes that it is in the
interest of the major Powers to cooperate in the endeavour
to build peace and stability in Afghanistan.
23-06935

08/03/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

Pakistan endorses the proposals for a clear road map
or pathway to normalization in Afghanistan. Such a road
map should, on the one hand, set out the desired objectives
of the international community, and on the other, indicate
the incentives for the Afghan interim Government,
which seeks the lifting of sanctions and international
recognition. As a first step, the travel ban exemptions
could be restored, and a review of the sanctions regime
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) could be
initiated. We hope that the anomaly of Afghanistan’s
United Nations representation will also soon be addressed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Roza
Otunbayeva, for her briefing and civil society briefer
Zubaida Akbar for her remarks.
As a contiguous neighbour and long-standing
partner of Afghanistan, and given our strong historical
and civilizational linkages to the Afghan people, India
has direct stakes in ensuring the return of peace and
stability to the country. In the interest of time, however,
I shall be brief, limiting myself to four points only.
First, the collective approach of the international
community has been articulated in resolution 2593
(2021) of August 2021, which was adopted under India’s
presidency of the Security Council. In accordance with
the resolution, we expect that the territory of Afghanistan
should not be used for sheltering, training, planning or
financing terrorist acts, specifically terrorist individuals
and entities proscribed by the Security Council. It also
means acting against drug trafficking. Resolution 2593
(2021) also outlines the need for the formation of a truly
inclusive and representative Government structure that
represents all sections of Afghan society, respects the
rights of all Afghans and ensures equal rights for women,
girls and members of minority groups, including their
access to education.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
remains deeply distressing. The dire situation has been
highlighted by the Special Representative of the Secretary-

S/PV.9277

General as well. In response to the humanitarian needs of
the Afghan people and in response to the urgent appeals
made by the United Nations, India has dispatched several
shipments of humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. We
are committed to continuing our help to the Afghan people
going forward. In that regard, we have provided several
shipments of humanitarian assistance, including 40,000
metric tons of wheat, 65 tons of medical aid and 28 tons of
other relief material. Recently, we also sent approximately
5,000 units of stationary items and winter clothing for
primary school students of Habibia High School in
Kabul. In addition, we are also partnering with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for the
welfare and rehabilitation of the drug-user population
in Afghanistan, especially among Afghan women. We
have also assisted UNODC by supplying medical aid,
blankets and female hygiene kits, as per their requirement.
Thirdly, India appreciates and supports the work being
done by the United Nations in Afghanistan. We actively
took part in finalizing the draft of the current mandate of
UNAMA after the takeover of Kabul by the Taliban in
2021. We are ready to work with the Secretary-General in
his efforts to find progress on the situation in Afghanistan.
Fourthly, we are particularly concerned about
increasing attempts to remove women from public life
in Afghanistan. We call for women and minorities to be
included in Afghanistan’s future and their rights to be
fully respected.
I would like to reiterate once again that security and
stability in Afghanistan will continue to be our priority,
and India will continue to speak out in support of the
Afghan people. Peace and stability in Afghanistan are
critical imperatives that all of us need to collectively
strive for. India will continue to play its constructive role
in pursuit of that objective. The interests of the Afghan
people will always be at the core of all our efforts.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

23-0693523/23
