S/PV.7566

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7566th meeting

Wednesday, 25 November 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wilson. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the progress towards the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (S/2015/866)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-38967 (E)
*1538967*

S/PV.7566

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
progress towards the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (S/2015/866)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/866, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the progress towards the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sellassie.
Ms. Sellassie: It is my honour to brief the Security
Council for the second time on the implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and the
situation in the Sahel. This is an important opportunity
to highlight the predicament of a region that desperately
needs the continued focus of the Security Council.
I take the floor at a time when terrorist attacks have
taken place around the world — in Bamako, northern
Cameroon, Nigeria, Paris and Lebanon, and the
targeting of a Russian aircraft over the Sinai — attacks
in which too many innocent lives were lost and which
I strongly condemn. The attacks attest to the global
reach of terrorism and the interconnectedness of all
communities, rich or poor, and are a reminder to all of
us that no one is immune to this threat.
The fight against terrorism requires international
solidarity. Global partnerships in the fight against
terrorism are no longer an option; they are an imperative
for survival.
Security threats continue to be the main
preoccupation in the Sahel region. Increasingly, the
countries of the region, which are among the poorest
and least developed in the world, are forced to dedicate
significant percentages of their budgets to address

2/18

25/11/2015

security threats, in a region where only 56 per cent of
children have access to primary education and only
36 per cent of the population can read or write. This
unsustainable vicious cycle can only worsen without
strong international assistance.
It is very alarming that young people and women
in the Sahel, who constitute a vast majority of the
population, are the targets of recruitment into radical
movements. Up to 41 million young people under 25
years of age in Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania
and the Niger alone face hopelessness and are at risk
of radicalization or migration. If nothing is done to
improve access to education and increase employment,
integration and opportunities for young people, the
Sahel, I am afraid, will become a hub of mass migration
and recruitment and training of terrorist groups and
individuals, which, as Council members know, will
ultimately have grave consequences for global peace
and security.
Drug traffickers are increasingly colluding with
armed groups and terrorism movements that grant
them safe passage in exchange for financial benefits.
If conflicts are to be prevented in the Sahel, illicit
trafficking, including in drugs, weapons and human
beings, should be stopped.
Governance challenges are persistent, with
major segments of populations continuing to be
denied meaningful political participation. Building
communities’ resilience continues to be a real
challenge in the Sahel due to the persistence of extreme
environmental degradation, repeated climate shocks
and demographic trends that, together, are pushing
millions of people to the brink of humanitarian disaster.
The persistence of those challenges notwithstanding,
there are reasons to be optimistic about the Sahel. First
of all, the Sahel has continued to receive the sustained
attention of the international community, as evidenced
by the numerous Sahel strategies. Improvements in the
coordination of our efforts and strategies will enhance
the benefits of those activities for Sahel communities.
Secondly, the countries of the region have taken
greater leadership in, and ownership of, initiatives
designed to address regional challenges in the Sahel.
There is evidence of enhanced partnership and
coordination between the countries of the region
and international partners using various platforms
established by the Group of Five for the Sahel, the

15-38967

25/11/2015

Peace and security in Africa

African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
Thirdly, the United Nations entities working in
the region have greatly improved coordination and
coherence in the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. My office has made
ownership of projects by the countries of the region the
hallmark of its regional programming by ensuring full
consultations and effective operational partnerships
with regional organizations, Governments, civil society
and beneficiary communities.
We have worked closely and in an innovative
manner with several United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes that are now jointly developing
and implementing projects aimed at addressing
multidimensional issues in the areas of governance,
security and resilience. In that regard, significant
progress has been made in the development of regional
projects by United Nations entities and the International
Organization for Migration, in collaboration with
regional organizations and countries of the region.
I recognize the central responsibility of the Sahel
countries to take the lead in finding solutions to the
challenges they face. However, I am also obliged to
admit that the Sahel is a victim of the effects of such
global phenomena as climate change, drug trafficking,
violent extremism and the global economic decline,
which surpass the nations’ capacity to address them
and that require diverse tools to mitigate and prevent
these trends.
As I conclude, I would like to make two
recommendations. First, I would urge the Security
Council to remain engaged in support of the Sahel
region. Secondly, I would urge the Security Council to
fully use existing mechanisms and expand their mandate
to better monitor, report on and prevent the trafficking
of drugs in the Sahel region. This trade finances terror
and instability, and must be choked if our efforts are
to be successful. I would also like to highlight the
importance of listing all those who indirectly finance or
support terrorist activities in the Sahel. In that regard,
I commend the efforts of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, which
has so far listed seven entities and six individuals who
have their origins in the Sahel region.

S/PV.7566

Finally, I encourage the international community
to enhance its support to the United Nations and
regional organizations in addressing cross-cutting and
transboundary issues. Together, and only together, we
can prevent further deterioration of the situation in the
Sahel.
The President: I thank Ms. Guebre Sellassie
for her briefing, and also in particular for the two
recommendations that she made to us, which I hope we
shall be able to consider seriously. I hope that she will
not mind, considering that she has been so focused in
her remarks, if we come back to her with any questions
that members of the Council may want to raise.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank the United Kingdom presidency for having
convened this meeting under the agenda item on the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. I
also thank Ms. Guebre Sellassie, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, for her briefing.
Unfortunately, the Sahel region continues to face a
security situation characterized by the ongoing crisis in
Libya and many enduring threats, including terrorism,
in the Lake Chad Basin. As indicated in the report of
the Secretary-General on progress towards the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (S/2015/866),
security threats in the region — terrorism and violent
extremism in particular — require the countries of the
region to prioritize security, undermining efforts in
equally essential areas.
The major source of the terrorist threat in the
Sahel is Libya, which is engulfed in total chaos and
where a multitude of heavily armed terrorist groups
find safe haven and flourish. Moreover, the absence
of a Government of national unity that is capable of
restoring security in the country is fuelling the threat
to security in the Sahel. In that regard, Chad is deeply
concerned by the establishment and entrenchment of
a Daesh stronghold in southern Libya. In facing this
threat, we stress the urgent need to do everything
possible to thwart the expansionism of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and to assist Libyans in creating
a Government of national unity.
In the Lake Chad Basin, the terrorist group Boko
Haram has been severely weakened, although it
continues to carry out deadly asymmetrical attacks

15-389673/18

S/PV.7566

Peace and security in Africa

on innocent civilians. The group is no longer able to
launch headlong attacks against military positions or
to conquer cities, as it did some months ago. Despite
its modest means and an especially difficult economic
situation, Chad has contributed significantly to the fight
against barbarism and obscurantism. On the various
fronts of the fight against Boko Haram in neighbouring
countries, Chad has lost dozens of brave soldiers and
made significant financial sacrifices in its own budget.
We reiterate our appeal to the international community
and our bilateral and multilateral partners to support the
efforts of the countries of the Sahel and the Lake Chad
Basin, and call on the African Union to accelerate the
establishment of a trust fund to finance the operations
of the Multinational Joint Task Force.
Aware of the magnitude of the terrorist threat, at
their November summit in N’Djamena, the countries
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) decided
to pool their efforts in the areas of security and
development. In that regard, we note, among other
measures, the creation of a joint regional military
force and a regional military academy, the launch of a
regional aviation company, the construction of a railway
line connecting the five countries of the region, and the
abolition of visa requirements among them. These new
initiatives strengthen those already undertaken in the
framework of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for
the Sahel, ably chaired by Mali. As I thank that country
for its important efforts, Chad, in its twofold capacity as
entering President of the G-5 Sahel and the Ministerial
Coordination Platform, will continue to emphasize the
need to strengthen multifaceted cooperation in the areas
of security and development in the Sahel in general and
among the members of the G-5 Sahel in particular.
Along these lines, and given the close correlation
between security and development, Chad stresses
the urgent need to mobilize significant international
resources to finance specific projects for young people
and women. Promoting self-employment for those two
social sectors would reduce threats to peace, security
and development, including violent extremism, armed
conflict, trafficking of all kinds, and migration. We
encourage the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to pursue her efforts to raise awareness and galvanize
development partners with a view to the effective
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.
To that end, we underscore the need for the G-5
Sahel countries to participate fully in the definition,

4/18

25/11/2015

implementation, follow-up and assessment of priority
development projects. We also stress the need to bolster
the Office of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel and to consider very carefully
the transfer of the Office to the headquarters of the
permanent secretariat of the G-5 Sahel. The countries
of the region have made this request repeatedly, and
it should be considered during the December strategic
review of the Office. In the same vein, given the hope
raised by the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, the Security Council must meet at least three
times a year to discuss the many challenges in the Sahel
and the implementation of the Strategy.
In conclusion, we recall the utmost importance of
launching a United Nations multi-donor trust fund for
the Sahel so as to meet the immense expectations of the
countries of the region, pursuant to the recommendation
of the Secretary-General in his report.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel for her
briefing and for her dedicated work on the ground.
As the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/866) indicates, the Sahel region continues to
face grave security, development and socioeconomic
challenges. Close coordination of the activities by
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
and other regional and subregional actors, ensuring
complementarity of effort and enhancing the delivery
of assistance and support are crucial. The European
Union remains a dedicated partner in those efforts and
is implementing its respective strategy and an action
plan adopted earlier this year. As part of the European
Union Training Mission in Mali, Lithuania has and
deployed instructors to train Malian forces Koulikoro,
and we will continue to do so.
The 20 November assault on the Radisson Blu
Hotel in Bamako was the latest in a series of deadly
attacks. We strongly condemn that murderous attack
and express our condolences to all those affected.
The terrorist threat posed by Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram and groups such as the
Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa, Ansar
Eddine, Al-Mourabitoun, as well as human smuggling,
trafficking, the free flow of arms into the region,
further compounded by the Libya crisis, continue to
aggravate Sahel’s vulnerabilities.

15-38967

25/11/2015

Peace and security in Africa

We commend the implementation of projects and
flagship programmes by the United Nations family
aimed, inter alia, at strengthening security cooperation,
border protection, counter-terrorism coordination and
information-sharing and countering violent extremism
and radicalization in the Sahel. It was encouraging to
hear from the Special Envoy that there is more progress
in terms of better coordination of the work.
We also welcome the efforts of the G-5 Sahel to
reinforce regional security cooperation capacity by
carrying out joint cross-border military exercises, as
well its members willingness to work together on crossborder issues such as organized crime, radicalization
and the root causes of illegal migration.
Tackling poverty and social exclusion and lingering
grievances of individual communities within the
Sahel countries remains crucial. As the Speical Envoy
underlined, despite the fact that a huge percentage of
the population is below the age of 25, youth are not
systematically involved in decision-making and lack
education and employment opportunities. Such a
situation is a ticking time bomb because, as she also
noted, disaffected young people are easy prey for
terrorist recruiters and organized crime. The countries
of the region need to develop sustainable livelihoods,
with the support of international partners, strengthen
the presence of the State throughout the respective
countries, ensure the delivery of basic social services
and guarantee access to justice.
In all of the countries of the region, there is a clear
need to develop rule-of-law, law enforcement and
judicial capacities to be able to detain and try terrorists
and radical extremists. Tangible improvements are
also urgent in the detention and penitentiary systems,
considering the fact that prisons can often serve
as recruitment grounds for violent extremists and
criminals, especially in conditions where regular
criminals and petty offenders are held together with
terrorist suspects for lengthy periods. Concerns with
regard to the safety and security of judges who try
terrorist cases must also be taken into account and
addressed.
In our view, more attention is required on preventing
recruitment and radicalization among vulnerable
refugee and displaced persons communities, especially
in border zones, where terrorist extremists can come and
go as they please owing to porous borders. Such zones
are in general subject to particular vulnerabilities, and
it is therefore no wonder that when Boko Haram first

S/PV.7566

struck the Niger it did so in the border zone of RossoDiffa.
The role of women, civil society representatives
and religious leaders remains essential to counter
radicalization. Some good practices exist among the
countries of the region — for example, on promoting
moderate Islam, the training of Imams in Mali — that
could be shared and applied more broadly.
In conclusion, I would like to ask the Special Envoy
a couple of questions with regard to counter-terrorism
efforts. How would she assess progress in developing
national counter-terrorism/counter-violent extremism
strategies in the countries of the Sahel? How could the
Security Council aid those countries in that regard?
Earlier this year, there were recommendations to
strengthen her Office’s capacity on countering terrorism
and violent extremism. Has anything been done since?
How can we help her to strengthen the ability of her
Office to deliver on the ground?
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the briefing by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, as well as her efforts to step up
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.
The Sahel continues to face vulnerabilities in the
area of comprehensive
​​
security. The growing activity
of terrorist groups has affected the efforts to achieve
sustainable peace and speed up the implementation of
the Integrated Strategy, thereby jeopardizing security
and the safety of the inhabitants of the region. The
heightened violence by those groups makes it urgent
that we undertake national, regional and international
efforts to combat this scourge in a coordinated way so
as to prevent the proliferation of such organizations and
the escalation of violent extremism.
Regional and international coordination are also
urgent, given the porous borders and the vast territories,
which the countries of the region are barely able to
control. We therefore appreciate the efforts of the
States members of the Lake Chad Basin Commission
and of Benin in establishing and implementing a joint
multinational force to confront terrorist groups. We
encourage the countries of the region to follow that
example, all the while ensuring that the operations
of those forces are governed by international law and
human rights.
The deterioration in the security situation hampers
the implementation of the Humanitarian Strategic

15-389675/18

S/PV.7566

Peace and security in Africa

Response Plan for the Sahel and efforts aimed at
saving lives and improving the resilience and ability
of Governments to manage the work of development
actors. The prevailing insecurity has served to create
a transit corridor from sub-Saharan Africa to North
Africa and Europe for people seeking protection
and who are exposed to trafficking. We are greatly
concerned about the situation facing displaced persons
who board boats bound for Europe with a legitimate
hope of finding a better world.
The complex emergency affecting the Sahel is
one of the most protracted humanitarian crises of
recent times, and is aggravated by food insecurity,
malnutrition, epidemics and natural disasters.
We reiterate the importance for the international
community to contribute to the financing of the relevant
humanitarian appeals. It is also imperative to further
strengthen the coherence of United Nations efforts in
the Sahel to create conditions conducive to the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons.
It is essential for States to continue to promote gender
mainstreaming and integrate women into all sectors of
public live. We note the efforts to implement resolution
1325 (2000) and the adoption in countries of the region
of laws on gender parity in public institutions — an
initiative we hope others will emulate.
The young people of the Sahel have few prospects of
a better future. It is urgent to promote investments in the
education, health and employment sectors and to create
opportunities for young people, thereby preventing
migration, radicalization and the recruitment of young
by terrorist groups.
We reiterate our support for the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which is a model of
preventive action to prioritize projects to address the
structural causes of instability. The Strategy will allow
the Sahel region face the threat together and holistically
and to set up mechanisms for interaction and joint
cooperation among regional and local authorities.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting on peace and security in the
Sahel. We also thank Ms. Guebre Sellassie, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, for her
briefing and for the efforts she directs to marshall the
needed support for the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

6/18

25/11/2015

The Sahel faces many challenges in the security,
political and humanitarian fields. That has led to a
deterioration in the humanitarian situation and created
fertile ground for armed terrorist groups. In turn, that
poses a threat to peace and security in the region. It is
not an overstatement to say that the Sahel is a crossroads
for terrorist groups, including armed terrorist groups
coming from the Middle East. The effects of their
actions are clearly visible throughout the world. Jordan
emphatically condemns the terrorist attacks, especially
the recent attack that targeted a hotel in the centre of
Bamako. We reiterate our rejection of terrorism, which
is directed at civilians in many parts of the world.
On the security front, the increase in terrorist
groups’ activities and their move into the Sahel region,
and the expanding illicit trade in drugs and arms, the
result of weak security institutions and the inability
of some States in the region to protect their extensive
borders have all led to a deteriorating security situation
and undermined the security of citizens in the region
and of society as a whole.
Concerning the strengthening of regional security
cooperation among the countries of the Sahel with the aim
of eradicating terrorism and enhancing Africa’s peace
and security architecture, Jordan welcomes the steps
they have taken to eliminate Boko Haram, including
the Nouakchott Process and the establishment of the
Multinational Joint Task Force, as well as the creation
of the Group of Five for the Sahel. In that regard, Jordan
is of the view that the international community should
support the Sahel in creating a unified, comprehensive
regional strategy. It should be aimed both at eradicating
terrorism and at tackling the problem of terrorist groups
by depriving them of their ability to recruit citizens by
cutting off their financing sources and by dealing with
the region’s economic and social challenges so that the
groups can no longer exploit them in order to recruit
new fighters. The countries of the Sahel region should
also step up their efforts to counter transnational
security threats by strengthening their border controls
and ending illicit trafficking in arms, natural resources
and narcotics.
In the areas of political stability, peaceful transition
and the holding of elections, the fact that entire sectors
of society, including young people, women and
minorities, do not participate enough in political life,
coupled with weaknesses in institutions, governance
and the rule of law, makes for a source of tension and

15-38967

25/11/2015

Peace and security in Africa

instability and undermines regional efforts to improve
stability and cohesion.
On the humanitarian front, the indicators have
regressed as a result of increasing acts of violence. More
than 20 million people suffer from food insecurity,
and about 4.4 million have been displaced, which is
extremely worrying. The international community
must act to end this slide. Unemployment remains high,
particularly among young people, who are becoming
economically marginalized at a time when the region
urgently needs to invest in its young people’s strengths.
Poverty, unemployment, illiteracy and unstable
family relationships contribute to creating a fertile
environment for extremist and obscurantist ideology,
and we are grateful to Ms. Sellassie for drawing our
attention to this important issue.
In conclusion, Jordan reaffirms the importance
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, which must be promoted if we are to mobilize
partnerships and strengthen regional cooperation,
particularly on the security front, in order to tackle
the current emerging and interlinked challenges, while
at the same time formulating a comprehensive vision
aimed at dealing with the underlying causes of tension
and conflict so as to strengthen peace and establish
lasting security in the region.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): We would like to thank
Special Envoy Sellassie for her briefing today. We see
considerable merit in increasing the frequency and
tempo of the Council’s engagement with the Special
Envoy.
The Sahel is facing multifaceted challenges — drug
trafficking, human trafficking, irregular migration,
environmental degradation and the illicit proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. All of these remain
matters of great concern.
Armed groups, terrorists and criminal gangs
continue to pose a potent threat to peace and stability in
the region. As their activities are clearly transboundary,
addressing them will require the close cooperation and
collaboration of the countries in the region. It is in
recognition of that fact that members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission — Chad, Cameroon, the Niger and
Nigeria, along with Benin — are actively collaborating
within the framework of the Multinational Joint Task
Force in order to combat and defeat Boko Haram.
The effectiveness of our joint action is evident in the
steady progress the Task Force had made in the war

S/PV.7566

against Boko Haram. Territory has been reclaimed and
socioeconomic activities, including education, have
resumed in the liberated areas. To sustain those gains,
the Nigerian Government has begun to implement
rehabilitation and reconstruction programmes in the
areas of the country affected by Boko Haram.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
is another principal cause of insecurity in the Sahel.
Combating the problem is therefore crucial to improving
the security situation in the region. That will of course
require concerted action on the part of the international
community, regional organizations, States and other
stakeholders, including arms producers and exporters.
States in the region must intensify their efforts to
achieve the African Union’s goal of silencing the guns.
We believe that full compliance with the Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, their Ammunition and
other Related Materials of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) would aid that
concerted effort.
We would like to commend the Office of the Special
Envoy for the Sahel for its support to the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel and other regional
mechanisms. We note the outcome of the Platform’s
third meeting, held in November 2014, concerning the
establishment of thematic groups for addressing issues
of governance, security, resilience and development.
We expect that to facilitate implementation of the Sahel
initiatives and strategies. We strongly support efforts
to strengthen regional ownership of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. The Strategy’s
prioritization of flagship projects is indeed a positive
development. We are convinced that emphasizing such
projects will help to mitigate the overlapping security
risks in the Sahel.
Nigeria believes that resolving the multifaceted
problems in the Sahel requires a holistic solution, and
that the path to a holistic solution lies in a comprehensive
and coordinated approach. While we welcome the
initiatives of the United Nations, we acknowledge the
significan efforts of other stakeholders to address the
challenges of the Sahel. They include the African Union
Strategy for the Sahel, the ECOWAS Sahel Strategy
and the Maghreb Arab Union’ ssubregional programme
to combat desertification in the Maghreb. Others
include the European Union Strategy for Security
and Development in the Sahel and the commitments
of multilateral actors such as the Group of Five for
the Sahel. We believe that those initiatives can gain

15-389677/18

S/PV.7566

Peace and security in Africa

from close coordination, based on the capabilities and
comparative advantages of the various stakeholders.
As the Secretary-General is embarking on the
strategic review of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel by the end of this year, we look
forward to recommendations that can not only deepen
the partnership of the United Nations with key regional
stakeholders but also strengthen regional ownership
of the process of implementing the Strategy. We want
to take this opportunity to pay special tribute to the
Special Envoy, Ms. Sellassie, for her astute leadership,
and we assure her of our continued and unalloyed
support.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
today’s meeting, and Ms. Sellassie for her briefing.
The situation in the Sahel region is a source of
concern and requires greater input and integrated
approaches by the international community. China
wishes to highlight the following four points.
First, the international community should start by
tackling hot-spot issues in the Sahel region by actively
supporting the efforts of the countries of the region to
undertake political processes aimed at achieving steady
progress towards peace, stability and development in the
region. It is necessary to actively support the relevant
parties in Mali in their efforts to comprehensively
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
signed last June and to promote steady progress in the
peace process in Mali. Close attention must be paid
to the spillover effect of the crisis in Libya and other
hot-spot issues outside the region by promoting the
resolution of relevant issues and reducing the impact of
complex external factors on the region.
Secondly, the relevant counter-terrorism bodies
within the United Nations system should provide greater
input with respect to the Sahel region and promote the
counter-terrorism efforts of the countries of the region.
The international community should actively support
the countries of the region in their efforts to speed up
capacity-building in the area of security and support
the counter-terrorism efforts of the countries of the
region. Such efforts must adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and other
fundamental norms governing international relations.
There should be no double standards, nor should they
link terrorism to any specific religion or ethnicity.

8/18

25/11/2015

Thirdly, we hope that countries in the Sahel region
will take the opportunity of the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to formulate
a development agenda and strategy tailored to their
national conditions. The international community
and international financial institutions should provide
greater assistance for development and actively help
the countries in the region to improve their indigenous
capacity for development. The relevant agencies of
the United Nations should carry out in-depth studies
of the actual needs of the countries in the region,
formulate a clear and achievable list of projects as well
as measures and a timetable for implementation, and
promote tailored input from international donors in the
provision of assistance and cooperation, so as to speed
up socioeconomic development in the region.
Fourthly, the United Nations should further
strengthen its communication and coordination with
the five countries in the region, the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
other countries and organizations in Africa, with a
view to linking the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel with national and regional strategies so
as to leverage their respective advantages, strengthen
resource consolidation and create synergy in their joint
efforts to resolve the issues facing the Sahel.
In 2013, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the Presidents of the World Bank and the African
Development Bank made joint visits to the Sahel region
and achieved positive results, thus initiating a new
model of joint efforts by the international community
aimed at resolving regional issues. The relevant parties
should consider visiting the region again so as to assess
the status of implementation of the outcomes reached
during recent visits and make new commitments for
assistance.
The Chinese Government attaches great importance
to relations between China and Africa, as reflected in
its provision of bilateral assistance and its participation
in peacekeeping operations. China has been making
unremitting efforts to promote peace, stability and
development in Africa. Next month, the second summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, under the
theme “Africa-China Progressing Together: Win-Win
Cooperation for Common Development”, will be held
for the first time in Africa. Leaders from China and
African countries will gather in Johannesburg to draw
up a joint plan for the development of China-Africa
relations and cooperation over the coming three years.

15-38967

25/11/2015

Peace and security in Africa

China will take advantage of this opportunity to make
greater efforts to strengthen its cooperation with African
countries in the five priority areas of industrialization,
agricultural modernization, public health, people-topeople exchanges, and peace and security, with a view
to bringing about tangible benefits to African countries,
including the countries of the region, as well as to carry
out win-win cooperation for common development.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish at the outset to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
Head of Office for the Sahel for her briefing.
As reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/866), the security situation in the Sahel region
remains unstable, giving rise to concern at the direct
effects thereon of the complex political realities
prevailing in Libya and Mali, the terrorist threat posed
by Boko Haram and other terrorist groups, as well as
increased drugs and arms trafficking. Venezuela has
repeatedly warned of this in the Council, and we have
expressed our concern at the armed violence, the spread
of terrorism and the destruction of the capacities of the
Libyan State following the 2011 military intervention,
which gave rise to instability in the subregion and other
parts of the world.
Concerning Mali, as we have stated before,
Venezuela welcomes the efforts made in the area
of dialogue and negotiation among the parties to the
conflict in Mali, as well as the mediation team led by
Algeria, as reflected in the signing last June of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, which has led
to considerable progress, not just for the country itself
but in terms of the stability of the region.
At the same time, we continue to condemn the
spread of terrorism, which has given rise to a structurally
serious situation in the northern and central parts of the
country, where the prevailing violence was reflected
in the terrorist attacks that took place in Bamako last
week, which were strongly condemned by the Council.
The political and security instability in Libya and Mali,
as well as trafficking in small arms and light weapons
in the subregion, has created a dangerous hotbed
of tension in the Sahel as a whole, resulting in an
exacerbated climate of violence, which has promoted
criminal activity and trafficking in drugs and weapons,
as well as terrorism, with the civilian population being
the primary victims.

S/PV.7566

We are concerned at the fact that terrorist groups
such as Boko Haram and Al-Qaida, among others, have
intensified their operations in the Sahel region, with
the inevitable consequences being an increased number
of displaced persons and refugees. We therefore hope
that the sustained efforts being carried out in the field
by the Multinational Joint Task Force to combat Boko
Haram will lead to its achieving its goal in the fight
against terrorism.
Unfortunately, the effects of these conflicts and
threats to security have forced the States in the region
to give priority to financing the security sector over and
above critical socioeconomic needs such as those arising
from the humanitarian situation. The report of the
Secretary-General describes a set of factors reflecting
the humanitarian needs of more than 20 million people
in the region, including conflict-related violence, food
insecurity, epidemics and natural disasters.
While we recognize the advances made by the
United Nations 2014-2016 Humanitarian Strategic
Response Plan for the Sahel in responding to acute and
chronic needs in the region, including capacity-building
for Governments, we are concerned that humanitarian
programmes in the Sahel continue to be underfunded.
We therefore call on the international community to
continue to commit itself to mobilizing resources in
order to alleviate the urgent humanitarian needs in the
Sahel. The role played by Mauritania, Burkina Faso,
Chad, the Niger and Mali as members of the Group
of Five for the Sahel, the Ministerial Coordination
Platform for the Sahel, the Nouakchott process and the
informal group of international partners for the Sahel
has been very important in implementing social and
security policies in the region.
We stress the fact that these efforts should be
focused on sustainable development in the region and
not purely a military vision. Failure to address the
structural causes of conflicts lads to more violence.
It is only with sustained attention to the root causes
of conflict — such as poverty, lack of access to basic
services and education, political dialogue and adequate
support by regional and international partners — can
we ensure strong and sustainable peace and security.
Because of its geographic and political characteristics,
the Sahel has the ability to contribute to constructive
solutions that effectively meet the major challenges in
terms of internal displacement, refugees and migratory
flows, which in recent times have had a significant
human impact on the Mediterranean region.

15-389679/18

S/PV.7566

Peace and security in Africa

While we must go after mafia groups that traffick
in human beings and take advantage of misfortune of
the disadvantaged, we must also act with political and
moral coherence in putting in place policies for the
region that do not encourage armed conflicts by way
of economic interests. In that way, we could avoid
the tragic consequences and eventual regret over the
interregional impact of such crises as the current one
involving migrants.
We acknowledge the importance of the good results
achieved by the joint efforts of the specialized agencies
of the United Nations, as reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, especially the work aimed at women
and young people as those especially vulnerable to the
effects of violence, the purpose of which is to prevent
armed conflicts and the spread of violent extremism,
but above all to relieve the suffering of millions of
people who are excluded from the right to development.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that the
wealth and many natural resources of Africa have
historically been a target of the ambition on the part of
more powerful nations and their dire colonial legacy,
which has led to untold suffering, conflicts and divisions
in the region. Mobilizing resources and financing for
development initiatives and projects in the Sahel must
be based on the spirit of sustainability and cooperation,
whereby leadership in overall management as well as
over specific projects is exercised by Governments
and peoples jointly with the specialized agencies of the
United Nations and the African Union, which should
lead the international effort.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like
to express the condolences of the Government of New
Zealand to the Malian people and those affected by the
attack in Bamako on Friday. Such attacks seem endless,
and we are horrified anew every time.
In the light of Friday’s attack, it is all the more
important that the parties to the Mali peace process
continue to consolidate the hard-won gains made this
year to move forward with the implementation of
the agreement on peace and reconciliation in Mali.
Similarly, it is vital that the peace process in Libya does
not falter and is brought to a successful conclusion.
I would like to thank the Special Envoy for the
Sahel, Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, for her briefing
and for her work across the Sahel. The challenges
detailed in the Special Envoy’s briefing and the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/866) are immense.

10/18

25/11/2015

Making progress will require sustained long-term focus
by the Governments of the region and support from the
international community. New Zealand hopes that we
will be able to adopt a draft presidential statement as
a clear acknowledgement of the challenges to peace,
security and stability across the Sahel.
We have learned time and time again that the
security threats that face one country or region are not
contained borders, deserts or, indeed, oceans. That is
precisely why the Council has had to become involved
in situations that, while largely within the territory of
one country, pose a threat to the peace and security of
the wider region and, as in the case with the Sahel, well
beyond the region.
It is too often that the issues before the Council
are considered and acted upon in isolation. The United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel acknowledges
that the threats to international peace and stability
within that vast region are interlinked. Terrorism,
political instability and the flow of arms, to name but
a few, cannot be dealt with without reference to each
other and without the region acting in close coordination
with the international community. As we know only too
well, those threats are not contained within any one of
the Sahelian countries, or even within the whole of the
Sahel region. The risks of migration, radicalization and
terrorism were rightly highlighted by the Special Envoy
in her briefing.
Looking ahead, and picking up on the observations
and conclusions in the Secretary-General’s report, we
consider that four steps are critical.
First, ongoing military cooperation in the region
is essential. Cooperation among States of the region,
such as through the establishment of the multinational
joint task force by the countries of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, will be critical to reduce the ability of
terrorist groups to operate freely across borders.
Secondly, we need to maintain a concerted focus on
humanitarian support. Combating trends such as food
insecurity and malnutrition are critical to resolving
the root causes of conflict and instability. Social and
demographic issues, including gender inequality,
entrenched poverty, unemployment, lack of access to
education and a growing contingent of disenfranchised
youth, also undermine political stability and national
cohesion across the Sahel. Ultimately, addressing those
challenges requires a long-term approach. The actions,
missions and strategies that the Council mandates in the

15-38967

25/11/2015

Peace and security in Africa

Sahel must be carefully considered within the context
of international support.
Thirdly, we need to acknowledge the impact of the
continued instability in Libya on the wider security of
the Sahel. The illicit flow of arms, drugs and people
across the region undermines national Governments
and exposes the countries of the Sahel to unpredictable
to unpredictable security vulnerabilities. A resolution
of the conflict in Libya is important not only for the
people of Libya but for the wider region. New Zealand
recognizes the increasingly important role that regional
organizations play in addressing regional issues. In that
regard, we encourage the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union to harmonize efforts to
support the Sahel region.
Fourthly, we encourage the Special Envoy to
continue her outreach to all international and regional
actors focused on the Sahel. The fact that there are
currently a multitude of strategies being pursued
by various actors risks duplicating resources and
undermining efforts to support the region. We welcome,
therefore, the increasing cooperation between the Office
for the Special Envoy for the Sahel and the United
Nations Office for West Africa. We urge continued
and long-term engagement with the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Lake Chad Basin Commission and leaders of the
Group of Five for the Sahel. Further cooperation will
significantly improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of the combined efforts in the Sahel.
Our pursuit of international peace and stability
in the Sahel must be conducted in unison. If we work
together, then the security gains made so far will
be harnessed and will better prepare us for future
challenges.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
The Sahel is a priority region for Spain. This morning
on my way to the office, I was reviewing the statements
of my Minister for Foreign Affairs, and today he said
once again that the Sahel is a priority region for Spain.
Why is that? It is because we share four types of threats.
First, there is terrorism. The attacks on the Radisson
Blu Hotel have demonstrated that terrorism is a main
threat to peace and security. For that reason, Spain
actively cooperates actively in Mali in the training of
the Mali security forces as part of the European Union
Training Mission.

S/PV.7566

Secondly, there is the migration factor. The Sahel
has a determining role to play. Suffice to recall that
90 per cent of the migrants from the sub-Saharan region
cross the Niger to reach the Mediterranean. Spain’s
position is very clear in that regard. There is a clear
shared responsibility among countries of origin, transit
and destination, and I believe it was clearly shown at
the Valletta Conference on Migration that Africa and
Europe should face the challenge together.
Thirdly, there is the security-development factor.
Without security there can be no development, and
without development there can be no security. That is
why Spain is investing decidedly in the Sahel.
Lastly, climate change is a factor. We held an
Arria Formula meeting on 30 October during which
we highlighted the fact that climate change is a clear
multiplier of risk. In 2013, we launched the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. It raised great
expectations, but not all of them have been met. Two
years later, there are two central issues that I belive are
still fully valid.
The first is the consistency of the strategy, which
the representative of France mentioned in the first
debate. The Strategy is, first and foremost, a real
exercise of consistently bringing together the efforts of
United Nations agencies.
The second overarching idea is that of action.
We must prioritize taking action over diagnosing
problems. The Sahel does not need further studies,
surveys or analyses. We all agree on the diagnosis, and
the challenges are clearly identified. What the Sahel is
calling for is for us to take action now and that we act
bearing in mind the region’s priorities, and in particular
those set by the countries of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
In that connection, I would like to congratulate,
first, the Special Envoy for her briefing and the
enormous task she is undertaking and to tell her
that she has all our support. Secondly, I would like
to congratulate Chad for its dual presidency of the
Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel and the
Group of Five Sahel, which we believe will align the
efforts of the United Nations in the region.
In would like to conclude by saying that, as my
Deputy Foreign Minister said at the G-5 Sahel summit
in N’Djamena last Friday, Spain’s commitment to the

15-3896711/18

S/PV.7566

Peace and security in Africa

Sahel is not temporary. It is ongoing with a view to the
future.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sahel, Ms. Sellassie, for her briefing. The United States
welcomes her close engagement with regional leaders
and the broader international community to assist the
countries and the people of the Sahel region on their
path towards achieving effective governance, security,
development and prosperity.
The horrific attacks last week in Bamako, which
killed nearly 20 innocent civilians, including those
assisting Mali in its efforts to provide basic services
to its population, and yesterday’s attack on a convoy
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali that was travelling near
Timbuktu, as well as the ongoing threat posed by
Boko Haram, especially in north-eastern Nigeria and
northern Cameroon remind us just how high the stakes
are for the countries of the Sahel.
The creation of the Multinational Joint Task Force,
with the participation of Nigeria, the Niger, Cameroon,
Chad and Benin, is the most recent example of the
deepening commitment by African countries to counter
terrorism. African forces, with support from the United
Nations and bilateral partners, also responded to the
crisis in northern Mali in 2013 by working with the
French to dislodge Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
and other groups that had established a safe haven there.
Our work in Mali is far from finished, and the problems
faced by Mali cannot be solved by military force alone.
The success of the Mali peace process rests on the
Malian parties committing to making hard choices for
the collective security of all Malians. We welcome the
steps taken by the parties in Mali to uphold the ceasefire
arrangements; however, we need to see more progress
by the Government on institutional reforms that will
better enfranchise northern Malians and improve
governance for all citizens, as well as more progress
by all the Malian parties to prepare for cantonment and
joint security patrols to pave the way for a return of
reformed security forces to the north. Progress in these
areas will enable Mali to, as President Obama said
recently, rid its country of terrorists and strengthen its
democracy — goals to which the Security Council is
deeply committed. I would like to highlight a few areas
in the region where I think we can do more.
First, we believe that enhanced focus on good
governance by the countries of the region is essential.
12/18

25/11/2015

Appropriately, that is one of the pillars of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahe. Inclusive
and effective governance and improvements will serve
as the foundation for stability across the region. The
people of Mali and of other countries of the region
have expressed a clear desire for more responsive
Government institutions and for peaceful democratic
changes of power through inclusive, transparent and
free elections.
The recent events in Burkina Faso serve to further
demonstrate that legitimate, civilian-led Government
is the lifeblood of any democracy and crucial to
stability. When a faction of the military attempted
in September to seize power from Burkina Faso’s
transitional President, the population responded with
a resounding “No!” Courageous civil society activities
helped Burkina Faso to overcome its governance crisis.
The people of Burkina Faso are expected to go to the
polls for elections on Sunday. We look to the Niger,
which is set to hold elections in early 2016 amid serious
security challenges at its borders, to continue to make
progress towards democratic consolidation and political
inclusion.
Secondly, we must work collectively to counter
the underlying drivers of violent extremism in the
Sahel. The United States welcomes the region’s efforts
to create a new countering-violent-extremism youth
network for the region, which we hope will enable the
sharing of best practices. We welcome the fact that the
leaders in the Sahel are working to deepen cooperation
among themselves, including through the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the Nouakchott Process,
by coming to agreement on a shared vision of the
region’s transnational threats and the efforts needed to
address them.
The United States will continue to work with its
partners in the Sahel and the Maghreb region to build
their counter-terrorism capacity, so that they can
address the underlying drivers of radicalization and
build the long-term law enforcement architecture that
will preserve the many gains they have already made.
In this vein, we encourage the leaders of the Sahel
region to adopt a whole-of-Government approach to
countering violent extremism that reflects a common
understanding that terrorists will not be defeated by the
force of arms alone.
Thirdly and finally, we encourage further progress
by the United Nations system and its partners towards
the effective implementation of the United Nations
15-38967

25/11/2015

Peace and security in Africa

Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s forthcoming strategic review of the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Sahel and the consideration of its recommendations
on ways to improve the United Nations system’s
capacity to deliver assistance effectively to the Sahel
region. We encourage Special Envoy Sellassie to
continue to pursue her good offices with the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for West and
Central Africa, as they all work to enhance regional
cooperation and strengthen international assistance to
the region.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome and thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel
for her briefing on the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
We start by regretting that Security Council
members were unable to reach an agreement on the
terms of a draft presidential statement to be adopted
today on the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel. We would like to appeal to the members of
the Council to demonstrate flexibility and take into
account the needs for action by the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
Angola commends the work of the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel in
the prevention of conflicts and good offices in mobilizing
resources for crucial programmes and projects and in
assisting the countries of the region, which face very
complex and difficult circumstances. As mentioned
in the report (S/2015/866) of the Secretary-General,
the political, security and humanitarian situation,
aggravated by recurrent conflicts, an unpredictable
climate, epidemics, drug trafficking, transnational
organized crime and the activities of armed and
terrorist groups, gravely affect the lives of millions
of people across the region of the Sahel, with chronic
food insecurity and malnutrition requiring dedicated
attention by the international community.
A positive development is the commitment by the
Sahel countries to find common solutions to grave
problems affecting them, since the prevailing situation
is a threat for the entire region and beyond. This has
driven the Sahel community to a sense of ownership
in their common endeavour, which constitutes the
right approach to tackle the challenges they face. The
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
should join forces with the international community in
addressing the challenges facing the Sahel countries

S/PV.7566

and afford the necessary political support and material
resources to a region living in conditions of extreme
poverty.
Several countries of the region have either held or are
in the process of holding elections, a process that should
lead to the consolidation of democratic institutions and
be supported by the international community through
the provision of electoral assistance to enable them
to organize free, transparent and peaceful elections.
However, conflicts and criminal activities weaken the
social fabric of the countries in the region, making it
extremely difficult to implement programmes on good
governance and development.
The Sahel region is facing huge security challenges,
mainly due to the prevailing insecurity in Mali and
Libya and the uncontrolled movement of armed and
terrorist groups. In Mali, despite the signing of the peace
agreement, armed groups, terrorists and extremists
continue to destabilize the north of the country,
indiscriminately attacking civilians, the Malian armed
forces and United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali personnel. The recent
terrorist attack in Bamako is proof that peace in Mali is
still a long way off.
In Libya, the presence of two parallel Governments
and their inability to fight the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham and other terrorist organizations fuel
insecurity and instability in the Sahel. It is crucial
for the parties in Libya to conclude the political
process by empowering a national Government as a
means of stepping up the fight against terrorism. The
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, should strengthen their assistance to the
countries of the region. The decision of the countries of
the Group of Five for the Sahel to enhance cooperation
for sustained social and economic development and for
security to combat terrorism and transnational crime
deserves the financial and logistical support of the
international community to enable them to continue
to address the threat posed by terrorists, drug and
human trafficking and mass migration of people from
sub-Saharan Africa to the north and to Europe.
A case of a successful subregional initiative was
the creation of the Multinational Joint Task Force by the
Lake Chad Basin States and Benin, which joined forces
to fight Boko Haram. The success of the Task Force’s
operations led to the recovery of areas previously under
terrorist control and to the release of thousands of people.
In addition to conflict-related violence, the report of

15-3896713/18

S/PV.7566

Peace and security in Africa

the Secretary-General underlines how the Sahel is
affected my food insecurity, malnutrition, epidemics
and natural disasters. We are deeply concerned over the
fate of millions of people living in such dire conditions.
To conclude, we commend the Office of the Special
Envoy for promoting the participation of women and
youth in the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and call on United
Nations agencies, international organizations, donors
and partners, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the European
Union to contribute to the implementation of projects
in the Sahel that address serious structural weaknesses
in those countries. That would enable the Integrated
Strategy and the Special Envoy to coordinate in
achieving stability and development in the region.
Finally, we deem it important for the Security
Council to receive more regular briefings on
developments in the region. We commend the countries
of the Sahel for their joint efforts to resolve outstanding
challenges and for their continuing work with the
international community in the maintenance of peace
and security and for the region’s development.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie for
her detailed briefing. We believe that it is important
for the Security Council to discuss the issue of the
Sahel in a comprehensive manner. Her assessment of
the situation in that vast region is of great usefulness.
The ever-increasing number of challenges there give
the effective implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel its continued
relevance. The Russian Federation has welcomed that
initiative from the outset, as it holds great promise.
A series of useful projects have been crafted to
help the countries of the region overcome existing
issues. There must be a shift to a practical phase that
brings together a large number of participants from
the various branches of the United Nations system
under one umbrella. It is of paramount importance
that, with support of the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, interested States of the
Sahel establish relevant mechanisms for cooperation.
In time, that will allow the countries of the region to
take a leading role and primary responsibility for the
implementation of the comprehensive Strategy.

14/18

25/11/2015

We are increasingly guided by the concrete
outcomes of the work of the Ministerial Coordination
Platform for the Sahel. The operationalizion of the
Group of Five for the Sahel provides a nucleus for
initiatives in that region. Specialized agencies for
continental integration are working well at various
levels, including the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of the Central African States and the Lake
Chad Basin Commission.
Of particular concern is the security threat to
the Sahel, which over the past year has significantly
increased. The instability in the Middle East and Syria
and the lack of an internationally coordinated response
are spreading to the countries of North Africa. That
poorly controlled region has thus become a hotbed for
terrorists and organized crime groups. Moreover, we
note with interest that the southern Sahara is also a
growing hotbed for such activities. We cannot overcome
these challenges with the kind of outside intervention
that occurred in Libya.
The fight against Boko Haram is a relatively
successful example because it was undertaken
by the Multinational Joint Task Force, although a
comprehensive breakthrough is still far from being
achieved. The counter-terrorism activities in the Sahel
have not yet borne fruit, and terrorists believe that they
enjoy full impunity. That was clearly demonstrated by
the recent attacks launched by Al-Qaeda and Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in Bamako.
Joint local mechanisms for security, such as the
Nouakchott Process, remain in their early stages
but progress has been made. The lack of political
sustainability, economic underdevelopment and social
unrest lay the foundation for young people to become
radicalized. We welcome the increased attention being
paid by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to
the root causes of the crisis in the Sahel. We hope that
the consistent implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, with the broad
participation of partners, will lead to a qualitative
improvement of the situation in the region.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Ms. Guebre
Sellassie, for her statement and I would like to reiterate
my country’s full support to the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. I will
focus my statement on three points.

15-38967

25/11/2015

Peace and security in Africa

First, the full implementation of the peace
agreement in Mali is a crucial step in stabilizing
the country and the Sahel. I take the opportunity to
reiterate our condolences to the Government of Mali
and the bereaved families of the victims, as well as to
other States whose nationals who died in the terrorist
attack in Bamako on 20 November. That attack was
hardly fortuitous. The meeting for the implementation
of the peace agreement was to take place that very same
day. We must stop those who are seeking to derail the
peace process.
The United Nations, and more broadly speaking
the international community as a whole, must continue
to fully support the stabilization of Mali and the
implementation of the peace agreement. As announced
by President Hollande on 22 October at the conference
for the economic recovery and development of Mali
hosted by Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, France is providing more than
€360 million in aid to Mali and nearly €80 million for
the northern regions for the period 2015-2017.
Secondly, France is fully committed to assisting
the countries of the Sahel in addressing the challenges
before them. In addition to its activities within the
European Union and the United Nations, France is
continuing to develop its Sahelo-Saharan strategy in a
comprehensive approach that brings together security,
governance and development issues. France’s SaheloSaharan strategy covers activities in six countries:
Senegal, Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso, the Niger
and Chad. The strategy is focused on four priorities:
contributing to improving the people’s living conditions,
strengthening States’ capacities to fight terrorism and
major trafficking networks, countering radicalization
by supporting the development of education and the
media, and encouraging and facilitating regional
security cooperation. In that context, France allocates
between €400 million and €500 million a year in
bilateral assistance to the six countries covered by
our strategy, all of which are priority recipients of our
assistance.
The terrorist attacks perpetrated in Paris on
13 November only strengthen our conviction that the
international community must pool its efforts to combat
terrorism. In the Sahel, since August 2014 France’s
Operation Barkhane has been our military contribution
to combating terrorism and improving the security
situation in the Sahel region, with 3,500 French soldiers
on the ground in five countries: Burkina Faso, Mali,

S/PV.7566

Mauritania, the Niger and Chad. Barkhane operations
have led to the neutralization and capture of more than
100 terrorists in one year, including many leaders,
while inflicting long-term damage on the operational
and logistical capacities of terrorist groups.
My third and final point is that the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel should help the
countries of the Sahel to establish projects that will
benefit their people. The Strategy should improve
coordination among the different United Nations
agencies in the Sahel and make them more effective.
Its goal is also and above all to help the Sahel countries
to develop transnational projects in the three areas of
governance, security and resilience. It is essential for
the people of the Sahel to begin to enjoy the dividends
of the United Nations commitment. We therefore
eagerly await the recommendations of the forthcoming
strategic review of the Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
and hope that it will further strengthen the coherence of
United Nations action in the Sahel and in West Africa.
During the past year, the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) have strengthened their
cooperation, as demonstrated by the second summit
of Heads of State in N’Djamena on 20 November, in
which the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
participated. Joint military operations led by the G-5
Sahel States, with the support of Barkhane, represent a
concrete response to the terrorist threat by the States of
the region. France joins the Special Envoy in her goal of
conjugating regional and international efforts on behalf
of the Sahel.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking Special Envoy Guebre Sellassie for
her comprehensive briefing on progress towards
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the situation in the Sahel
region.
As highlighted by Ms. Sellassie, the situation in
the Sahel region remains a matter of concern. Since
her last briefing (see S/PV.7335), the region has faced
and continues to face many challenges and conflicts.
Of particular concern is the ongoing threat posed by
terrorism. The attack on the Radisson Blu Hotel in
Bamako last week and the ambush of the presidential
bus in Tunis yesterday are cases in point. I take
this opportunity to extend the solemn and deepest
condolences of my Government to those affected and
wish survivors a speedy recovery.

15-3896715/18

S/PV.7566

Peace and security in Africa

Malaysia stands in solidarity with countries of the
Sahel and all countries similarly affected by the scourge
of terrorism. We strongly and unequivocally condemn
all acts and practices of terrorism, regardless of their
motivation. We remain unwavering in our commitment
to combating terrorism in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.
We are equally concerned by the security situation
resulting from the attacks by Boko Haram in the
region. We are in particular gravely alarmed by the
systematic and widespread abuses of children and
violations of their human rights perpetrated by Boko
Haram and other terrorist groups. In that regard, we
welcome and support the efforts of the countries of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission and Benin to establish
and operationalize the Multinational Joint Task Force.
We are pleased to note that the Task Force has made
steady progress in the fight against Boko Haram, and
encourage the international community to continue
supporting the Task Force. I also take this opportunity
to register our appreciation to the countries that have
contributed their efforts to the fight against Boko
Haram, and to pay tribute to the soldiers who have lost
their lives.
It is appalling that the number of displaced persons
across the region has increased sharply, from 1.6 million
in January 2014 to 4.4 million in 2015. It is particularly
distressing to note that children have been particularly
affected, with an estimated 1.4 million currently
displaced in Nigeria and neighbouring countries. At
the same time, we note that the humanitarian stuation
in the region remains precarious. In that connection,
we urge Ms. Sellassie to continue her intensive work
with the relevant international organizations to find a
solution to the problem.
Against that background, we are encouraged by
the enhanced cooperation between the Office of the
Special Envoy and all relevant regional and subregional
actors, particularly the African Union, the Economic
Community of Western African States and the Group
of Five for the Sahel. It is indeed crucial that relevant
key partners intensify their efforts to address the
challenges that continue to affect the region, including
the proliferation of weapons, radicalism and violent
extremism, food insecurity, trafficking in drugs and
humans, lack of education and youth unemployment.
We are particularly pleased to note that concerted
efforts have been made to align national projects
with the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the

16/18

25/11/2015

Sahel. These efforts, together with continuous and
comprehensive engagement with the countries of the
region, will enable us to formulate a truly integrated
strategy that will bring sustainable development and
prosperity to the Sahel region.
While effective coordination and cooperation
among multinational partners, regional organizations
and countries of the region are essential, Malaysia
continues to believe in the importance of according
primacy to national and regional initiatives. In that
regard, the role of the Ministerial Coordination
Platform for the Sahel is imperative to the effective and
successful implementation of initiatives and strategies
on the Sahel. We also commend the strong commitment
and support provided by the multitude of international
partners and stakeholders to the Strategy.
Malaysia looks forward to the Secretary-General’s
strategic review of the Office of the Special Envoy, to
be conducted in December. We remain hopeful that the
strategic review will provide a realistic assessment,
important insight and constructive recommendations
on ways to further improve the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We are
aware that the tasks facing the countries of the Sahel are
monumental, and that international support is therefore
crucial. I therefore wish to conclude by reaffirming
Malaysia’s commitment to working closely with all
regional and international partners — particularly
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the countries of
the region — towards the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
The President: In a moment I shall give the Special
Envoy a chance to come back on any of the comments
or questions raised. The representative of Lithuania
raised two questions — one on how the Special Envoy
would assess progress in countering terrorism and
violent extremism; the other was how her Office has
been strengthened in this period.
I shall first make a brief statement in my national
capacity.
I want in particular to reiterate the United Kingdom’s
full support for the United Nations multidimensional
approach and its partnership with the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States
and other regional organizations. This really is about
prevention, security and development, and it really
matters. As others have pointed out, Friday’s terrorist

15-38967

25/11/2015

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7566

attack in Bamako sadly illustrates the security threats
still facing Mali and the Sahel region. We strongly
condemn, as others have done, this act of barbarity, and
we still in solidarity with the Malian authorities and the
families of those killed and injured. Now is the moment
for countries of the region and their international
partners to redouble their efforts to tackle the terrorist
scourge and ensure security for their people.

have been launched and delivered under those three
core themes have been noted in the report. We look
forward to progress being made, in particular on human
rights, including the rights of women, on organized
crime, on terrorism — as the Special Envoy has just
highlighted — and on finding upstream solutions,
including on food security. We also look forward to the
outcome and strategic review.

Elsewhere in the region, Boko Haram continues
to threaten populations in north-eastern Nigeria and
the wider Lake Chad Basin. Their terror is not only
targeting innocent people but is also forcing millions out
of their homes, triggering a humanitarian crisis. This is
only further worsening the overall food insecurity in
the Lake Chad Basin region.

Finally, I want to thank Special Envoy Sellassie
and her team. Together, they have made an important
contribution to delivering the Integrated Strategy over
the past year. I wish her every success as she takes that
work forward in 2016.

However, we cannot let these terrible acts cloud our
perspective. In Mali, where security has such an impact
on the whole of the region, we have seen progress in
recent months. The fighting among armed groups
in the summer has receded, and it has been replaced
by a willingness to find a political solution to Mali’s
problems. We congratulate the Malian Government
and other parties to the peace agreement for the
commitment that they have shown. However, progress
is fragile. We urge all parties to redouble their efforts.
They owe it to all of the people of Mali, who deserve
peace and security.
This year we have also seen progress in the region’s
ability, together with its neighbours, to confront those
threats. In September, the coup in Burkina Faso was
successfully dissolved, as a result of regionally led
efforts. We expect that elections will soon mark the end
of the transition back to democracy. That is a notable
success.
We cannot lose sight of the challenges ahead.
As the Special Envoy has mentioned, the Sahel is
interconnected, and the challenges facing one country
also affect its neighbours. Many are also transitional
in nature. The report rightly highlights food security,
organized crime and a demographic explosion, all of
which put pressure on one of the poorest regions of the
world. In that context, we will study very carefully the
recommendations that she has just made to us.
Against that backdrop, the three pillars of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel — governance,
security and resilience — remain the right way of
bringing sustainable peace and development to the
region. I am pleased that the range of projects that

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Special Envoy Sellassie to address
any of the comments we have heard and, in particular,
the two questions that were raised.
Ms. Sellassie: On the question raised by the
representative of Lithuania, on whether progress has
been made by States in the region in terms of countering
terrorism, the answer is that progress has been made.
Some countries have even developed comprehensive
strategies to counter terrorism. Many bilateral partners,
including the African Union and the European Union,
are working to strengthen the capacity of State actors.
The United Nations, through the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, are also working to build
those countries’ capacities so as to counter terrorism.
However, the level and the multiplicity of the threats
linked to terrorism in the region are such that they
probably require further efforts. In that respect, I
would like to say that there was a recommendation, at
one point, for my Office to be provided with an expert
on terrorism to support countries in the region, which
never materialized. I would say that that would have
benefited my Office and given us additional capacity to
support the region.
There was a comment made by the representative
of China about the projects that the United Nations is
implementing in the region. I have a feeling that there
is a perception among some members of the Council
that the United Nations is not doing enough in terms of
expectations. I would like to say that what we have been
doing — at least at the regional level — is described at
length in Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/866). But
I would like to add that what we are trying to address

15-3896717/18

S/PV.7566

Peace and security in Africa

25/11/2015

in the Sahel are long-standing structural issues. That
takes time. The added value of the Strategy is that it
requires United Nations entities to work together in an
integrated manner and develop regional projects, which
is not an easy endeavour. What my Office has tried to
do over the past year, first of all, is gain the support and
the ownership of the countries of the region in those
processes. We have been able to develop nine flagship
projects, five of which have been launched. Those
projects are beubg implemented in multiple countries
by multiple agencies in a holistic approach.

launched by United Nations entities. I have not mentioned
here all the work that has been done by United Nations
entities at the national level within countries. We are
therefore doing our best with the available capacities
to deliver on expectations. But I want to reiterate that
what we are trying to do is structural prevention. We
are not trying to resolve ongoing conflict or address
short-term issues. Rather, we are addressing long-term
issues, which take time. I would like to insist on that
and have the Council’s understanding that what we are
doing is a long-term endeavour.

Secondly, we consider those nine projects as our
flagship projects because of their essential nature. We
believe that they will have a quick and visible impact.
Meanwhile, 10 other regional projects have been

The President: I thank Ms. Sellassie for the
clarifications that she has provided.

18/18

The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

15-38967
