United Nations

S/PV.4379

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4379th meeting
Friday, 21 September 2001, 12.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Levitte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ahsan
Mr. Chen Xu
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Ward
Mr. Touré
Mr. Gokool
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Mejdoub
Mr. Kuchinsky
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Hume

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 14 September 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2001/868).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-54497 (E)

*0154497*

S/PV.4379

The meeting was called to order at 12.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 14 September 2001 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2001/868)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Živalj
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) took the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I invite Mr. Petritsch to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jacques Paul
Klein, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Coordinator of United Nations Operations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I invite Mr. Klein to take a seat at the Council
table.

2

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 14 September 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
transmitting the twentieth report on the activities of the
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
document S/2001/868.
As there is no list of speakers for the Council
members, I invite Council members who wish to take
the floor to so indicate to the Secretariat as from now.
Following statements by the Council members, I
will give the floor to those Member States that have
asked to speak under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
Before giving the floor to those who wish to
speak, I should like to extend the apologies of the
members of the Council to all those who have had to
wait, starting with Mr. Petritsch and Mr. Klein. In our
consultations we had an important discussion on the
question of terrorism, which delayed the beginning of
this public meeting. If members of the Council agree,
we can have an hour’s discussion now, until 1.15 p.m.,
and conclude our meeting, and then resume it at 3 p.m.
sharp.
I hear no objection.
I now invite the Council to hear briefings by Mr.
Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch.
Mr. Petritsch (spoke in French): This is the fifth
time that I have had the honour of addressing the
Security Council. Given the tragic events that took
place 10 days ago in New York; Washington, D.C.; and
Pennsylvania, one might wonder if perhaps there are
not more important questions to be discussed than the

S/PV.4379

implementation of the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement
on Bosnia and Herzegovina. Many have stated,
however, that last week’s terrorist attacks prove the
truth of the idea of an inevitable clash of civilizations.
Indeed, many had put forward the same argument
during the horrible war that ravaged Bosnia and
Herzegovina until about six years ago.
(spoke in English)
I firmly believe that the raison d’être of this
world body — the United Nations — is to work
actively against this flawed concept, and I
wholeheartedly agree with the Secretary-General’s
assertion in today’s New York Times that the United
Nations is uniquely positioned to advance this effort.
Having served now for two years as High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, I am
deeply convinced that the Dayton peace process
demonstrates that the comprehensive engagement of
the international community to heal the wounds of
conflict in the Balkans is, in fact, working. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still a country with a very delicate
religious, cultural and social fabric. However, its postwar society is about to pull together the strength
needed for this State to survive.
In this context, I believe it should be noted that
the work which the international community is carrying
out in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to strengthen
State institutions and establish the rule of law, which
was so obviously absent during and immediately after
the war, is also contributing to the overall fight against
global terrorism.
Since I last reported to the Security Council on 22
March, there has been considerable progress in this
work, which is predicated on empowering the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and bringing the country
ever closer to the European mainstream.
At this juncture, let me recapitulate some of the
more security-related aspects of our mandate to
strengthen the State institutions. In January 2000, I
imposed the State Border Service law, establishing an
institution which effectively addresses the wartime
legacy of fragmented, porous and unprotected borders,
patrolled by local police forces which were often
complicit in cross-border crime. Since then, the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) has taken on responsibility for setting up,
training and monitoring the State Border Service. The
Service currently covers 75 per cent of the border of

Bosnia and Herzegovina. Full deployment is scheduled
for the end of September 2002, pending budget
allocations.
In the absence of secure State identity documents,
my Office — the Office of the High Representative —
initiated two years ago, in conjunction with the
domestic authorities, the so-called common identity
protection system, or Citizens Identity Protection
System (CIPS), a package of legal and administrative
steps which, among other things, will significantly
improve Bosnia and Herzegovina’s border regime.
Under CIPS, Bosnia and Herzegovina will have its first
integrated civil registry. Bosnian authorities can then
compare the current passport database with the civil
registry of valid Bosnian residents and isolate
suspicious cases. This represents a tool that will allow
Bosnian authorities to address concerns about their
ability to deal with the phenomenon of cross-border
crime. CIPS will also create a State-level network
operations centre containing a blacklist of
internationally wanted persons, as compiled by
Interpol.
CIPS will deliver a range of additional benefits to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It will introduce a secure
identity card which meets International Civil Aviation
Organization standards for use as an international
travel document. Most importantly, the information
technology supporting the CIPS project will increase
the confidence of immigration authorities that Bosnian
identity documents are well-managed and secure. We
hope that this will be a first step towards easing visa
restrictions for citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
travelling abroad.
As early as February, my Office had proposed to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives
that the mandate of the Naturalization Commission,
which reviews cases of wartime naturalization, be
extended so as to address any irregularities in
citizenship granted to foreigners during the war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I reiterated this request to
Prime Minister Zlatko Lagumdzija this week when I
discussed with him the urgent need for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to establish an anti-terrorism task force in
his country.
Prime Minister Lagumdzija is the leader of the
Alliance for Change, a coalition of non-nationalist
parties that formed Governments at the State and
Federation level at the beginning of this year. The

3

S/PV.4379

Alliance groups together political parties that have
significant ideological differences. However, it is held
together by a common determination to replace the
failed nationalist agenda with a raft of policies aimed at
creating a modern European State.
The new, non-nationalist authorities have asserted
themselves, and they demand greater respect and a
partnership with the international community.
Partnership is a necessary and welcome first step
towards ownership. Indeed, I am encouraged to see that
the Government is embracing the ownership concept I
articulated when I arrived in Bosnia and Herzegovina
two years ago.
I responded to this new mood when I proposed
the establishment of what we call a consultative
partnership forum. In this forum I have already started
to discuss and resolve urgent issues with the Council of
Ministers, reflecting the principle of ownership. The
partnership forum is not aimed at replacing existing
mechanisms of Government. It will facilitate
interaction between the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on the one hand, and the international
community, on the other.
I am now preparing for the inaugural meeting of a
civic forum, which will extend informal consultations
to intellectuals, business people, media personalities
and religious and community leaders. The object of this
is to promote active citizenship. Through the civic
forum I intend to give the country’s recovering civil
society a more active role in the public policy
discourse.
I have already spoken about the ruling coalition’s
determination to join the European structures. Allow
me to draw the Council’s attention to the passage of an
election law by the State Parliament on 23 August.
This legislation had been stalled for years because of
chronic
parliamentary
obstructionism.
I
had
consistently argued in the past that Bosnia and
Herzegovina should pass this most basic of laws
necessary for a democratic State, prior to being
allowed to join the Council of Europe. Over the
summer, a majority of deputies decided to support the
law on the grounds that, whatever its limitations, it
provides the necessary mechanism for holding free and
fair elections. Their decision represents what I may
describe as principled pragmatism, and it points
towards a promising legislative future for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

4

While saluting this pragmatism on the part of
Bosnia and Herzegovina politicians in securing passage
of the election law, I would also like to commend the
efforts of the Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which played a crucial role in piloting
this legislation onto the statute book. As a
consequence, I believe that Bosnia’s application for
membership in the Council of Europe should now be
favourably and rapidly considered.
Let me turn to another burning issue — the state
of the economy. Part of the changing circumstances in
Bosnia and Herzegovina involves the evolution of a
double transition. In addition to the shift from war to
peace, Bosnia and Herzegovina is engaged in a
transition from a communist command-driven economy
to a free market; and, indeed, in many cases, the two
are intimately interconnected. For example, the old
payment bureaux, which we successfully abolished at
the beginning of the year, were remnants of the
command economy that stifled enterprise and were also
being used to finance the nationalist parties that were
dominant during the war. Now, a modern commercial
banking system is swiftly taking root in the country.
However, in the last six months, overall economic
progress has, unfortunately, been patchy.
August should have seen the selection of a
telecommunications company to take up the third
mobile phone licence for Bosnia and Herzegovina, a
crucial step forward in a strategic economic sector. The
Communications Regulatory Agency, established by
my decision of March 2001, had organized a tender
that required the successful bidder to invest up to $200
million in a new, State-wide mobile phone network.
The tender had to be abandoned when two of the four
foreign companies that had submitted bids pulled out in
the final stages, citing uncertainty over the Council of
Ministers’ attitude towards incoming investors.
The failure of the GSM tender was of course a
self-inflicted wound. What Bosnia and Herzegovina
needs is the total, immediate and professional
commitment of its leaders to long-term economic
reform, not short-term political calculation. My Office
will seek to encourage that commitment.
There is a danger that unless the pace of reform in
Bosnia and Herzegovina rapidly increases, it will be
left behind and will remain the weak link in the
regional chain. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s overall

S/PV.4379

economic growth, projected to be around 5 per cent
this year, continues to disappoint. According to the
World Bank, it would take another six to eight years of
annual growth of 6 per cent for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to achieve a level of credit worthiness that
would be sufficient to finance future development. On
the positive side, it has become increasingly apparent
that the Alliance parties are beginning to realize that
any further delay in instituting real economic reform is
not an option. Citizens are impatient, and will not
allow their representatives to drag their feet prior to the
elections to be held late next year.
The Federation recorded solid growth in the first
half of 2001, whereas the economy of the Republika
Srpska actually contracted in the same period.
However, the fact that growth of any sort has been
achieved this year, in the face of declining donor aid
and a weak growth of the global economy, may be
viewed as a promising indication that the economy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is beginning to function under
its own steam, albeit at a minimal level.
The post-war recovery of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has depended from the very beginning on
the return of refugees and displaced persons to their
homes. According to Human Rights Watch, a
breakthrough in the return process was achieved last
year, and this positive trend was maintained during the
first half of 2001. In the first six months of 2001, there
were more than 35,000 so-called minority returns, an
85 per cent increase over the same period last year.
These figures point to an unstoppable momentum. I
view this as a result of activities undertaken by the
Reconstruction and Return Task Force (RRTF). The
RRTF is the umbrella group of agencies that includes
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), the Stabilization Force
(SFOR), the European Commission, the World Bank,
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and the OSCE. The Task Force operates
under the auspices of the Office of the High
Representative, making common and productive use of
information, facilities and personnel.
The process of return depends on economic and
social sustainability — the reopening of shops,
factories, schools and so on. As communities recover
they become better able to absorb larger numbers of
returnees. By applying consistent and focused pressure
on recalcitrant authorities, the RRTF has been
remarkably successful in boosting the number of

people who have been able to go home. Let me take
this opportunity to underline that the presence of SFOR
on the ground remains a precondition for those efforts
to be brought to a successful end.
Work has also continued apace to create a
political environment that is conducive to return. By
the end of July, both entities’ Constitutional
Commissions, established by me in January to
implement last year’s Constitutional Court ruling on
the constituency of peoples, had adopted provisional
reports on draft amendments to their respective entity
Constitutions. These amendments will ensure that no
citizen living in either entity will experience inequality
because of ethnicity or religion. This autumn will
likely see an animated debate over the adoption of
these amendments by the respective entity Parliaments.
The work of the Constitutional Commissions also
demonstrates how the Dayton process can be adapted
to meet changing needs. If one day the representatives
of the peoples and citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
decide that they want to amend the core annex of the
Peace Agreement, the Constitution, they can do so.
As the country’s constitutional settlement is
modified through consensus and as politicians turn
their attention to pressing issues of economic reform, I
have acted decisively to quell any recurrence of
separatism.
On 6 April, I placed the Hercegovacka Bank, the
biggest bank in Herzegovina and the second biggest in
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina,
under
provisional
administration after I had been presented with clear
indications that the bank was being used to finance
illicitly a variety of nationalist projects, including the
attempt to launch the so-called Croat self-rule,
specifically condemned by the Security Council in its
statement of 22 March 2001. The extremely violent
reaction by a well-organized mob to the establishment
of the provisional administration indicates that we went
for the right target.
The bank’s provisional administrator has spent
the summer examining the books and retrieving
thousands and thousands of documents which the
former management sought unsuccessfully to erase
from computer files. She will shortly report her
findings.
In March, as a corollary of the self-rule project,
thousands of Croat soldiers deserted from the

5

S/PV.4379

Federation army. By mid-June a majority had reenlisted. The hard-line Croat politicians, who had
exhorted troops to leave the barracks with the promise
that their salaries would continue to be paid and even
enhanced, were unable to deliver on this promise. With
their failure, one of the most serious challenges to the
Dayton peace process was overcome.
While
standing
firm
against
regressive
nationalism, my office has made consistent and
increasingly successful efforts to reach out to moderate
Croat leaders and to respond to the legitimate concerns
of the Croat constituent people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
In May, Serb extremists and local thugs attacked
local and international participants at the groundbreaking ceremonies for the reconstruction of historic
mosques in Trebinje and in Banja Luka, which had
been demolished under the wartime regime of the
Republika Srpska. One of the participants at the Banja
Luka ceremony subsequently died of his injuries. The
Republika Srpska authorities conspicuously failed to
maintain public security during these well-orchestrated
outbreaks of nationalist violence.
After
consultations
with
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein, I asked Republika Srpska authorities to
dismiss immediately several high-ranking police
officials who had failed in their professional
obligations. I also summoned the Republika Srpska
leadership — the President, Vice-President, Prime
Minister and relevant ministers — to Sarajevo, where I
made it clear to them that if they did not make
arrangements for the ceremony to proceed, with
complete security and appropriate dignity, and if
significant changes were not made in the Republika
Srpska’s social and political structures, there would be
serious consequences for the future of the entity. I laid
out the steps that must be taken in order to change this
regressive mindset, unfortunately prevalent in the
Republika Srpska, and the steps that must be taken to
find and punish the culprits in the violence of May and
to ensure that such violence is never repeated.
In addressing the violence surrounding the
mosque ceremonies and the flawed political
environment which produced it, I received the
forthright support of UNMIBH. The Mission has also
been at the forefront of efforts by the international
community to ensure that those responsible for the

6

violence of May are identified and prosecuted. Finally,
on 18 June, the cornerstone was laid at the Banja Luka
mosque site, with the President and Prime Minister of
the Republika Srpska in attendance.
On 11 July, a ceremony to mark the sixth
anniversary of the massacre at Srebrenica was held
without incident. Security was provided by SFOR in
cooperation with local police from the Republika
Srpska and the International Police Task Force (IPTF).
Meanwhile, I am able to report two promising
developments regarding the stance the Republika
Srpska is taking on military issues. At the end of July, I
communicated to the Republika Srpska and Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia authorities that the defence
annex to the Special Parallel Relations Agreement that
they had just signed had no legal effect, as they had
failed to consult my Office, as required by this very
agreement. Delegations from the Republika Srpska, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and my Office met last
month and agreed on the way forward to the conclusion
of a future defence annex.
In July, the Bosnia and Herzegovina presidency
formally applied for the membership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the Partnership for Peace programme
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
This will require a joint military structure that closely
coordinates the operations of Federation and Republika
Srpska armed forces. This in turn represents a viable
long-term military strategy for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is particularly encouraging that the
initiative for this has come from the tripartite
presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Next week the Republika Srpska National
Assembly will decide whether or not to adopt
legislation formalizing and facilitating the cooperation
of the Republika Srpska with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Regardless
of the outcome, the Republika Srpska has a standing
obligation to cooperate with the Tribunal, an obligation
that it has failed to honour so far. Passage of the bill,
though technically unnecessary, would represent an
important acknowledgement on the part of the
authorities of the Republika Srpska of the fact that their
entity cannot continue as the only holdout in the region
against the process of international justice. It is high
time the remaining fugitives from justice, beginning
with Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, were
apprehended and transferred to The Hague. Inasmuch

S/PV.4379

as these and other indictees have been able to find
refuge inside and outside Bosnia and Herzegovina,
routinely travelling to and from neighbouring
countries, I am seeking to promote a regional response
to the apprehension of these fugitives.
One bright spot in regional cooperation has been
the succession agreement signed in Vienna on 29 June
by the five former Yugoslav republics. Under my
separate mandate for this succession issue, I oversaw
and mediated the negotiations and acted as a witness to
the signature of the agreement. With this treaty, the
first agreement since the end of the old Yugoslavia to
be concluded among all five States, the protracted legal
dismantling of the old Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is brought to a close. It allows the
successor States to gain access to their agreed portion
of the former Yugoslavia’s assets, an important
boost — approximately $125 million in the case of
Bosnia and Herzegovina — to their respective State
finances. I would like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General, who graciously accepted my
proposal of being the depository of this agreement.
Improving
State
and
entity
finances,
professionalizing the civil service, promoting the work
of independent regulatory agencies, and establishing a
modern legal framework: all of this will endow Bosnia
and Herzegovina with institutions that can maintain
stability and, in due course, take the country into
Europe. In the last six months, important progress has
been made in developing and strengthening strategic
institutions.
The Independent Judicial Commission, which I
established last December, replacing the United
Nations-led Judicial System Assessment Programme,
has the task of strengthening the independent judiciary
of the country. It aims to reform the appointment
process for judges and other court personnel. It is
reviewing the qualifications and conduct of all judges
and prosecutors, and it is introducing initiatives
designed to improve the training offered to personnel
throughout the judicial system over the next 18 months.
Work is also under way to overhaul the civil
service, freeing bureaucracy from political influence
and raising its standards. We are pushing for the swift
adoption of a civil service law prepared by my Office
that will professionalize the state civil service, making
merit the main criterion for appointment and
promotion.

In the spring of this year, I was asked by the
Foreign Ministers of the Contact Group, as well as by
the Foreign Ministers of the European Union, to
oversee the streamlining of civil international peace
implementation structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina
with a view to improving efficiency and coordination.
This is especially important in light of our desire to
foster local ownership.
The present level of international commitment
cannot be sustained. Donor fatigue has already led to a
strategic reduction in actual and projected aid. Equally
important: as long as the international community
determines politics in Bosnia and Herzegovina to such
a large degree, it will inhibit the mature growth of
domestic institutions. We thus need to develop, in
coordination with the entire international community
and in consultation with the local Government, a plan
that will set the stage for the final phase of peace
implementation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let me
emphasize the need to focus on the end state, rather
than merely on an end date. However, it is imperative
that we set benchmarks and develop action plans for
our core activities to improve focus and cooperation.
Since my last report to the Security Council, my
Office has carried out a comprehensive overview of the
international community’s activities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Office of the High Representative
has sought and received proposals from other
international agencies. The United Nations mandate
given to me, the High Representative, under resolution
1256 (1999) obligates me to take an inclusive approach
to our streamlining efforts. At the meeting of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
last week, I invited representatives from UNMIBH,
UNHCR, the United Nations Development Programme,
OSCE and SFOR to present their views. In its
communiqué, the Steering Board has tasked my Office
with identifying core requirements and functions for
the international community, reviewing tasks, mandates
and field presence, and presenting options for a followup police monitoring mission. This plan of action will
be presented for consideration by the Steering Board at
its December 2001 meeting.
Let me state in this context that I appreciate and
welcome the presence of Jacques Paul Klein, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, at this
very important meeting.

7

S/PV.4379

In concluding, I would like to stress the vision
that the international community must adhere to in its
efforts. Our task is not to work on a mere exit strategy;
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs an entry strategy into
European structures. Membership in the Council of
Europe is a first step. The European Union has further
defined the path with its Stabilisation and Association
Agreements.
In my address to the Council, I have gone into
some detail in order to demonstrate the at times
complex and technical nature of our engagement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, I believe that these
are indispensable elements of our mission to help build
a viable and truly multi-ethnic State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina that can take its rightful place in the
European family of States.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Coordinator of United
Nations Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Klein: At this time of wrenching anguish and
tragedy for the people and city of New York, the
empathy of the men and women of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) for
them is real. Many of my staff come from this city; a
large part of the United States of America contingent of
the International Police Task Force (IPTF) is from the
New York City Police Department. They have lost
close friends and colleagues. Their ability to console
the survivors and their families is limited to the
telephone. This is one of the unwritten human
dimensions of the job of peacekeeping: the distance
from family and friends when tragedy strikes at home.
But our work must go on with new urgency and
determination. Weak and failed States are a target of
opportunity for extremism. War and conflict have
domestic and international consequences long after the
fighting has stopped. We have begun to understand a
new reality. Without reconciliation, tolerance and the
rule of law, we are all potential victims of violence and
terrorism.
We must respond on two fronts: to find and
punish those who committed these abominable acts and
to establish the social, political and economic
conditions in which democracy, peaceful resolution of
disputes and the rule of law can govern national and
international society.

8

This is precisely what the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is striving to achieve.
UNMIBH has, admittedly, a thin slice of the
international mandate, even less than that envisaged in
annex 11 of the Dayton Accords. Specifically, our role
is to reform and restructure the local police forces, but,
as we look at the major domestic and international
problem areas — terrorism, corruption, discrimination
— the establishment of a professional, non-political
and honest police force is the key to resolving each of
them. And as we look at the future priorities —
economic reform to encourage investment, sustainable
minority returns and institution-building — none of
these will be achieved without rule of law based on
effective policing and an impartial judiciary.
Ambassador Petritsch has reported eloquently on
the overall progress of the peace implementation
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I wish to update
the Council simply on the major achievements of
UNMIBH since my last briefing in June and to seek its
engagement in and guidance on the process of
streamlining in the context of imminent decisions about
the future of UNMIBH and the United Nations role in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With respect to the progress of UNMIBH, I must
admit to some frustration. Through our Mandate
Implementation Plan, UNMIBH is robustly undertaking
one of the largest police reform and restructuring
missions in history, but, as we have repeatedly noted,
the judicial system remains largely dysfunctional. Two
weeks ago, a policeman in Trebinje chose not to carry
out a potentially dangerous arrest of a known smuggler.
His reason was simple: twice before he had put his life
at risk arresting this man, but both times the perpetrator
had been immediately released by local courts. In such
circumstances, police forces cannot be effective. Police
reform and judicial reform must proceed hand in hand.
Equally important to the goal of establishing
professional police forces is the unresolved salary
issue. As long as police do not regularly receive wages
sufficient to feed their families, their performance will
always be open to compromise and corruption. No
amount of restructuring and retraining can overcome
economic necessity.
I am prepared to aggressively weed out corrupt
and non-performing police officers, but this is
ultimately an impossible task if honest policemen
cannot make an honest living. For this reason, we have

S/PV.4379

constantly advocated that priority should be given to
police salaries and housing allocation. Judges’ salaries
were substantially raised a year ago, but police in the
Republika Srpska entity have received only nine
inadequate salaries in the past 12 months.
Consequently, even some of our minority police
recruitment projects are suffering. Despite the most
intensive efforts, the pool of displaced police officers
willing to return to an uncertain and inadequate income
is ever diminishing.

pursuing traffickers. In the past six months, all 290
known brothels have been raided, some several times.
With the assistance of the International Organization
for Migration, over 150 women have been repatriated
this year alone. We are now focusing on prosecuting
traffickers and brothel owners, and on assisting
international efforts to identify the gangs behind
trafficking. In this regard, more protection needs to be
given in their home countries for trafficked women
who agree to testify in court.

Notwithstanding these difficulties, which are
beyond the authority of UNMIBH to address, we are
making good progress on our core mandate. Our latest
review showed that 30 of our 64 projects are
completed; 28 are ongoing; and eight are in the
planning stage.

Through the regular ministerial-level meeting on
police and the trilateral Regional Law Enforcement
Agreement, we are building patterns and institutions
for regional cooperation against organized crime and
illegal migration. The State Information and Protection
Agency (SIPA) that we are creating will be an essential
complement to our efforts to improve the efficiency of
police cooperation between the 23 different police
administrations in the fight against organized crime.
However, we are concerned about possible competing
and uncoordinated initiatives. Next week we will chair
the first coordination meeting between major regional
and bilateral parties working on these issues.

The State Border Service (SBS), which
Ambassador Petritsch mentioned, now covers about 75
per cent of the border and is already proving its worth.
Illegal migration through the Sarajevo airport has
decreased from 25,000 last year to about 9,000 as of 15
September this year. Attempts to bypass the Sarajevo
airport controls by using the Tuzla airport have been
thwarted, and the director of the offending airline
company, Air Bosna, has resigned.
We are delighted to have concluded a
memorandum of understanding this week with the
United Kingdom for the co-location of migration
experts with our Border Service Department as part of
the European Union Illegal Migration Initiative. There
is no alternative to a regional approach to this growing
problem.
The State Border Service has also confiscated 1.2
million convertible marka of contraband goods, thus
demonstrating that it will contribute to increased
customs and excise revenues. It should be borne in
mind that effective border controls are a major weapon
in the fight against international terrorism. However, to
complete this vital project by November 2002,
additional funds are urgently required. Assuming that
the 2001 State budget is implemented, and a similar
allocation is made for 2002, the remaining shortfall is
approximately $12 million.
UNMIBH has taken stringent measures against
human trafficking. Under the UNMIBH Special
Trafficking
Operational
Programme
(STOP),
conceptualized by Mme. Celhia de Lavarene, special
teams of international and local police are aggressively

The Police Commissioner Project is fundamental
to ensuring an independent and apolitical police force.
It is also the first step in the formation of a professional
non-partisan civil service. In the Republika Srpska
entity and in 6 out of 10 cantons, interim police
commissioners have been appointed, pending the
amendment of legislation to enable the posts to be
formally established and filled permanently through
open competition.
But, particularly in the Sarajevo canton and in
areas dominated by Croat hardliners, we are meeting
political obstruction. In the Croat areas, suitable
candidates have been identified, but local authorities
are attempting to put conditions on their appointment.
In Sarajevo, the Ministry of the Interior, apparently
under instructions from members of the Alliance
parties, has completely failed to nominate even one
candidate, out of 1,800 local police, who meets the
simple criteria we have set out — namely, eight years
of police experience, not a political office holder and a
clean wartime criminal and housing record. I find this
to be extraordinary and unacceptable behaviour from
political parties who claim to be serious partners with
us and the rest of the international community.

9

S/PV.4379

UNMIBH is also engaged in constructive
dialogue with the Stabilization Force (SFOR) on how
to bridge the public order security gap through
advanced training of local police riot control support
units by the IPTF and the SFOR Multinational Support
Units. From recent discussions in Brussels and in
Sarajevo, I believe that the will is there, but additional
funding is required for accommodation and equipment
to enable these units to operate in company-size
formations.
This week, UNMIBH began training the second
group of 26 military observers for deployment to
Ethiopia and Eritrea. The second contingent of civilian
police has been deployed to East Timor. By the end of
this year, I expect that a multi-ethnic composite
logistics unit of over 120 military personnel will be
ready for deployment to other United Nations peace
operations.
Turning now to streamlining, I have consistently
maintained that as long as the international community
continues to pursue a piecemeal approach to the
Balkans, in which loose coordination among a
multitude of actors is an unsatisfactory substitute for
purposeful planning, the real opportunities to close a
tragic decade of war and instability will go begging.
Streamlining presents a unique and long-overdue
opportunity to correct the deficiencies in the structure
and activities of the current international presence. But
this opportunity can be realized only if streamlining
moves beyond mere ad hoc downsizing of existing
international operations and organizations and is
instead based on an agreed international strategic
vision and plan that has the authority and support of
the Security Council.
Also, decisions must be made in the coming
months about the future of United Nations peace
operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Next month,
UNMIBH must present its budget for the period July
2002 to June 2003. Bearing in mind that the UNMIBH
core mandate is scheduled for completion in December
2002, I seek your guidance on what should remain in
2003, other than an administrative liquidation presence.
Last week, at Ambassador Petritsch’s invitation, I
addressed the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board in Brussels. I noted that any decision regarding a
continued United Nations peacekeeping presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina after 2002 is the sole
prerogative of the Security Council. With respect to the

10

specific goals and directions of streamlining, I
emphasized that the establishment of the rule of law
has to be a core task of the international peace
implementation effort and that without it the other
three core goals — refugee return, institution building
and economic development — cannot be achieved.
Council members may ask what is the optimum
manner in which to carry out the core tasks. On the
basis of extensive United Nations and personal
experience in the region, I believe that streamlining
should be based on the following key elements.
One element is a comprehensive 2002-2005
Dayton Implementation Plan, with benchmarks and
timelines, endorsed by key international bodies — the
United Nations, the Peace Implementation Council, the
European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization — and including guaranteed multiyear funding of the agreed programmes.
The implementation of the agreed plan should
prepare the country for the commencement of
European integration, which ultimately is the only
long-term basis for stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the wider region.
In the medium term, activities for each of the core
tasks — rule of law, refugee return, institution building
and economic development — should be functionally
consolidated so that one organization will have primary
responsibility over each core programme and be held
accountable for carrying out its part of the Dayton
Implementation Plan according to realistic but strict
deadlines.
SFOR should be included in this process. Without
the implementation of some key tasks in the military
sector, civilian implementation will be incomplete.
Moreover, a continued robust SFOR presence is an
absolutely essential component of civilian peace
implementation.
Turning now to the question of implementation of
the core programme of the rule of law after 2002, I
raise the following considerations.
Subject to the necessary financial and political
support, UNMIBH is on track to complete its technical
mandate of police reform and restructuring by
December of next year. At that time, there will be
approximately 20,000 vetted local police plus the SBS,
trained according to European standards and organized

S/PV.4379

in accountable and transparent civilian police
structures, with a basic level of police equipment.
Local riot control units will be fully established. The
institutions and mechanisms for internal and regional
police cooperation and mechanisms for progressively
increasing the multi-ethnic composition of police will
be ongoing.
In sum, the police forces in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will know how to do their work
professionally, but their willingness and ability to do so
will continue to be severely constrained by political
interference in policing, inadequate and irregular
salaries and the lack of effective and impartial judicial
institutions.
In these circumstances, a follow-on intrusive
police-monitoring mission post-2002 will be essential
to ensure that the achievements of UNMIBH are not
lost and that the ongoing work of the international
community is not compromised.
Irrespective of which organization should take on
the task, two options merit consideration: a stand-alone
police-monitoring mission or a comprehensive rule-oflaw mission, as originally envisaged in annex 11 of the
Dayton Accords. With the Council’s engagement,
involvement and guidance, streamlining offers a unique
and timely opportunity to make the optimum decision.
Option one is a stand-alone police-monitoring
mission. The role of the mission would be to ensure
that local police planning and performance in the key
areas of returnee security, public order and human
rights are monitored intensively; internal and regional
coordination and cooperation is maintained; minority
recruitment continues; and police structures are not
politically compromised. This suggests a mission of
between 450 and 500 international police personnel,
plus interpreters and administrative support staff.
Option two is a comprehensive rule-of-law
mission that would bring together under one roof the
police, the judiciary and the penal system. This would
implement the lessons learned from United Nations
experiences in Kosovo and East Timor, which
demonstrated that there is a triangle in which the
police, the judiciary and the penal system are
inseparable. It would be consistent with the principle of
one organization — one responsibility, which is a
desired outcome of the streamlining process. And it
would facilitate the introduction of a more efficient

“pillar” structure for the organization of
international effort in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

the

If option two is preferred, the United Nations has
extensive expertise and capacity to take on such a
mission. In this way, peace implementation would
continue to be a collective endeavour between five
principal organizations, but with clearer mandates and
responsibilities. For example, the High Representative
would be responsible for the core programme of
institution-building, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) would
manage refugee return, the OSCE would do
democratization and human rights, SFOR would be
responsible for security and the United Nations would
manage the rule of law.
I raise these possibilities for the Council’s
consideration and guidance. Even though the current
UNMIBH mandate runs until June 2002, if UNMIBH is
to be terminated in December 2002, urgent decisions
are required to plan the downsizing and liquidation of
the Mission and to enable the successor organizations
to plan its future mission.
(spoke in French)
The terrorist attacks carried out in New York and
Washington D.C. last week were attacks on us all.
Those who reject peaceful conflict resolution, and turn
instead to indiscriminate terror against innocents, reject
the very basis of civilization. The role of the United
Nations in seeking to rid the world of the scourge of
war is more important than ever. Only an international
structure and consensus can successfully take on this
global challenge. We say it so often that we sometimes
overlook that the United Nations was formed
specifically because nations were united in their
commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes and
the rule of law. That commitment needs to be
reinvigorated now.
Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be seen as some
distant venture, isolated from global developments.
The international community has real and abiding
interests. Bosnia and Herzegovina remains a test case
for the ability of three ethnic and religious groups —
Bosniacs, Serbs and Croats — to live in tolerance in
one State under the rule of law.
If the multi-ethnic society of Bosnia and
Herzegovina fails this test, after six years of efforts and
$6 billion of international investment, I fear there will

11

S/PV.4379

be no hope for multi-ethnic States anywhere in the
Balkans or in any other area of the world where there is
historical, religious and cultural dissent. In such
circumstances, further State fragmentation and
violence are likely, and the international community
will yet again have to deploy a massive long-term
military presence to prevent non-viable mono-ethnic
mini-States from going to war with each other, with
their own minorities or with the international order at
large.
I urge the Council to remain engaged and to resist
fatigue, be it political, donor or compassion fatigue.
Give the world the leadership and the vision necessary
to make the ideals of this great institution a global
reality.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): At the outset, let me
thank High Representative Petritsch and Special
Representative Jacques Paul Klein for their succinct
and lucid briefings, as well as for their comprehensive
report, which provided us with a clear vision of the
current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My delegation is encouraged by the positive
tendencies testifying to the fact that the general
situation in that country has become more stable.
Ukraine welcomes the results-oriented efforts of the
High Representative aimed in particular at
consolidating the Bosnia and Herzegovina State
institutions and at strengthening their competencies.
We also appreciate the High Representative’s activities
focused on economic reform and refugee return.
We are pleased to note further progress in
creating a multi-ethnic and multicultural united State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina based on the democratic and
humanitarian ideals of modern Europe.
Ukraine particularly welcomes the recent decision
of the House of Representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to adopt the election law, which in fact
was a major step forward on the road to European
integration. It is also an important prerequisite for the
accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Council of
Europe.
In this context, I wish to commend the successful
work of the Office of the High Representative and the
representatives of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, which made a remarkable
contribution to achieving this political compromise. We
support the steps of the High Representative aimed at

12

stabilizing political life in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
delegation fully endorses the measures taken to
preserve the country’s unity and to create conditions
necessary for the productive work of State institutions
based on non-nationalistic principles.
Ukraine welcomes the adoption by the Council of
Ministers of the Stability Pact Charter for Media
Freedom. We believe that this important step will
provide a new impetus to the further development of
free and pluralistic media in the country. Let me also
mention the adoption of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
defence policy, which has strengthened the authority of
the presidency in the field of defence and security. We
believe that such a decision will help intensify the
further development of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
security and defence identity.
In this context, my delegation supports the
intention of Bosnia and Herzegovina to join the
Partnership for Peace programme. We hope that a
positive response to this initiative can provide an
important incentive for Bosnia and Herzegovina in
taking forward the political and military reforms.
As for the economic dimension, we are confident
that the advancement of economic reforms in the
country should continue to be a key element of the
international community’s strategy. At the same time,
we should be realistic about the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue to face serious economic
difficulties until the structural reform has been fully
implemented. My delegation welcomes the decision
made by the High Representative, in pursuit of
economic reforms in the financial, labour and pension
sectors, in creating a favourable environment for the
effective functioning of industry and trade and in
promoting the privatization process.
We have noted the concern expressed by the High
Representative about the state of public finances in the
country, as indicated by the results of the audit of the
entity budgets for 2000. In this respect, let me stress
again that effective economic reforms in any country
are impossible without sound and transparent financial
administration.
While noting the recent progress on returns of
minorities, we believe that much more should be done
in ensuring the conditions necessary for their security
and the equality of their rights upon their return. In this
respect, it is of particular importance to make the
property laws effective, to promote further

S/PV.4379

comprehensive judicial reform and to strengthen
human rights institutions. My delegation applauds the
measures taken by the High Representative in this
regard.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
underline the importance we attach to ensuring the
human rights not only of the three constituent peoples
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also of its national
minorities. As the Council knows, the Ukrainian ethnic
community constitutes the fourth-largest ethnic group
in the country. My delegation commends the efforts of
the High Representative aimed at improving conditions
for the national, political and cultural revival of the
national minorities in the country. Moreover, I would
like to express our readiness to be useful to the Office
of the High Representative in this important work. At
the same time, we would greatly appreciate the
comments of the High Representative on the current
situation in the field of the protection of the rights of
national minorities. My delegation would also welcome
his remarks on further necessary steps in this regard.
The President (spoke in French): Since we are
running late, I will call on two more speakers before
suspending the meeting.
Mr. Hume (United States of America): Given the
lateness of the hour, I will be brief.
I would like to thank our two visitors for the
briefings they gave us today. I think they have given us
a great deal to think about as we look at how to go
ahead with the international community’s continuing
responsibility to support the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Accords.
The streamlining process that we have heard
about reflects the evolution of the international
community’s role in Bosnia and Herzegovina and is a
clear signal to its leaders about the need to work
together ever more diligently to make progress on
refugee returns, joint State institutions and economic
reform.
On hearing the High Representative’s report
about the slow progress in building healthy joint State
institutions for Bosnia, it strikes me that this is a
problem not only because citizens are deprived of
necessary services but also because the investment
required for economic growth and for security is
discouraged. I think that we will have to find some way
to institutionalize the sense of urgency rather than

accept practices of procrastination. If we are able to do
that, we are more likely to find overall success.
We think that there must be a concerted effort by
the Office of the High Representative and Bosnia’s
leaders, recognizing the progress that has already been
made in some of these areas, to strengthen border
controls, passport issuance and the fight against the
organized smuggling of women and other transnational
crimes that are often linked to terrorist activities.
We have appreciated what we have been briefed
on in this regard, but obviously this is an effort that has
to be pushed even further. We are encouraged that
progress on refugee returns continues to improve —
quite dramatically, in fact. But this will not be
sustainable without progress in consolidating and
strengthening Bosnia’s joint institutions. One of the
key issues in the streamlining exercise is addressing
the police-related mission that will remain after the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
completed its work next year. This fundamental task is
one of the priority considerations that is guiding our
thinking about the future.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I, too, will be
extremely brief. I can afford to do so not least because
the representative of the European Union will be
speaking later in the debate.
I would like to focus on three key points, the first
of which is the streamlining exercise. I do not think it
would be appropriate now for me to go into the details
of the pros and cons one way or the other. Certainly, as
Ambassador Hume said, the future police presence is
going to be one key element of whatever is put
together. But I think that we, the international
community generally and the Steering Board will look
to be presented later in the year with a solution with
which all the various constituent bodies and
organizations are happy; which avoids duplication; and
which meets the long-term vision, so to speak, about
which Mr. Petritsch and Mr. Klein have spoken.
I would just like to take this opportunity to say to
the Office of the High Representative and to the High
Representative himself that we hope that work will be
taken forward quickly against the sort of background
and within the parameters that I have just outlined.
Secondly, on the State Border Service, Mr. Klein
referred to the recent memorandum of understanding
that the United Kingdom signed with the United

13

S/PV.4379

Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
continue to regard the State Border Service as a matter
of high priority, and I was very interested to hear that
75 per cent of the border is now covered. We would be
interested to have Mr. Klein’s assessment later on as to
how long it will take to cover 100 per cent of the
border.
Finally, I would just like to support what
Ambassador Hume said about refugee returns and ask
what progress there has been on implementing the

14

Constitutional Court’s decision on constituent peoples.
It will be interesting to hear from Mr. Petritsch whether
the entities’ Constitutional Commissions are yet close
to reaching an agreement on this subject.
The President (interpretation from French): I
propose to suspend the meeting and to resume
promptly at 3 p.m. I ask that everyone be here at 3 p.m.
precisely.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.
