United Nations

302nd

*

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

,PLENARY MEETING
Friday, 3 November 1950, at 10,,45 a.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Official Records

Flushing Meadow, New York

-----------------------------------------~i

CONTENTS
Page
Unite~ action fo~ peace: reports of the First Committee (A/1456) and the

Fifth Committee (A/1463) ( concluded)

...•. 341

,.. ......

.

Request for the deletion of item 66 of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . .. 347
Statement by the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States. . . . . . •• . .. 347
Financial' reports and accounts, an.d reports of the Board of Auditors: report
of the Fifth Committee ...
348
11

11

,

••••••••' ••••••••••

,11

•

•

•

•

•

..

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

••

United Nations Joint Staff Pension· Fund: report of the Fifth Committee
(A/1449) .'. . .
348
G •

•

•

,;.11 •

•

•

•

"

•

•

•

•

• "

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

..'" •

•

' . ' 11

•

•

•

•

•

.. •

•

•

•

•

••

Observance in Bulgaria; Hungary and Romania of human rights and fundamental freedoms: report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee (A/1437) ... 348
President: !v.lr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Ir~n).

United action for peace: reports of the Fit'st Committee (A/1456) and the Fifth Co~~mittee
(A/1463) (concluded)
[Agenda item 68]

1. M.r. PEARSON (Canada): AfJ one of the sponsors of the first draft resolution which is now before the.
General Assembly, I should like to add a few wprds con,:,
cerrting it. before the vote is taken, and also a. few
worqs-althQugh it is tempting ,to say more thana few
wor~~~ri ,the statements made to the. General Assembly by the leader of the Soviet Union delegation.
2: . Vyh~n he spoke ,yesterday [301st, meeting], Mr.
Vyshmsk}r complained of, the rattle and the thunder ot
oUr speeches In support of this draft t~solution. According to him, they were mendacious sneers and rude outbursts against the Soviet Union. All the sponsors of this
draft, in his opinion, had vied with each other in impudence and crudeness, and he urged the participants
l~ this debate to stick to the draft resolution anoargue
either fo!' it or against it, strictly on its merits. .
3. Then. what did he do in his own speech? When he
came to the rostrum, he attempted to drag the debate
down to the level of an attack on various il1dividuals,
and m.ore particularly on Mr. Dulles. So far as I could
see from where I sat, Mr. Dunes seemed to receive this
verbal assault with equanimity. He probably realized
that he ~as safe, since a debate in th~ General Assembly

is not a purge. He may even have fe1t some satisfaction,
as ~n author, from knowing that his book was receiving
so much valuable publicity. Moreover, instead of stick. ing to the draft resolution, Mr. Vyshinsky spent most
or a great part of his speech in discussing the report of
the United States Economic Survey Mission to the
Philippines headed by Mr. Bell, Mussolini's attack on
Ethiopia, the election-or rather, the continuation in
office-of our Secretary-General, the characteristics of
monopoly capitalism and, especially, the events of the
autumn of 1939, events which do, in fact, bear a rela..
tionship to the draft v.;hich is before us.
4. :On this subject, we were privileged to T,;ear frotii:
the leader of the Soviet Union delegation the pure party
line on !he cordial.but temporat"y friendship struck up
at that tIme between the Na?,;is and Moscow, and I must
tell him' frankly that his account of that episode simply
will not wash. He assured us that the sole purpose of
the Soviet-German pact in 1939 was to enable the USSR
to fill gaps in its defences for the attack which it knew
was coming. If that is a true explanation, why did the
Spviet Union do its best, after the destruction of Poland,
to torce the nations of the British Commonwealth and
France to stop fighting Hitler, ,and why did it accuse
them of aggression ill continuing thewat:? If those
countries had stopped fighting at that time, would the
USSR have..been stronger to withstand the attack from
Hitler, who would then have been in virtual domination
of a~l of western Europe~ an attack which Mr. Vyshinsky

341
..... 1 ..

.A/PV.302

342

Gen.eral Aseernbly-F'ifth SessiQn-Plenary Meetings
~

assures U$ the rulers of Moscow knew was coming? If
they did know it, why did they spurn all the attempts
made by the United Kingdom Government to watn them
of their danger as' efforts to divide them from their
friends of that moment, the Nazis?
5. In our view, Mr. Vyshinsky's version of the history
of that period will not stand even the most superfidal
analysis, and his account of what happened in. Korea in
June 195Q--and that also has a very immediate connexion with our draft resolution-seems to us to be
equally flimsy apd to fall to pieces at the slightest
examination. He insisted yesterday, as he has insisted
before, that it was the Soviet Union which tried to bring
about a cease~fire in Korea in order to stop the war, and
that it was thle United States which did not permit this
pacific solution.
6. I do not need to remind the General Assembly of
some elementary facts. On 25 June, after North Korean
forces had crossed the 38th parallel and were streaming
south with armoured columns, the Security Council met
to consider a report from the United Nations Commission on Korea1 which had confirmed those facts, and it
was the Security Council on tbat day, and not the
Soviet Union, which asked for a cease-fire and called
on the ~Torth Korean forces to withdraw beyond, or to,
•the 38th parallel. 2 That was a splendid opportunity for
the USSR to support an appeal to cease-fire.
7. Did the Soviet Union support the Security Council
ip its efforts to stop the war, or did it encourage the
forces of North Korea, which were then triumphantly
advancing? So far as I am aware, there was no whisper
of support from the USSR at that moment for the Security Council's appeal for a cease-fire. And what was
thP.l reason? Possibly, as we have not had a reason .from
the Soviet Union delegation, I might suggest an·answer.
8. 'The USSR may have refused to support the Security Council's c()Jl for a cease-fire at that time because
then the North Korean forces were enjoying the first
fruits of aggression and were advancing pell-mell down
the peninsula. The interest of the Soviet Union in a
cease-fire bloomed later. It was not an early advocate"of
this idea, as Mr. Vyshinsky would have us believe, but
rather its interest was expressed later, on 1 August, 3
when it called for a cease-fire. At a time when its triends
were in possession of most of Korea and the brave and
embattled forces of the Republic of Korea, of the United
States, and of other Members of the United Nations
stood ~t bay, waiting until United Nations forces
should h~ye gathered sufficient strength to. take the
offensive-..then, and then only, did the Soviet Union
suddenly become pacific and realize the great advantages
of a cease-fire.
'
9. The history of this is of importance only in so far as
it helps us to me~t tt.~ future, a.s we ar~ attempting to
do in this. dr9-;'~ r~solution. Let us admit that all of us,
nations andL -:viduals, made mistakes in the dismal
thirties. But SI- 'tIe of those mistakes we do not intend
to l'~p~at if. we can avoid it. We ate not going to repeat
the mistakes of the thirties when collective security was
1 See Official Records of the General Assemlfly, Fifth S~ssion, Supplement No. 16, chapt-er I, para. 6.
. ~ See Official Records of the Security Council, fifth year,'
No. 15.
a Ibid.,N o. 22.
.

betrayed---we can admit that-and when Sta.tes fell one
by one before the aggressor. Nor are we going to repeat
the mistakes of June 1950, when we were not organized
to carry. out quickly the collec~ive security obligatioll~
we had undertaken when we Signed the Charter. The
purpose of the first of the three draft resolutions before
the General Assembly is to help us 'to avoid making
.,
these mistakes in the future.'
10. This draft resolution has been attacked, and very:
vigorously attacked, as aimed against, for one thing, the
unanimity of the great Powers. That, as I see it, is nonsense. No one has more to gain from such unanimity
than the smaller and middle-sized Powers. But what is
the use of a unanimity which can be achieved only by
doing nothing, which is used as a cloak for obstruction
and reactkm? That kind of unanimity is meaningless
and will get us nowhere.
11. The draft resolution has also been attacked as a
violation of the Charter. In this Assembly some honest
doubts have been expressed about its constitudonality,
and, as honest doubts, the sponsors of the dr,dt resolution ,respect them. NeYtt ,\'theless, we feel convinced that
the draft resolution 18 ~lthin the terms of the Charter.
We believe that the Ge~era.l Assembly has the power to
make recommendations on the subjects dealt with
therein, although it would not have the power to make
aecisions which would automatically impose commitments or enforcement obligations un the Members of the
United Nations.
12. There has been a great deal of legal argument
about this draft resolution, but I suspect that nothing
that we can do or say on that subject will make any impression on the delegations of the Soviet b~,oc, which
keep on repeating' that it is a flagrant viola'ion of the
Charter. It should not, however, escape notice that those
same delegations, which use such hard language about
the legality of this draft r,~solution and have constituted
themselves as the guardians and guarantors of the purity
of our Charter, have at the same time submitted an
amendment to the third draft resolution which is before
us, which would cettainly make that resolution co~­
plet:cly aq.d entirely a violation of·the Charte!.
13. ' Article 23, paragraph' 1'of the Charter reads: "The
Security Council shall consist of eleven Members of the
United Na~ions. Th~ Republic of China, France" the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics" the' United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northetn Ireland, and the
United States of America shall be permanent members
'.. Counc1·...
'1 "
of t he,Secunty
.. ,.
14. But the amendment to the third draft resolution
which has. been introduced by. the; Soviet. Un.ion delega~
tion [A/1466] proposes that the·first part of the operative part of the resolution shOUld be redrafted to read
as follows: "Recommends to thl~ permanent members of
the Security Council-the Pec/ple's Repltblic of China,
France, the Uoion of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
United-Kingdom of Great Bdtain and Northern Ireland
and theUuited States of America-that .. /'
15. You will note that in that listing of the permanent
members pf the Security OJuncil, the Soviet Union de17"
gation has added one litt1(~ word to tlfe list contained 10
Article 23 of the Charter. That one word, howeverthe word "People's" before the words "Republic of
China"-is enough to fJhow 9 I think, that in this amend-

30211d Meeting-3 November 1950
ment the USSR is attempting to rewrite paragraph 1 of
Article 23 of the Charter. Would that, by any chance,
be a violation of the Charter?
16. In the first draft resolution, we are making further progress toward organizing collective security.
That is our goal. It is a good goal, and it is one which
we are determined to reach, especially we of the smaller
and middle Powers who know that by no other means
can our security be ensured against those who threaten
it. What this resolution does has been, I think, sufficiently explained by previous speakers, but let me mention
one or two things which it does not do.

17. It does not sabotage the Security Council. It merely
establishes peace machinery under the General Assembly to supplement the Security Council when the
latter body sabotages itself. If the Security Council can
work effectively to defend the peace and defeat the aggressor, this resolution will never have to be invoked.
And no one will be more pleased by that than its sponsors and supporters.
18. Also, this resolution does not, as some friendly
critics in Asia have suggested, organize the Assembly
for war. It merely lays down methods by which, through
General Assembly action, Members of the United Nations can implement obligations already undertaken
under the Charter.
19. Thirdly, this resolution does not set up an international force. It recommends that Members should
place national contingents at the disposal of the United
Nations to carry out obligations and recommendations
which those Members accept. These contingents must
be equipped, trained and ready to join in international
police action, so that, if a 27 June 1950 occurs again,
the United Nations will have forces fr0111 many of its
Members ready to meet the aggression, and not fr0111
one or two alone. To make this provision effective-the
provision in paragraph 8-it will not be enough for a
few countries to take the action recommended. We must
all, within the measure of our capacities, contribute to
its implementation. That will be the test of the sincerity
of our words in favour of collective security, and that
will be the test of the effectiveness of this new effort
to put international force behind the collective will for
peace of the United Nations.
20. Finally, this resolution, even if it is fully implemented, will not of itself bring peace. As section E
indicates-and for that section we are indebted to the
Chilean delegation-peace, in the long run, will be
achieved only by establishing conditions of economic
and social decency and security throughout the world.
In the shorter run, peace will be achieved if the stronger
Powers settle the problems which now so tragically divide them and which threaten to engulf us all in the
tragic consequences of failure.
21. In this draft resolution we have made a bold step
forward toward a genuine and effective system of collective security. This is our answer to those who would
frustrate and make futile the efforts of the Security
Council to carry out the task for which it has primary
responsibility, namely, the maintenance of international
peace and security. This draft resolution is also our
warning to those who would threaten the peace and who
are tempted to commit aggression. If they yield to this
temptation, they will not only find opposed to them the

343

collective conscience of the peaceful world, expressed
through the United Nations, they will also find that this
conscience cart express itself through international forces
organized and equipped to carry out the decisions of om
world Organization, decisions which will have no other
purpose than the de£e11ce of peace. We are organizing
collective security not for war bat to prevent war, not
for the pursuit of national policy but for the defence of
international peace. In this high endeavour, all men of
good will everywhere and all nations which follow the
policies of peace will be on our side.
22. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : The
list of speakers is closed; the general discussion is therefore also closed. Two delegations have asked to explain
their vote and I shall call upon them in turn.
23. Mr. BOHEMAN (Sweden): The Swedish delegation will vote for this important draft resolution as a
whole, but it wishes to reiterate a reservation made by
Sweden's Foreign Minister in the First Committee as
far as section C is concerned. The Swedish delegation
abstained from voting on that section since the question
involved must be submitted for consideration in accordance with the usual constitutional procedure. This does
not signify, however, that the Swedish Government opposes that part of the draft resolution.
24. Mr. BELAUNDE (Peru) (translated j1'om
Spanish): The Peruvian delegation will vote wholeheartedly and advisedly, as it did in Committee, in .
favour of the entire draft resolution which has been
discussed. It will do so for reasons which I shall now
enumerate.
25. The Peruvian delegation's attitude to the problem
under discussion is not of recent date nor is it due to the
Acheson plan: my delegation's position in this matter
was settled at the discussions at San Francisco. This is
the most categorical answer to those who think that we
have been or are discussing measures of mere expediency, emergency measures dictated by the circumstances.
The Peruvian delegation considered this problem at
San Francisco from an essentially legal standpoint.
26. It is obvious, from the Dumbarton Oaks principles,
that it was then believed that practical and effective enforcement measures should be within the exclusive j urisdiction of the Security Council. That was the intention
of t~e authors of the Dumbarton Oaks principles, but
that IS not what was decided at San Francisco. Before a
vote is taken, it is proper that this should be stated here
emphatically, as being the absolute truth.
'
27. A distinction must be made between the spirit and
the ideas prevailing at Dumbarton Oaks, and the spirit
prevailing at San Francisco and the principles adopted
there. The small nations, knowing perfectly well that the
Council might be paralysed when it should take action,
demanded that such inability to act should be noted and
reported to the Assembly. Their demand that the Assembly should be acquainted with the Council's frustration was not based on theoretical or abstract considerations; it was based on the premise that it was essential
that the Assembly should recover full jurisdiction in
order to fulfil its responsibility for the maintenance of
peace.
28. We said this categorically and we based ourselves
on this argument in urging that the Council's inability
to act should he noted in cases where, under the Dum-

344

General Assembly-Fifth Seseion-Plepary Meetings

barton Oaks principles, its disability was bound to be
protracted 01' prolonged indefinitely. That was what tht;
Peruvian deleg~,tion thought and that was what it said;
at that time---.1945--the Peruvian delegation said that
the small nations would never be able to resign themselves to an Assembly powerless in the face of a paralysed Council.
,
29. Looking bade on the text 01 'the statements made
at San Francisco--lcall to tbe members of the relevant
Committee in testimony-I find that the words used by
the Peruvian delegation at that time; five years ago, were
the same as those it used in the First Committee and is
using now: "It is contrary to the spirit of San Francisco
to have an Assembly powerless in the face of a paralysed
Council."
.
30. Four months later I wrote a book on the San
Francisco Conference and, a,lthough it is not in good
• taste to quote oneself, it is essential to explain principles
properly and to establish the truth. I said in that book4 :
"For obviou,s political reasons, the great Powers might
have found It undesirable to contemplate the possibility
of a paralysed Council, but it was the duty of the small
Powers to state that the Assembly> reflecting world
opinion, ~ould be a decisiye factor in ~he strengthening
of peace m the event of disagreement 10 the Council." I
adde~ : uIt was essential that the Powers desiring to use
the rIght of veto as. a means of gaining political advantage~ sh<?ul~ know for cerfain t~at the Assembly, under
the .Irr~slsbble pressure of pubhc opinion, would always
deCIde 10 favour of those Powers which were determined
to support just solutions for the maintenance of peace."
31. Thus as long ago as 1945 I warned that if the
Council ~~re p~r~lysed, the Assembly would be obliged,
under an IrresIstIble pressure", to assume the responsibility conferred upon it by the Charter and to support
those members of the Security Council which favoured
the solution whose adoption had been prevented by the
veto of a single Power.
32. , I! i~ obvious t~at t~e text which we are going to
adopt 15 In conformIty wIth the spirit and letter of the
Charter. I shall not dwell further on that point since I
am simp!y explaining my vote, but I must adcL in this
explanatIon, that we shall not be conferring any new
powers upon the Assembly. The. representative of
Canada ha~ made it very clear that there is no question
of destroymg the powers of the Council' nor is there
any question of revoking Articles 33 a~d 36 of the
C~arter. In exercising its new functions, the Assembly
wIll ?av~ to respect Articles 33 and 36 of the Charter
and It wdl h~ve to respect existing law. Nothing in this
dr~ft .resolutIon can run counter to existing law or to the
prmclple that p:eced~nce must b.e given to the peaceful
me~tls of settbng dIsputes whIch are laid down in
regIOnal arrangements or established in the Charter.
33: T~us, anot~er a~gument explaining. my vote is
thIs: thIS resolutIon wIll ensUre that the Charter is ful, filled and, although ~his. may .seem paradoxical, will
strengthen the Secunty Councd.For the Council has
been. weakened by. a f~lse idea which was in reality a
C0!1s1stent m9 ral vIolatIon of the spirit.of the Charter-this converSIon of the unanimity rule into the right of
," See Belaunde; V. A., La COl'tferencia de San Francisco
Ltma, Talleres Graficos de la Editorial Lumen S.A 1945'
pages 48 and 49.
.;
...

veto. Today; when we are sure that the Assembly will
meet and will take whatever action is necessary and that,
under irresistible pressure-as I said in 1945-it will
support the measures for peace taken by the great
PowersA it will be very difficult for any Power to try to
0Pl?ose that irresistible pressure. Accordingly, our reso"
lutIon will end the use of the veto and bring about the
application of the unanimity rule instead, because we did
not vote for the veto as a privilege but as an' obligation
binding the great Powers to seek agreement.
34. The Assembly beiog tbus strengthened by the
principle of the integrity of the life forte, the Security
Council also will be st~engthened.. and we think that
with this resolution we shall· have taken a definite step
forward towards internati\>mal1»eace and justice. With.out this resolution, we had an mcomplete, crippled and
ineffective Charter. With this resolution we shall have
a Charter which works.
35. Mr. FOURNIER ACVJ:&A (Costa Rica) (trans"
latea from S ptlnish) : Before' the Gen~ral Assembll pro"
ceeds to a v01te on the dr~ft resolutions before It, the
Costa Rican delegation 'would like to explain its posi"
tionas rega"'ds section C, in othe!' words, it wishes to
repeat more or less what it said in the First Committee.
36. vVe shall vote in favour of paragraph 8 of section C
on the understanding that the phrase, ('in accordance
with their respective constitutional processes", affects
the whole of paragraph 8 of section C and not merely its
second part. We make this point beca~se our country
cannot, U11der its Constitution, carry out the obligation
laid down in paragrapp 8 to keep permanent forces
either for use by the United Nations or for any other
reason.
37. Because of the deeply-rooted anti-militarism of its
people, Costa Rica has always wished to be a completely
unarmed and pacific country. After the r,evolution of
1948, the provisional government which then came into
power dissolved the national armed forces because it
considered that an army is no defence for a small country
like ours at a time when the weapons needed are the
powerful ones which are beyond our means. Our sole
defence is therefore in the right and justice which inter"
national organizations may give us. Moreover, armies
generally imperil the domestic life of a country, especi"
ally in so far as civic liberty and the electoral power of
its people is concerned. And that measure which the
revolutionary provisional government of 1948 carried
out is enshrined in article 12 of our present Constitution
which says: "A permanent army is forbidden. Thp, neces"
sary police forces shall be set up for the maintenance
of law and order".
38. Consequently the Republic of Costa Rica cannot
assume the obligation laid down in paragraph 8 unless
that obligation is conditional on the phr~se which I men"
tioned before, namely, "in accordance with their respective constitutional processes".We shall vote for the .
draft resolution as a whole provided it is recognized that
we cannot assume the obligation contained. in paragraph
8 because our Constitution prevents us fro111 so doing•.
39. I should like to t.ake this opportunity to repeat
that our country will '\Tiote wholeheartedly for the draft
resolution as a whole, because it is a measure which will
give the United Nations the necessary and indispensable
efficacy as well as putting its decisions on a more demo-

...

--

S02nd Meeting....-3 November 1950

cratic basis. Besides, as I said before, we base our
defence and all our hopes on organizations for justice
such as the United Nations.
40. Mr. 'CASTRO (El Salvador) (tretns!.ated from
Spanish) : The delegation of El Salvador will vote for
all the draft resolutions which were approved by the
First Committee and. for its plan for peace. As we
know, those proposals are a result of the difficulties
which have arisen in the United Nations on account of
the €txcessive use of the veto.
41. We should like nothing better than that the future
should render entirely unnecessary any application of
the measures recommended in the peace plan. Naturally,
however, everything depends upon the policy which the
permanent members of the Security Council pursue in
that important organ of the United Nations. ! repeat,
then, that the delegation of El Salvador· will vote for all
the proposals approved by the First Committee.
42. I have deemed it necessary tq explain publicly the
vote of the delegation of El Salvador, for it sometimes
happens, particularly when a vote is taken by roU-call,
that many errors and misunderstandings are spread
about the vote of this or that del~ation.
43. When the issue before the Assembly was the
election, or ~ther, the extension of the term of office,
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the
delegation of El Salvador voted for the draft resolution
submitted jointly by several delegations. Yet, according
to almost all the NewYork newspapers, the delegations
of El Salvador and Haiti were absent during the vote.
That is not true. The delegation of El .Salvador has
never failed to take a stand on any problem on the
agenda of the Assembly which it considered important.
The election of the Secretary-General was important;
consequently the delegation of El Salvador came out
quite clearly in favour of the joint ,draft resolution, just
as it would have been in favour of the proposal made by
the representative of Syria, had that proposal received
sufficiently wide support.
44. I wish to repeat, then, that the delegation of El
Salvador will vote in favour of all the draft resolutions
approved by the First Committee in connexion with the
plan for peace.
45. Mr. AL-JAMALI (Iraq): My delegation will
wholeheartedly support all resolutions aimed at ensuring COllective security and strengthening world peace.
We believe that the draft resolutions submitted to the
General Assembly for the purpose of making the General Assembly function when the:activities of the Security Council are hampered by the veto are very important, and that is why we shall vote for them. We
shall vote for all those'proposals, whether they. are of a
.'
preventive or of a remedial nature.·
46. 1 have, however, one reservation to make, with
. regard to paragraph 3 in section B of the first draft
resolution, with regard to the peace observation commission. I should, like to put it on 'record that it is our
understanding that the invitations which would be extended to that commission would not mean that all the
members of that commission would go to all places in
t~e world. I say that because my country cannot recog'"
ntze one member OH, that propbsed commission. I have
leafned from one /.)£ the eminent sponsors of the draft
resolution that it is not meant that all the members of the

S4S

, commission would visit ~ll places for purposes of inspec:;- I,'
tion. .In other words, the, invitation is to be 1itrtited 1;0 )
certain members of the proposed commission, be·caU;$e
certain States cannot invite all the members of the
co~m~ssion to their terdto~es. We certainly are una1Ple
to InVIte to our country one member among the fo,'Ltrteen mentioned, because we do not recognize it.
47. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :We
shall now vote on the draft resolutions 'submitted t(j the
General Assembly. I shall take the vote on these draft
resolutions section by section. We shall also have to
take action on the amendments which have been submitted. Only the USSR delegation has submitted ~~mend­
ments [A/1465 and A/1466]. I shall first take a vote on
the amendments to a particular section ~ltld' then I shall
put the section itself to the vote. 1 shall ask the de:legation
of the Soviet Union to· help me by telling me if I make
an~ er~or or omission with regard' to the am(~ndments
which It has submitted.
48. .We shall begin with the preamble to th~'first draft
resolution submitted by the First Co~mittee [A/1456].
49. I put to the vote the USSR amendment [A/1465,
I, paragraph 1] calling for the deletion of the fourth
recital, beginning with the words "Recalling its resolu'
tion 290 (IV) .. ."
The amendment was reje~ted by 49 votes to 5, with 5
abstentions.
. ,
50. The PRESIDENT (tra1~slated from French) :. I
put to the vote the USSR amendment [A/1465, I, paragraph 2] calling for the deletion, in the fifth recital 1 of
the words "and to exercise restraint in the use of the
veto".
.
The amendment was rejected by 45 votes to 5, with 5
abstentions.
51. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :,1
put to the vote the USSR amendment [A/1465, I, paragraph 3] calling for the replacement, in the sixth recital,
of the words "and desiring to ensure that, pending the
conclusion of such agreements, the United Nations has
at its disposal means for maintaining international peace
and security", by the words "and taking into account
the obligation to implement' Article 106 of the Charter".
The amendment was rejected by 45 votes to 5, with 5
abstentions.
.
52: The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put to the vote the USSR amendment [A/1465,I,paragraph 4] calling for the deletion of the seventh, eighth
and ninth recitals.
Th? amendment was reJected by 52 votes to 5, with 2
abstenUol1s.
.
53. The PRESIDENT (translated from Fre1;ch) : I
put to the vote the preamble to the first draft resolution.
The preamble was adopted by 53 votes to 5.
54. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
\Ve .now come to section A of the first draft resolution.
The delegation of the Soviet Union has submitted three
amendments to thissectiott.
55. I put to the vote'the USSR amendment [A/1465,
I, paragraph 5] calling for the replacement, in paragraph
1, of the words "to making appropriate recommenda..
tions to Members for collective 'measures, i~c1uding in

.

Generl,llAssembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings
---....-...-.. . . . ._------...-_------.
. _-----<._------_..---:_-----.. . . _ -------.. . . . .

346

the case of a breach of the. peace or act of aggression the
1. put to the vote the USSR amendment' [A/1465, 11,
use of armed force when neces~ary to maintain or re- . . Iparagraph 1] calling for the replacement, in paragraph
1, of the words Utwenty~four hours" by the words "ten
store international peace and st,eurity", by the words
days".
Uto making appropriate recommendations to maintain
or restore international peace and security, it being
The amendment was rejected by 48 votes to 5, with
understood that any such question on which action is
5 abstentions.
'.
necessary shall, in accordance with Article 11 of the
64. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Charter, be referred to the Security Council by the
I put to the vote the USSR amendment [A/1465, Il,
General Assembly either before or after discussion".
paragraph 1] calling for the deletion, in paragraph 1, of
The amendment was rejected by 49 votes to 5, with
th~ words "on the vote of any seven members thereof".
3 abstentions.
.
56. The PRESIDENT. (translated from French):
I put to the vote the USSR amendment [A/1465; I,
paragraph 6] calling for the replacement, in paragraph
1, of t~e words "within twenty-four hours" by the
wOi?ds "within ten days".

.The amendment was rejected by 47 votes to 5, with
5 abstentions.
57. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put to the vote the USSR amendment [A/1465, I,
paragraph 7] calling for the deletion, in pa~agraph 1, of
the words "on the vote of any seven members".

The amendment was rejected by 48 votes to 5, with
6 abstentions.
58. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put to the vote section A as a whole.

Section A was adopted by 52 votes to 5, with 1 abstention.
59. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
No amendments have been submitted to· section B. I
therefore put that sectioll to the vote as a whole.

Section B was adopted by 57 votes to none, with 2
abstentions.
60. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The delegation of the Soviet Union has proposed
[A/1465, I, paragraph 8] the deletion of paragraphs 7,
8, 9 and 10 of the draft resolution, which would amou.nt
to the deletion of section C. Ins~ead of putting tha.t
amendment to the vote, and if the USSR representative
agrees, I shall put section C as a whole to the vote,
which will really come to the same.

Mr. Vyshinsky indicated his agreement.
Section C was adopted by 45 votes io5J with 7 abstenuons.·
,
61. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The amendments submitted by the delegation of the
Soviet Union to section D [A/1465, I, paragraph 8]
are of the Same kind; they call for the deletion of paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 of the draft resolution, in other
words, of section D. I therefore put section D as a whole
to the vote.

Section D was adopted by 49 votes to 5, with 3 abstentions.
62. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
No a.mendments have been submitted to section E. I
therefore put that section to th$ vote.

Section' E was adopted by 54 votes to none, w#h 1
abstention.
63. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frenf':h):
We now come to the annex to the first draft resolution.

The amendment was rejected by 48 votes to 5, with
5 abst~ntions.
.
65. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):·
I put to the vote the USSR amendment [A/1465, 11,
paragraph 1] calling for the deletion, in paragraph 1, of

the words "expressed by vote in the Interim Committee
or otherwise".

The amendment was rejected by 40 votes to 6, with
'
4 abstentions.
66. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put to the vote the USSR amendmeJ;1t [A/1465, II,
paragraph 2] calling for the replacement, in paragraph
3, of the words "twelve hours" by the words "ten days".

The amendment was rejected by 44 votes to 6, with
4 abstentions.
67. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put to the vote the annex to the first draft resolution
as a whole.

The annex was adopted by 51 'Votes to 5, with 2
abstentions,
.
68. The PRESIDENT (tra1tslated from French):

No .amendments have been subm~tted to th.,~ second draft
resolution. I therefore put that draft resolution to the
vote.

The second draft resolution was adopted by 52 'Votes
to none, with 6 abstentions.
..
69. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We come now to the third draft resolution. The dele..
gatibn of the Soviet Union has proposed that the
beginning of the operative part should be redrafted to
read as follows [A /1466] :
((Recommends to the permanent members of the
Security. Council-theF~ople's Republic of China,
France, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America-·that. . ."
70. I put this amendment to the vote.
The amendment was rejected by 40 votes to 8, with

9 abstentions,

71. Mr. YOUNGER (United Kingdom): I should
like to explain why my delegation voted against this
amendment. In the First Committee, there were several
proposals designed to make it clear that their sponsors
considered that the Central People;s Government of
China was the government which should represent the
Republic 01 China, My delegation voted ·in favour of
those proposals in Committee. However, I voted agail1s,t
the amendment on which a vote has just been taken,
because, as was explained' by the representative of
Canada earlier today;'tcaccePt it in the form in which
l

I

302nd Meeting-3 November 1950
it was submitted would be, in effect, to rewrite a
provision of the Charter. It seems to my delegation
that no one has the right to define which are the
permanent members of the Security Council in any
other
. way than the way they are defined
. in the Charter.
72. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put to the vote the third draft resolution.

The third draft resolution was adopted by 57 votes
to none.
73. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

341

Article 43 of the Charter, the five permanent members
of the Security Council--the· Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the United States of· America,
the United Kingdom, ,China and France-should
take steps to ensure the necessary implementation of
Article 106 of the Charter providing for consultation
between them, and that they should consult together
in accordance with the said Article 106 of the Charter
for the purpose of taking c :Such joint action on behalf
of the Organization as may prove to be ne(~essaryfor
the maintenance of international peace anot security."

\ I now put to.. the V?t.e the dr~ft resolutions cOiltained in
. the report of ',the First Committee as a whole. A rollMcall
.
\ vote has been requested.

The draft resolution was rejected by 39 votes to 5,
with 11 abstentions.
'

A vote was taken by rollMcall.
Costa, Rica} having been drawn by lot by the PresiM
dent} was called upon to 'Vote first.
In favour: Costa Rica, Cuba, r)'enmark, Dominican

Request for the deletion of item 66 of the agep.da

Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia,
France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland,
IneJ.onesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, NorM
way, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey,· Union
of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, ¥ emen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Australia,
Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, .Burma, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia.

.Against: Czechoslovakia, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of'Soviet Socialist RepUblics,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic.

Abstaining: India, Argentina. ,
The draft resolutions as a whole were adopted by 52
votes to 5} with 2 abstentions.
74. The PRESIDENT '(translated from French):
The Assembly has just adopted a decision the importance of which is obvious to all. I can say without
exaggeration that it is not only the most important
decision adopfced during this session, but the most
important of all those adopted during any session of the
General Assembly since the inception of the United
Nations.
75. As you know, theSe resolutions are headed "UnitM
iog for Peace". It is for us now to justify that title. and
to prove to the peoples of the world that we are in
truth united for peace.
76. We shall now vote on the draft resolution submitted by the Soviet Union, concerning united action
for peace, which reads as follows [A/1467] :

77. The PRESIDENT (translated from Fre1tch):
You will have noted that, at the end of its report
[A/1456], the First Committee suggests that item 66
of the General Assembly's agenda should be deleted. <If
there are no objections, I shall interpret your silence to
mean that the Assembly approves this proposaL

It was so decided.
Statement by the Secretal'y.Ge)'leral of the League
of Arab States
'
78. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The General Assembly decided, at its 299th meeting, .'
on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee, to
invite the Secretary-General of the Arab League to
participate in the work of the General Assembly as an
observer. The Secretary-General of the Arab League
was not present 011 that day and waS therefore unable
to extend his thanks to the General Assembly. He is
here now, and has asked permission to do so today~
Since there are no obj ections, I call upon Azzam-Pasha,
Secretary-Gener?l of the Arab League.
79. AZZAM Pasha (League of Arab States): I am
greatly pleased to be 'able to present from this rostrum,
011 behalf of the Arab League, the most sincere expression of thanks to the General Assembly for the permanent invitati?n which has been extended to the League.
80. Allow me to explain to this honourable Assembly·
some of the significant features of the Arab League. The
League is an Arab organization open to each and
every Arab country attaining its independence and
sovereignty. So far the League comprises seven member
States) six of which are Members of the United Nations.
We trust, however, that the principles of the Chattet,
applied by th(: General Assembly, will bring into
membership of the League many Ara,b countries now
aspiring to liberty and independence.

81. At present the Arab League represents fifty million
Arabs from the whole Arab. world extending from the.
Atlantic to the Indian Ocean. This Arab world exercise$
concerted' action by the five permanent members of . a vast spiritual and cultural influence which ~tends far
beyond its ·frontiers. In fact, this influence is the sacred
the Security Council in defenaingand strengthening
that has devolved upon the Arab League from
heritage
peace and security among the nations,
the land that has been for thousands of years a principal
((Recommends that before armed forces are placed
cross-roads of the world, the melting-pot of ancient
at the disposal of the Security Council under appro..
civilizations and the cradle of great religions that inspire
priate agreements concluded in accordaflce with
hundreds of millions all over the world.

((The General Assembly}
((Taking into account the particular importance of

General Assemb~y--Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings
82. The Arab world, in addition to being a mel'ang..pot
of ideas, was actually a melting-pot of human ra.c~s,
thus producing a people which, through the eenturies,
has evolv~d 8¥d acquired a ~eep sense, of tolerance, fair
play and JUptice, coupled WIth a gentttne attachment to
fraternity and equality. With this ideal alive in the
minds and heat't~ of our people, the Arab League has
officially defined an Arab to be any person who dwells
in our land, speaks\ our language and shares our culture
and aspirations.
83. This goes. to establish that the Arab League is
not imbued With any religious or racial prejudice. We
are confident that the Arab League will not betray this
sacred legacy OIf tolerance and benevolence. It has always
been our tradition to extend a free hand of peace and
co.-operation to those who seek co-operation honestly
a'~~d peacefully.

84. Arabism is wide in scope and deep in significance.
The spirit it represents is traceable far beyond. Arab
lands. It is to be found not only' everywhere in fhe old
world, but it has also crossed the o.:;ean to the new
world, carried by members of the Me.<Wte.'rranean f~\mi1y
who have shared with us the heritage or the ]M:editerranean civmz~\tions and religions from time immemorial,
and particularly during the eight centuries prec:eding
the discovery of America. Our ancesto!rs lived together
on the shores of theM~diterranean. This is why ~ when
we Arabs come to th~ General Assembly and meet many
of the representa:tives of the American continent, we
feel a natural afftnity towards them, an affinity which
certainly flows from OUI' tommon legacy.
85. The East, through the lengthy experience of generations, has developed a golden rule inculcated by all
its religions, namely, that ideas can be conquered only
by ideas..Violence has always defeated its ends. Violence
PI' lio viol~~llce, the fittest of the ideologies will survive.
Why not then be human and tolerant?
86. I am happy to be able to speak to you today on
-behalf of the League as a whole and to renew the
assurance of our continued co-operation with the United"
Nations. The Arab League has been glad to work hand
in hand with organs of the United Nations, such as the
Food and Agriculture Organization, the W orId Health
Organi.Gation and the Economic and Social Coundl.
This month will witness the second social welfare
seminar for the Arab States of the Middle East, meeting in Cairo under the auspices' Of the United Nations
and the Arab Lea~ue. We are looking forward to closer
collaboration, particu'larly
social, economic and cultural activities.
87. Since 1947 I have, on behalf of the Arab League,
extended to the Secretf.try-G(:;ner~~.t of the United Nations
an invitation to visit qut part of th,e world and see with
us some of our problems. It is ne~<lless to aSSf.!rt that
this invitation still stands. We shall always be glad to
welcome in Cairo, which is the seat of the- Arab Leslgue,
the Secretary-General and other officials and organs of
the United Nations.
.
88. I should like once more to express to the President
and~ to the General Assembly the most sincere thanks, on
behalf of the League of Arab States, trusting that your
itfvitation will mark an era of fruitful co-operati<?n
leading to peace, progress and prosperity.

in

Financial report.s and accounts, and ·repoJ."ts of the
Board of Auditors: repor. of the Fifth Committee
[Agenda item 37]
(a) UNITED NATIONS) FOR 'l'HE FINANClAL YEAR ENDED
31 DECEMBER 1949 (A/1446)

The dra.ft resol·ution sub'mitted in th\~ report of the
Fifth Committee was (1a.tJpte(J by 58 vote~ to none) with
1 abstention.
NATJO.l'fS INTEl~NATIQNAT.I CHILDREN'S
. EMERGENCY Fu!'l'X>, .FOR THE ~INA~TCI.AL YEAR ENDED
31 DECEMBER 1949 (A/1447 and Corr.l)

(b) UNITED

The draft' resoluti'iJu s:tbmitted i'JJ the report of the
Fifth Committee was adoptsrl by 53 votes to none.
.
( c) UNITED N ATIQNS ;RELIEF FOR P ALESTINE REF~
UGEES, FOR THE PER,IOD 1 DECEMBER 1948 TO 30
APRIL 1950 (A/1448)
.
The draft resolution submitted in the report of the
Fifth Committee was adupted by 56 votes to none.
United Nations Joint Staff Peilsion Fund: report
of the Fifth Committee (A/1449)
[Agenda item 44]
The draft resolution submitted in the report of the
Fifth Committee was adopted unanimously.
Observance in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania of
human rights and fundamental freedoms: re·
port of the Ad Hoc Political Committee (A/1437)
, [Agenda item 25] .
89. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon the Assembly to signify, in accordanc:e with
its rules of procedure, whether it wishes to discuss the
report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee on the, ques,,,
tion of the observance in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania of human rights and fundamental fr~ddoms.
A vote was taken. by show of hands.
90. 'The PRESIDENT ( translated from ..French) :
I am faced with a difficulty-.I am not quite sure about
the rest!lt of the vote. I should prefer to consult the
Assembly again on the question whether it considers a
discussion of the report necessary.
A second vote was taken ~y show of hands.
91. The PRESIDENT (t1'anslated from French):
The result has changed to an extraordinary degree. The
first time, 6 delegations vot~d in favour of a discussion
and 18 voted against; according to the second vote,
10 delegations· desire a discussion and 15 do. not.
Twenty-five delegatidns have signified their wishes,
more than a third consider a discussion necess~\ry and
a discussion must therefore take place.
92. In accordance with the usual procedure, when I
counted the votes I did not take into account the
abstentions. At the first vote1 the six members who
voted in favour represented a third of those who voted
against. But it appears that, in accordance with the rules
of procedure, af least a third of all the members of the
. Assembly must vote in favour. I shall request Mr.
'~ordier to explain the matter.

302nd Meeting-a November 1950
\I

.

93. Mr. CORDIER (Exe~utive Assistant to the ,Secretary-General) : The President has rightly stat.ed that
abstentions do not count in the total number of valid
votes. At the first vote" the total number of valid votes
was 24.. Since there were only 6 votes in favour of the
proposal, instead of the 8 which would bave constituted
a third of the valid votes, there should be no debate on
this item.
94. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Owing to an error -on my part, two votes have taken
place although the first would have sufficed. Does the
Assemb1y desire to settle the matter by .a third vote?
95. Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : The USSR delegation does not quite understand what is happening.
First a vote was taken, and a certain result was
obtained. I consider that the President had every right
to verify t4at vote, since he had expressed certain doubts
as to the correctness of the count, and so on.
96. If I understand aright, the' results of the second
count were as follows: 10 delegations voted for the
opening of the discussion and 15 delegations voted
against. Thus 10 delegations, in other words, more than
the one-third stipulated in rule 67 of the rules of procedure of the .General Assembly voted in favour of
opening the debate. Why, then, should we now h;;:~f'~ to
have a third 'vote?
97. I think that everything is clear. Rule 67 of the
rules of procedure requires that at least 011e-third of the
Members present and voting should vote in favour of a
discussion. We have such a quorum and even more,
since 10 delegations voted in favour of ,opening the
debate.
98. I therefore consider that it would be unfair and
unjustifiable to take another vote,
99. The PRESIDENT (translated fro·;#' French):
I had hoped that Mr. Vyshinsky's explanation would
help me to reach a decision. Unfortunately, it has not
helped me very much. I made a' mistake-and I apologize for it-for the first vote was in conformity with
our rules of procedure and, if I had announced the
results, the Assembly. would not have embarked upon a
discussion of this question. I do not, however, believe
that the question is so very important, for, as the
number of those in favour rose from 6 to 10 between the
first and the second votes, no doubt the number of
cielegations favoul'ing a discussion would reach 15 if I
were to ask you to vote a third time.
100. Mr. KYROU (Greece) (translated from French) :
My delegation abstained on both votes precisely because
·it does not attad1. great importance to this discussion.
It is nevertheless prepared to agree to it. The President
made a mistake, which is, after all, only hUl11an, but in
my opinion, the question of these two votes should. be
regarded in the light of rule 82 of the rules of procedure,
which says:' "When. a proposal has been adopted Of
rejected it may not be reconsidered at the same session
unless the General Assembly, by a two-th~lds majority
of the Members present and voHng, so decides . . ."
Thus the first vote remains valid.
101. The PRESIDENT (translu."'ted fr~m French):
To avoid any further discussion, r \shall make a ruli'.'t!g.
Should it be challenged, I shall put it to the vote) in
accordance with the rules of proftedure.
.

.349\
I

102. The first. vote would have been .final if I ha4\
announced its results. But since I failed to do so and I
since I requested the Assembly to vote a second time, j
I consider the latter vote to be v(~lid. If this ruling is
challengedl I shall put it to the vote.
-103. I see that no one challenges it. Thank you for
this gesture of courtesy. You have supported me when
I was right and you have supported me again when.I
was wrong; I am most grateful to you. The debate lS
therefore open, and I invite the Rapporteur of the Ad
Ifoc Political Committee to present his report.
Mr. L6pez (PhiliPpines) (Rapporteul;) 1 submitted
the report of the Ad Hoc Political Comm.#tee and the
.
attached draft resolution (A/1437).
104. Sir Keith OFFICER (Australia):' I shall be
very brief, because this is a very simple proposal in
spite of the fact that, during the debates in thr.: Ad Hoc
Political Committee,5 a determined effort was made to
bring into it a great deal of extraneous matter.
105. In 1946, three States, Hungary, Romania and
Bulgaria, signed peace treaties with the Allied and
Associated Powers. In. those treaties, because of the
somewhat doubtful past record of those countries, prQvisions wt::re inserted regarding human rights. The
treaties were generous in every ~ay, and they were
signed without protest. And the three States have shown
no hesitation in taking every advantage of the benefits
the treaties conferred: Each of the tteaties contained a
provision regarding the procedure to be followed in the
event of disputes regarding the provisions on human
rights.
106. Since the treaties came into effect, there have
been grave charges against all three States of. infringement of the provisions regarding human. rights. Certain
States signatories to the treaties I therefore, took steps
to put into operation the treaty provisions for dealing
with such charges. The States charged with the offences
refused to carry out those provisions.
.
107.. During,the debate in the Ad Hoc Political Committee, a great deal of time, energY1 skill and ingenuity
were used to show, first, that to comply with the procedure would be an interference in the internal rights (jf
the States, and, secondly, to prove that the States were
models in every way as regards religious tolerance,
education, social welfare and so on.. If this is so, why do
the States not agree to the implementation of the p~o­
visions of the treaties and prove that there is no foundation for these charges and end the matter once and
for all?
108. I do riOt propose to set before the Assembly again
the details of these charges. They have all been set
forth before previous sessions of the General Assembly;
new ones were set forth in the Ad Hoc Political Committee..We are simply and solely concerned with the
breach of the treaties. If the States are not guilty of
offences, why do they not allow the procedure to be
followed and prove that 110 such breaches have ,been
I:ommitted? Until they dO~lti they can still doso--they stand· before us as treat/ .~reakers. They entered
into a solernnobligation; they have failed to keep it,
and, until they purge their. contempt,. they have no part
Of' lot with this Organization.
.
I;

i

- -Official Records of the Gmeral

IS S~
Assembly~ Fifth Session, Ad B:ci~ Political Committee~2nd to 6th meetings inclusive.

General A8sembly-Fifth Session-PlenaJ."y Meetillgs

- 109. Mr. COHEN (United States of America) : The
,- draft resolution before the Assembly, approyed in the
Ad Hoc Political Comll1iittee by a VOt0 ;0£ 39 to 5, has
i

.'the support of the Uniteld States delegation. The United
. States delegation would \be less than frank, howeve-r, if
it did not express its deep regret that apparently no
more effective course can be pursued by the Assembly
at the present time to e11lsure the fJ-,lfiI~lent of treaty
· obligations to respect human rights and freedoms in
;Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania. But. it is the hope of
the Unitt~d States, delegation that the pl'oposed resolution
· will stand as a public censure to the governments of
· those countries and asa COilstant reminder of what the
international community of naiions has a right to expect
· from them as a matter of tr,eaty obligation.

110. The draft resolution is not directed at the freedom-loving peoples of those countries. It is directed at
the governments which were imposed upon.those Countries in clear violation of the pledges made to those
peoples at Yalta. In the declaration they made at Yalta
in 1945, the principal Allied Po~"'vers promised to let
those liberated peoples' set up, by free elections, governments of their choice, ~md to see -to it that the Nazi
tyranny was not followed by any other tyranny. The
human rights clauses of the peace treaties were intended
to oblige the governments of those countries to honour
and respect those war-time promises of the Allied
Powers to the peoples of those countries.
111. The draft resolution before us deals with a ·matter
of profound international concern-the breaking of
specific treaty obligations. It is now more than two
yei\l.fS since the whole world was aroused by the trial
.and punishment of Cardinal Mindszenty in Hungary
a,nd· the Protestant churchmen in Bulgaria. Those trials,
however, ol1ly highlighted a persistent pattern of conduct
theretofore pursued by the Governments of Bulgaria,
Hungary and Romania which, in our opinion, disclosed
an intent to stifle the expression of any independent
thought or opinion. That pattern of condud seemed to
'. indicate that the governments of those countdes, which
had acquired power under the Soviet occupation, were
determined to hold their power regardless of the wishes
of the people and to terrorize all those not subservient
to Cominform dictates. The so-called peoples' republics
in those countries, instead of observing their treaty
obligations, apparently sought to follo\<v the law as laid
down in Mr. Vyshinsky's book on the Law of the
Soviet State.
.
112. In his book, Mr. Vyshinsky has frankly asserted:
-"In our State, naturally, there is ,a~d can be no place
for freedom of speech, Press, and so on for the foes of
socialism."6 And the peoples' repttbHcs in those countries apparently regard as fascists and as foes of
socialism all those whose thoughts and opinions do tlOt
at all times and in all ways conform ~r""'~ policies of
Soviet imperialism~
.

vVhen the matter was brought before the General
Assembly in the spring of 1949, the· Assembly urged
the complaining signatories to the treaties to· -pursue
their efforts under the treaties to ensure the observance
of human rights and fundamental. freedoms in these
countries [resolution 272 (Ill)]. Despite the indignation felt throughout the world,' the Assembly carefully
avoided at that time any formal condemnation of those
countries, but sought, as did the complaining signatories,
an objective determination of the facts and the law
under the procedures laid down in the treaties for the
settlement of. disputes.

114. The thtee accused governments, however, refused
to co-operate in obtaining a settlement of the disputes
under the treaties, and they denied that they were under
any legal obligation to co-operate in setting 1J.p treaty
commissions with authority·to settle the disputes. When
the matter again came before the General Assembly last
autumn, the Assembly requested -an advisory opinion
from the International Court of Justice to determine
whether the ac<:used governments were legally obliged
under the. treaties to appoint representatives to. the
treaty commissions [resolution 294 (IV)]. The Assembly also asked the Court to advise it whether., if the
accused governments failed to name their representatives, the treaty commissions could function ·without
them. The Court replied7 that the accused governments
were legally obliged to appoint representatives to -the
treaty commissions but that, if they failed to carry out
that legal obligation, the treaty commissions could not
fuoc&a
.

115. The draft resolution before us attempts to deal
with the situation created by the wrongful and illegal
refusal of the three governments to co-operate in the
settlement of those disputes regarding the observance
of human rights in accordance with the procedures laid
down in the treaties1 and in accordance with procedures
which the International Court of Justice hold:') that the',
are obliged to carry out.
.'
116. In the first place, the draft resolution -condemns
the wilful refusal of the Governments of Bulg'aria,
Hungary and Romania to fulfil their· obligations under
the peaf.e treaties to appoint representatives to the
treaty commissions, which obligation, as I have said,
has been confirmed by the International Court of
Justice. Certainly the Assembly can do no less than to
pronounce such condemnation. Friendly relations among
States depend upon respect for treaty o~ligations. What
we have here is not merely a dispute arising out of a
treaty between the parties to the treaty, but a wilful and
fJ:agrant refusCj.l on the part of the accused governments
to settle their disputes by peaceful means in accordance
with their treaty obligations.

113. ;Believing that the actions 01 tb, 'J::. governments
violated the human right5 clauses of the peace treaties,
the United States and other treaty States took steps
tmder the peace tt'eaties with a view to obtaining the
observance of these obligations concerning human rights.

117. In the second place, the draft resolution declares
that the conduct of the three governments in this matter
is· such as to indicate that they are aware of their
responsibility for the violation of their treaty obligations
and are callously indifferent to the sentiments of the
world cotnmunity. No. other. conclusion can be drawn
from the conduct of the accused governments. Evasion
and default have charae/:erized their conduct from the

6 See Vyshinsky, A. Y" The Law of the Soviet State,. New'
York, Macmillan Co., 1948, page 617.
.

'1 See Interpretation of Peac~ Treaties, Adviso1'3' Opinion:
l.G.!. Reports 1950: page 65, and ibid., (set01l,d phase) page 221.

351
302nd Meeting-3 Novembelo 1950
----.......__.---,-..,,-.....,.....-----------------------------------------very inceptiQln of the ~\ffort to have the charges against
them examined fairly ~\nd objectively and settled. They
have avoided all seriot\s discussion before the Assem..
bly's committees, or under the treaty procedures. '],"hey
have defended themselves I;)nly in propaganda statements and by irrel~,want conlOter-charges. They are unwilling to defend their record before any international
tribunal and to be judged h\1 any impartial forum in
accordance with the law 'and the evidence. They seem
bent on defying the conscience as well as the rules of
the international community.
118. In the third place, the draft resolution notes with
anxiety the cqntinuance of serious accusations in these
matters agairist the three governments and their failure
to make satisfactory refutation of these charges.
119. Were there any real indication of a change of
heart, of a genuine desire on the part of those governments to return to the peoples of those countries their
human rights and fundamental freedoms, there might
be little need for us to have to ,F.eview the acts of the
past. But a deliberate and cynical disregard for human
rights continues to mark the course of those totalitarian
regimes, as it has ever since they seized power.
120. In the Ad Hoc Political' Committee, for example,
the representative of Turkey complained that the Bulgarian Government was intensifying rather than relaxing the discriminatory measures against the Turkish
minority. There has been, moreover, a steady deterioration in the administration of justice in ~11 thl'ee countries.
The law, the courts and the police have in truth been
made instruments of political power and oppression.
121. Neither communists nor non-communists are safe
in their person or in :heir property unless they enjoy
the favour and do tll\; ,,;;xact -bidding of the ruling
clique. Not only have non-communists like Mindsze:nty,
Petkov, Ma~iu a~d Shipkov falle~ victims to the terror..
but commu111sts lIke Rajk and Kostov as well. Rajk and
Kostov, who were members of the governments which
den9tmced as absurd and slanderous provocations the
charges of treaty violations, have themselves in turn
been denounced and destroyed by the tyranny which
they served and" defended. Those who co-operated to
create the terror have themselves become victims of the
terror. Their ignominious fate should cause communists
as well as non-communists to realize that every human
being has an interest ~md a stake in the universal
observance of human rights.

f

!

Printed in U.S.A.

~

122. Finally, the draft resolution invites Members of
the United Nations, and particularly those which~"re
parties to the peace treaties, to submit to the Secretary"
General all evidence which they now hold or which may
become available in the future in relation to this
question.
123. So far as the United States is concerned, we still
stand ready to cp-operate with Bulgaria, Hungary and
Romania to carry Gut the ('~greed treaty provisions for
the settlement of disputes, so that there may be an
objective inquiry into the facts and an impartial ex~\mi~
nation and determination of the validity of the £harges.
124. Charges made in good faith and accompanied by
a willingness to submit evidence to the. treaty commissions or 'to any other impartial international tribunal
cannot be swept aside or answered by general denials-which will be heard here from the delegations defending,
those countries-impugning the good faith of the
treaty Powers or the nations represented in the General
Assembly. They can be md only by a willingness to
answer the charges before an impartial tribunal. That .
is the way to ascertain the t:f1 tth and the V'u1!,dity of the
charges. The truth ca,unot bG ali.{'red by oratory 01~
by polemics.
125, As the th~!ee accused governments have shown
no intention to co-operate in securing a fair and impartial adjuditationof the charges, the United States will,
if the draft resolution is adooted, submit detailed and
concrete evidence to the Secr(~tary-General in support
of the charges which we have made of treaty violations.
We hope that othe!' States will do likewise. The United
States believes that the evidence will make it clear
beyond doubt and as a matter of public record that the
three governments, in contra.vention of specific treaty
obligations, have systematica.11y and flagrantly violated
the human rights and fundamental freedoms or. persons
under their jurisdiction.
126. We must not relax in our efforts to secure tor
the unhappy peoples of these countries the human rights
and fundamental freedoms guaranteed to them under
the peace treaties. If we want peace in this world, we
must see to it that: the people, ail the people, have a
stake and an interest in peace and freedom. Peace is
not safe in any land when the ruling classes create
conditions that make the people feel that they have
nothing tQ lose but their chains.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

A---40464-December 1950--3,600
