74

General A11embly-Twenty 6fth Session

Regretting that the obligations undertaken by States
under the Charter of the United Nations and the decisions adopted by United Nations bodies have not
proved sufficient to attain respect for the right of
peoples to self-determination in all cases,
Recalling its resolution 2588 B (XXIV) of 15
December 1969 and resolution VIII adopted by the
International Conference on Human Rights held at
Teheran in 1968,7
Considering that it is necessary to continue the study
of ways and means of ensuring international respect for
the right of peoples to self-determination,
Noting the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, 8 which elaborated the principle of selfdetermination of peoples,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October
1970 on the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
1. Affirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples
under colonial and alien domination reco~zed as
being entitled to the right of stlf-determination to restore to themselves that right by any means at their
disposal;
2. Recognizes the right of peoples under colonial
and alien domination in the legitimate exercise of their
right to self-determination to seek and receive all kinds
of moral and material assistance, in accordance with
the resolutions of the United Nations and the spirit of
the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Calls upon all Governments that deny the right
to self-determination of peoples under colonial and
alien domination to recognize and observe that right in
accordance with the relevant international instruments
and tb:. ;)rinciples and spirit of the Charter;
4. Considers that the acquisition and retention of
territory in contravention of the right of the people of
that territory to self-determination is inadmissible and
a gross violation of the Charter;
5. Condemns those Governments that deny the right
to self-determination of peoples recognized as being
entitled to it, especially of the peoples of southern
Africa and Palestine;
6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
study, at its twenty-seventh session, the implementation
of the United Nations resolutions relating to the right
of peoples under colonial and alien domination to selfdetermination, and to submit its conclusions and recommendations to the General Assembly, through the
Economic and Social Council, as soon as possible.
1915th plenary meeting,
30 November 1970.

2650 (XXV). Report of the United Nations High
f.A>mmissioner for Refugees

The General Assembfy,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
'f Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
i;,. 9.
8 Resolution 262.'i (XXV).

0

High Commissioner for Refugees11 and having beard
bis statement, 10
Noting with appreciation the results obtained by the
High Commissioner in the accomplishment of bis
humanitarian task of providing international protection
to refugees within his mandate and promoting permanent solutions to their problems,
Noting the constant efforts being made to this end by
the High Commissioner, in co-operation with United
Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote the
voluntary repatriation, the mtegration in countries of
asylum or the resettlement in other countries of
refugees who are his concern-whether groups of
refu,ees. or in~ividual refugees-:-who~e p~blems are
causing mcreasmg concern, especially 10 Africa,
Commending the encouraging progress obtained in
the field of interagency co-operation, which, particularly
as far as the rural settlement of refugees in develo:eing
countries is concerned, is essential in order to achieve
durable solutions that are closely linked with the economic and social development of these countries,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing number of
Governments contributing to the High Commissioner's
assistance programme and the substantial increase in
some of these contributions,
Expressing its appreciation of the growing number
of accessions to the Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees of 1951 11 and the Protocol relating to the
Status of Refugees of 1967,12 and expressing the hope
that this trend will continue,
1. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to provide international pr~
tection and assistance to refugees who are bis concern,
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly
resolutions, in particular those relating to the new
groups of refugees in Africa, and with the directives of
the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue his
efforts to achieve, in co-operation with the Governments concerned, the specialized agencies and other
members of the United Nations system, speedy and
satisfactory solutions to the problems of refugees;
3. Urges Governments to continue to lend their
support to the High Commissioner's humanitarian and
constructive task l,y:
(a) Facilitating his efforts in the field of international protection;
( b) Continuing to co-operate in the promotion of
permanent solutions for refugees, including in particular
mdividual cases in Africa;
( c) Providing the necessary means to enable the
financial targets, established with the approval of the
Executive Committee, to be reached.
1915 th plenary meeting,
30 November 1970.
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/8012) and Supplement No.
12A (A/8012/Add.1).
10 Ibid., TwentY•fifth Session, Third Committee, 1789th
meeting.
11 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Supplement No. llA (A/6311/Rev.1/Add.1), part
one, para. 2.
