100

General Anembly-Twenty-ninth Ses■ion

Recalling a/so its resolution 3156 (XXVIII) of
14 Decemtier 1973, by which it, inter alia, requcsted
the Special Committee to continue to give full consideration to the question of the Gilbert and Ellice
Islands, including in particular the dispatch of a
visiting mission to the Territory,
Having heard the statements of the administering
Power relating to developments in the Territory, ª
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in August
and September 1974,15 at the invitation of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern lreland, the administering Power, and having
heard the statement of the Chairman of the Visiting
Mission, 141
Bearing in mind the observations of the Visiting
Mission relating to the results of the referendum, 11
Welcoming the positive decision of the administering
Power to participate in the relevant work of the Spedal
Committee and to permit United Nations visiting
missions access to the Territories under its administration and expressing the hope that the close cooperation thus established will be further strengthened
so as to accelerate the process of decolonization towards
the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration
with respect to those Territories,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the Gilbert and Ellice Islands;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Gilbert and Ellice Islands to self-determination and
independence in accordance with the Dedaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
lreland and to the Government of the Gilbert and
Ellice Islands for the co-operation and assistance extended to the Visiting Mission;
4. Requests the administering Power to take all
neces~ary measures to expedite the process of decol·
c-nization in the Territory in accordance · with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and of the Declaration;
~- Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlrst the assistance of the specialized agencies and the
organizations within the United Nations system in the
development and strengthening of the economy of the
Territory;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
give fu)! consideration to this question in the light of
t~e fin~ings of the Visiting Mission, including the possrble dispatch of a further visiting mission in consulta4
' See A/ AC. 109 · ~•V.987 and O{!iciaf Records o/ the General
A ,sc'..-,J,/y, f'we1•,;·-11inth Session, Fourth Committee, 2116th

tion with the administering Power, and to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3289 (XXIX). Question of Bermuda, British Virgin lslands, Cayman lslands, Montserrat,
Turks and Caicos Islands and United States
Virgin Islands

The General Asrembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, British
Virgin lslands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Turks and
Caicos Islands and United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 18
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as
well as ali other resolutions relating to the Territories
listed above, in particular resolution 3157 (XXVIII)
of 14 December 1973,
Taking into account the statements of the administering Powers relating to the Territories listed above, and
noting in particular the expressed readiness of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern lreland to grant independence to the peoples
of those Territories under its administration, in accordance with their wishes, 19
Noting with deep concern the slow progrcss in the
full implementation of the Declaration with respect to
the above-mentioned Territories, notwithstanding the
encouraging but limited political and constitutional dcvelopment which has recently taken place in sorne of
the Territories,
Noting with satisfaction the continued active participation of the United States of America in the relevant
work of the Special Committee, but deploring the ,negative attitude of that country's Governmcnt with respect to receiving a United Nations visiting mission in
the Territory concerned,
Welcoming the positive decision of the United Kingdom to participatc in the relevant work of the Special
Committee and to permit United Nations visiting missions access to the Territories under its administration,
as appropriate,
Concerned that the economies of the Territories referred to above are based mainly on fluctuating activities
such as tourism, land sales and tax haven arrangements,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories, including those dispatched by the Special
Committee in 1974 to the Cocos (Kecling) Islands,
the Gilbert and Ellice Islands and Niuc, 20 and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of visiting missions

mt"•~(IHi,.

J., O/J.rra/ Records of the General A.rumbly, Twenly-ninth
Session, Supplemcnt No. 23 (A/9623/Rev. l ), chap. XXI,
:\'l!ll"'l l.
¡,; lhiJ, Tworty-ninth Session, Fourth Committee, 2116th
meeting.
17
/bid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/
Rev.t ), chap. XXI, annex I, para. 303.

XXIII-XXV.
rnsee A/AC.109/SC.3/SR.198-200 and 202 and O{Jicial
Records o/ thc Geneml A.1:semh/y, Twenty-11intl1 St•.<.1iorr, Fourtli
Commitlee, 2116th meeting.
10 See Official Records o/ tire Gerre,a/ A.uemb/y, Twentynintlr Sessiorr, S11ppleme11t No. 23 (Al962J/Rev.l ), chap. XX,
annex, chap. XXI, annex 1, and chap. XXII, annex l.
18 fhid .. chap~. IIJ and

Reaolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Commlttee

to the Territories dealt with in the present resolution
is indispensable for securing adequate and first-hand
information in regard to the political economic and
social conditions in the Territories and to the views,
wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the
Territories,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories of Bermuda, British Virgin lslands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Turks and Caicos
Islands and United States Virgin Islands;21
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples
of those Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the D_eclaration _on the
Granting of Independence to Colomal Copntnes and
Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that the questions of territori1d s·ize, geographical isolation and limi!ed
resources should in no way delay the implementat1on
of the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take ali the necessary steps, without further delay,
to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goa!s
set forth in the Declaration with respect to the Temtories and, in that regard, to establish, in consultation
with the freely elected reprcsentatives of the people,
a specific time-table for the free exercise by the l?eo~les
of the Territories of their right to self-determmation
and independence;
5. Ca/Is upon the Government of the United States
of America as the administering Power concerned, to
reconsider 'its attitude towards receiving a United
Nations visiting mission in the Territory concerned;
6. Calls upon the administering Powers to take a~I
possible steps to diversify the economies of the Terntories listed above;
1. Urges the administering Powers to safeguard the
inalienable right of the peoples of those Territo_ries to
the enjoyment of their natural resour~es by takmg effective measures which guarantee the nghts of the peoples to own and dispose of those natural resources and
to establish and maintai~ control of their future development;
8. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system to assist in accelerating progress in ali SPCtors
of the national life of those Territories;
9. Invites the Secretary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him by the General Assembly in its resolution entitled "Dissemination of informa·
tion on decolonization",2~ to pay particular regard to
the need to intensify widespread dissemination of mformation on the process of decolonization in respect
of the Territories listed above and, in particular, to
XXIII-XXV.
3329 (XXIX).

21 /bid., chaps.
22 Resolution

101

consider in~ensifying the activities of the information
centres concerned;
1O. Requests the Special Committ~e to_ conti~ue !º
give full consid:ration to th_is. 9uest11?n,. mcludmg m
particular the d1spatch of v1s1tmg m1ss10ns to those
Territories, and to report to the Gene~al Assembly at
its thirtieth scssion on the implementatton of the present resolution.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974

3290 (XXIX). Question of American Samoa,
Guam, New Hebrides, Pitcaim, St. Helena
and Solomon blands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Guam, New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena and Solomon
Islands,
Having examined the relevant c~apte_rs of !he report
of the Special Committee on the S1tu~t1on w1th regard
to the Implementation of the Declarat1on on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 23
Reca/ling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Dec~mber
1960, containing the Declaration_ on the Grantmg of
Independence to Colonial Countnes and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as ali other resolutions relating to the Territories listed above, in
particular resolution 3156 (XXVIII) of 14 December
1973,

Taking into account the statements of the administering Powers relating to developments in t_he abovementioned Territories, including those relatmg to the
Solomon Islands and New Hebrides, 24
Noting with deep concern the slow progress in the
full implementation of the Declaration with respect to
those Territories, notwithstanding the encouragmg but
limited political and constitutional development which
has recently taken place in sorne of the Territories,
Noting with satisfaction the continued active participation of the United States ?f America in t_he ~ork of
the Special Committee relatmg t<;> _the Te~n.tones concerned and welcoming the pos1t1ve dec1s1on of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northe~ Ireland
to take part in the ~elev~nt work. of th: _Spec,al_ C~mmittee and to p<>rm1t Umted Nat1ons vmtmg m1ss1ons
access to the Territories under its administration, as
appropriate,
Deploring the continued refusal of the Government
of France, in contravention of the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, to co-:operate with the Special Committee in its examination of
the Territory of the New Hebrides,
Deeplv deploring the policy of those administering
Powers ~hich continue to maintain military bases in
some r the Territories under their administration, in
contravention of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
~3 Official Records o/ the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, S11ppleme11t No. 23 (A/9623/Rev.l), chaps. lll, X,
XV, XVII and XXI.
~4 See Al AC.109/SC.3/SR.207-210 and 214, A/ AC.109/
PV.976 and O{ficial Records of the General Ass!mbly, Twent)I·
ni111h Session, Fourth Committee, 2116th meeting.
