General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Seal.on

166

ization" and aggression in flagrant defiance of United
Nations resolutions, is continuing to occupy Namibia
illegally and is perpetuating on Namibian territory its
odious policy of apartheid and racial discrimination,
Deeply concerned at the continued collaboration of
certain Governments and transnational corporations
with the racist regime of South Africa in the political,
economic, military and other fields, thus encouraging
it to persist in the brutal suppression of the peoples of
South Africa,
Emphasizing that ratification of and accession to the
Convention on a universal basis and implementation of
its provisions without any delay are necessary for its
effectiveness and would be a useful contribution towards
achieving the goals of the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Taking into account Security Council resolution 418
(1977) of 4 November 1977 as a useful step towards
achieving the purposes of the Convention,
Firmly convinced that the legitimate struggle of the
oppressed peoples of southern Africa against apartheid,
colonialism and racial discrimination and for the effective implementation of their inalienable and legitimate rights, including their right to self-determination,
demands more than ever all necessary support by the
international community and, in particular, further action by the Security Council,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral11 on the status of the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid;
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in
the number of States which have ratified the Convention
or acceded thereto;
3. Commends the States parties to the Convention
that have submitted their reports under article VII of
the Convention and urges other States to do so as soon
as possible, taking fully into account the guidelines 18
prepared by the Working Group on the Implementation of the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid established
in accordance with article IX of the Convention;
4. Appeals once again to all States which have not
yet become parties to the Convention to ratify it or
accede to it without delay;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take measures
through appropriate channels on the dissemination of
information on the Convention with the aim of promoting further ratification thereof or accession thereto;
6. Calls upon States parties to implement fuUy article IV of the Convention by adopting legislative,
judicial and administrative measures to prosecute, bring
to trial and punish in accordance with their jurisdiction
persons responsible for, or accused of, the acts defined
in article II of the Convention;
7. Calls upon all States parties to the Convention
and the competent United Nations organs to consider
the conclusions and recommendations of the Working
Group contained in its report 19 and to submit their
views and comments to the Secretary-General;
8. Welcomes the efforts of the Commission on
Human Rights to undertake the functions set out in
article X of the Convention and invites the Commission
to continue its efforts, especially with a view to pre17 A/34/442 and

Corr.I.

1s E/CN.4/1286, annex.
1 u E/CN.4/1328, sect. VI.

paring periodically a list of individuals, organizations,
institutions and representatives of States that are alleged to be responsible for crimes enumerated in article
II of the Convention, as well as of those against which
legal proceedings have been undertaken;
9. Calls upon the competent United Nations organs
to continue to provide the Commission on Human
Rights, through the Secretary-General, with information
relevant to the periodic compilation of the abovementioned list as well as with information concerning
the obstacles which prevent the effective suppression
and punishment of the crime of apartheid;
10. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
take into account, in preparing the above-mentioned
list, Gener.al Assembly resolution 33/23 of 29 November 1978 as well as all the documents on the subject prepared by the Commission and its subsidiary
organs;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute the
above-mentioned list among all States parties to the
Convention and all States Members of the United
Nations;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to include in
his next annual report under General Assembly resolution 3380 (XXX) a special section concerning the
implementation of the Convention, taking into account
the views and comments of States parties to the Convention called for in paragraph 7 above.
69th plenary meeting
15 November 1979
34 / 28.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/102 of 16 December
1978 on the report of the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination and 34/26 of 15 November
1979 on the status of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
as well as its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November
1973 and 34/24 of 15 November 1979 on the Decade
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its nineteenth
and twentieth sessions, 20 submitted under article 9, paragraph 2, of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 21 and the
decisions contained therein,
Mindful of the obligation of the States parties to
comply fully with all the provisions of the Convention,
Emphasizing the need for Member States to intensify,
at the national and international levels, their struggle
against acts or practices of racial discrimination and the
vestiges or manifestations of racist ideologies wherever
they exist,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
on its nineteenth and twentieth sessions;
2. Welcomes the interest shown by the Committee
in further participation in the activities for implementa20 Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/34/18).
21 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

VI.

167

Resolutiom adopted on tbe repons of the Third Committee

tion of the Programme for the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
3. Welcomes also the continued co-operation of the
Committee with the competent specialized agencies and
other United Nations bodies, especially with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to secure the fullest possible implementation of
article 7 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
4. Commends the Committee for continuing to focus
its attention on the just cause of peoples struggling
against colonialism, oppression and occupation wherever
they exist, particularly in southern Africa, as is within
its mandate;
5. Calls once again upon relevant United Nations
bodies to supply the Committee with sufficient information on Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories and
all other Territories to which General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 applies to enable
it to discharge fully its responsibilities under article 15
of the Convention;
6. Expresses its grave concern that some States parties to the Convention, for reasons beyond their control,
are being prevented from fulfilling their obligations
under the Convention in parts of their respective territories, and in this respect supports the opinion expressed
by the Committee regarding the persistence of this problem in the Syrian Arab Republic, 22 reiterates its endorsement of Committee decision 1 (XV) of 1 April
1977 23 and reaffirms its resolution 32/13 of 7 November 1977 as well as its resolutions 2784 (XXVI) of 6
December 1971 and 3266 (XXIX) of 10 December
1974, concerning the situation in the Golan Heights;

1. Invites the States parties to supply the Committee
with all the requested information on their implementation of the principles and provisions of the Convention,
including information on the demographic composition
of their population and on their relations with the racist
regimes in southern Africa, in order to enable the Committee to discharge fully its responsibilities;
8. Calls upon the States parties to observe fully the
provisions of the Convention and other international
instruments and agreements to which they are parties
concerning the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination, and to take effective measures for securing
full equality and promotion and protection of the rights
of every person, group of persons or national or ethnic
minority, as well as full .protection of the rights of migrant workers, by preventing all practices of racial
discrimination;
9. Urges all States which are not parties to the Convention to ratify or to accede to it and, pending such
ratification or accession, to be guided by the basic provisions of the Convention in their internal and foreign
policies;
10. Notes with due attention Committee decision 1
(XX) of 13 August 1979 24 concerning the future meetings of the Committee and requests the Secretary-General
in this connexion to explore the possibility of providing
necessary assistance for the holding of such meetings
22 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/34/18), para. 138.
28 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/32/18),
chap. VIII, sect. A.
24 lbid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/34/18),
chap. VIII, sect. B.

in developing countries and to submit a report in this
regard to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.

69th plenary meeting
15 November 1979

34 / 43.

Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the need to achieve international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, as provided
in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 25 which proclaims that everyone has the right to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
Convinced of the desirability of elaborating an international instrument on the elimination of all forms of
intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or
belief,
Recalling its resolution 3267 (XXIX) of 10 December 197 4, in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to submit to the General Assembly, through
the Economic and Social Council, a single draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance
and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling also its resolution 33/106 of 16 December
1978,
Taking note of the work thus far done by the Commission on Human Rights,
l. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to give high priority to the drafting of the
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or
Belief;
2. Further requests the Commission on Human
Rights to strive towards completion of the draft Declaration at its thirty-sixth session with a view to submitting
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, a single
draft Declaration;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Elimination of
all forms of religious intolerance" and to give it high
priority.
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979

34/ 44.

Importance of the universal realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination and of
the speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November 1970, 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 3070
(XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, 3246 (XXIX) of 29
November 1974, 3382 (XXX) of 10 November 1975
and 33/24 of 29 November 1978, and Security Council
resolutions 418 (1977) of 4 November 1977 and 437
(1978)of l0October 1978,
25

Resolution 217 A (III).
