S/2020/638

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 July 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 2 July 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2532 (2020), in
connection with the agenda item entitled “Maintenance of international peace
and security” and adopted on 1 July 2020. Resolution 2532 (2020) was adopted in
accordance with the voting procedure set out in the letter dated 27 March 2020 from
the President of the Security Council (S/2020/253), a procedure agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Pursuant to that procedure, I enclose herewith copies of the related documents:
• A letter dated 30 June 2020 addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (see annex 1), putting to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/2020/607;
• Letters received in reply from members of the Security Council indicating
their national position on the draft resolution (see annexes 2 to 16);
• Statements submitted subsequently by members of the Security Council
providing explanations of vote (see annexes 17 to 23).
The present letter and its annexes will be issued as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Christoph Heusgen
President of the Security Council

20-08902 (E) 130720 120820

*2008902*

S/2020/638

Annex 1
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
[Original: English and French]
In accordance with the procedure agreed upon by the members of the
Security Council in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
coronavirus disease pandemic, and as reflected in the letter dated 27 March 2020
from the President of the Security Council addressed to all members of the Council
(S/2020/253), I would like to draw your attention to the following.
The members of the Council have discussed a draft resolution, submitted
by France and Tunisia, in connection with the agenda item entitled “Maintenance
of international peace and security”. That draft resolution has been put in blue
(S/2020/607, see enclosure).
In my capacity as President of the Security Council, I hereby put the abovementioned draft resolution to a vote. The non-extendable 24-hour voting period for
that draft resolution will begin at 11 a.m. on Tuesday, 30 June 2020 and expire at
11 a.m. on Wednesday, 1 July 2020.
Please submit your vote (in favour, against or abstention) on that draft resolution
and possible explanation of vote by sending the Director of the Security Council
Affairs Division of the Secretariat (egian@un.org) a letter signed by the Permanent
Representative or Chargé d’affaires a.i. within the non-extendable 24-hour voting
period set out above.
It is my intention to circulate a letter listing the outcome of the vote within
three hours of the conclusion of the 24-hour voting period. I also intend to convene
a video-teleconference of the Security Council to announce the outcome of the vote
shortly after the conclusion of the voting period, in the afternoon of Wednesday,
1 July 2020.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

2/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Enclosure

S/2020/607

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional
28 June 2020
Original: English

France and Tunisia: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Recalling its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security,
Reaffirming the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations,
Expressing grave concern about the devastating impact of the COVID-19
pandemic across the world, especially in countries ravaged by armed conflicts, or in
post-conflict situations, or affected by humanitarian crises,
Recognizing that conditions of violence and instability in conflict situations
can exacerbate the pandemic, and that inversely the pandemic can exacerbate the
adverse humanitarian impact of conflict situations,
Recognizing that the peacebuilding and development gains made by countries
in transition and post-conflict countries could be reversed in light of the COVID-19
pandemic outbreak,
Underscoring that combating this pandemic requires greater national,
regional and international cooperation and solidarity, and a coordinated, inclusive,
comprehensive and global international response with the United Nations playing a
key coordinating role,
Commending the continued contribution and commitment of national and
international health and humanitarian relief personnel to respond urgently to the
COVID-19 pandemic,
Recognizing efforts and measures proposed by the Secretary-General
concerning the response to the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to
conflict-affected countries, in particular his appeal for an immediate global ceasefire,
Having considered the resolution 74/270 “Global solidarity to fight the
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)” adopted by the UN General Assembly on
April 2nd 2020,
Acknowledging the launch of the Global Humanitarian Response Plan for
COVID-19 by the United Nations, which puts the people at the center of the response,
Considering that the unprecedented extent of the COVID-19 pandemic is
likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security,

20-089023/27

S/2020/638

1. Demands a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations
on its agenda and supports the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General and his
Special Representatives and Special Envoys in that respect;
2. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to engage immediately in
a durable humanitarian pause for at least 90 consecutive days, in order to enable
the safe, unhindered and sustained delivery of humanitarian assistance, provisions
of related services by impartial humanitarian actors, in accordance with the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence, and
medical evacuations, in accordance with international law, including international
humanitarian law and refugee law as applicable;
3. Affirms that this general and immediate cessation of hostilities and this
humanitarian pause do not apply to military operations against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh), Al Qaeda and Al Nusra Front
(ANF), and all other individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated with
Al Qaeda or ISIL, and other terrorist groups, which have been designated by the
Security Council;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to help ensure that all relevant parts of
the United Nations system, including UN Country Teams, in accordance with their
respective mandates, accelerate their response to the COVID-19 pandemic with a
particular emphasis on countries in need, including those in situations of armed
conflict or affected by humanitarian crises;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide updates to the Security Council
on the UN efforts to address the COVID-19 pandemic in countries in situations
of armed conflict or affected by humanitarian crises, as well as on the impact of
COVID 19 on the ability of peace-keeping operations and Special Political Missions
to deliver their mandated priority tasks;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to instruct peace-keeping operations to
provide support, within their mandates and capacities, to host country authorities in
their efforts to contain the pandemic, in particular to facilitate humanitarian access,
including to internally displaced persons and refugee camps and allow for medical
evacuations, and further requests the Secretary-General and Member States to take
all appropriate steps to protect the safety, security and health of all UN personnel
in UN peace operations, while maintaining the continuity of operations, and to take
further steps towards the provision of training for peacekeeping personnel on issues
related to preventing the spread of COVID-19;
7. Acknowledges the critical role that women are playing in COVID-19
response efforts, as well as the disproportionate negative impact of the pandemic,
notably the socio-economic impact, on women and girls, children, refugees,
internally displaced persons, older persons and persons with disabilities, and calls for
concrete actions to minimize this impact and ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and youth in the development and implementation of an
adequate and sustainable response to the pandemic;
8. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

4/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Annex 2
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to the letter from the President of the Security Council of 30 June 2020
relating to the draft resolution on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
(S/2020/607).
In accordance with the procedure set forth for the adoption of resolutions
under the current extraordinary circumstance caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, I
am pleased to indicate that Belgium votes in favour of this draft resolution. At this
stage, my delegation does not intend to deliver an explanation of vote.
(Signed) Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations

20-089025/27

S/2020/638

Annex 3
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of China to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your team for the strong support
in facilitating the voting procedure.
Please be kindly informed that China votes in favour of the draft resolution
submitted by France and Tunisia on the coronavirus disease pandemic (S/2020/607).
(Signed) Zhang Jun
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations

6/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Annex 4
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Special Envoy to the
Security Council of the Dominican Republic addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 30 June 2020 regarding draft resolution S/2020/607,
on the coronavirus disease, under the agenda item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security”.
Upon instructions from my Government, the delegation of the Dominican
Republic votes in favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution.
(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
Ambassador
Special Envoy to the Security Council of the Dominican Republic

20-089027/27

S/2020/638

Annex 5
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Estonia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to inform you, Sir, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, that my delegation votes in favour of the draft
resolution on the coronavirus disease (S/2020/607), under the agenda item entitled
“Maintenance of international peace and security”.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United Nations

8/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Annex 6
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
[Original: French]
I refer to the letter dated 30 June 2020 from the President of the Security
Council calling on the members of the Council to vote on the draft resolution,
submitted by France and Tunisia, under the agenda item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security”, on the coronavirus disease, put in blue under the
symbol S/2020/607. France votes in favour.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations

20-089029/27

S/2020/638

Annex 7
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Germany to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to inform you, Sir, in response to the letter of the President
of the Security Council dated 30 June 2020 initiating a written voting procedure
on draft resolution S/2020/607, in accordance with the procedures agreed by the
members of the Security Council as set out in the letter dated 27 March 2020 from
the President of the Security Council (S/2020/253), that Germany votes in favour
of draft resolution S/2020/607, under the agenda item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security”.
(Signed) Christoph Heusgen
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations

10/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Annex 8
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I am writing in reference to the letter dated 30 June 2020 by the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations, in his capacity as President of
the Security Council, regarding the draft resolution on the coronavirus disease
(S/2020/607).
I hereby indicate that Indonesia votes in favour of said draft resolution.
(Signed) Dian Triansyah Djani
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations

20-0890211/27

S/2020/638

Annex 9
Letter dated 30 June from the Permanent Representative of the
Niger to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I am writing in response to the letter dated 30 June 2020 by the President of
the Security Council calling on the members of the Council to express their vote on
the draft resolution (S/2020/607) submitted by France and Tunisia under the item
“Maintenance of international peace and security”.
In accordance with the agreed temporary procedures for the adoption
of resolutions during the coronavirus disease pandemic restrictions, I have the
honour to indicate that the Republic of the Niger decides to vote in favour of said
draft resolution.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Niger to the United Nations

12/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Annex 10
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour, Sir, to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 30 June 2020,
on the beginning of the voting procedure for the draft resolution in connection with
the agenda item “Maintenance of international peace and security” (S/2020/607).
In accordance with the procedure for the adoption of resolutions of the Security
Council being in place during the duration of the restrictions on movement in New
York due to the coronavirus disease pandemic outlined in the letter dated 27 March
2020 from the President of the Security Council (S/2020/253), I have the honour
to inform you that the Russian Federation votes in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/2020/607.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations

20-0890213/27

S/2020/638

Annex 11
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the draft resolution (S/2020/607) submitted by
France and Tunisia in connection with the agenda item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security.”
In this respect, I wish to inform you, Sir, that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
votes in favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
to the United Nations

14/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Annex 12
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council
I refer, Sir, to your letter dated 30 June 2020 regarding the draft Security
Council resolution concerning the coronavirus disease pandemic, contained in
document S/2020/607.
The delegation of the Republic of South Africa votes in favour of the abovementioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United Nations

20-0890215/27

S/2020/638

Annex 13
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
With reference to the letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of France, in his capacity as President of the Security Council,
regarding the draft resolution submitted by Tunisia and France in connection with the
agenda item entitled “Maintenance of international peace and security”, contained
in document S/2020/607, I would like to inform you, Sir, that Tunisia votes in favour
of that draft resolution.
(Signed) Kais Kabtani
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations

16/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Annex 14
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Chargé d’affaires of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
With reference to the letter dated 30 June 2020 from the President of the
Security Council, the United Kingdom votes in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/2020/607, in connection with the agenda item “Maintenance
of international peace and security”.
(Signed) Jonathan Allen
Ambassador
Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations

20-0890217/27

S/2020/638

Annex 15
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
On the draft resolution submitted by France and Tunisia in connection with
the agenda item “Maintenance of international peace and security” (S/2020/607), the
United States votes in favour.
(Signed) Kelly Craft
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations

18/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Annex 16
Letter dated 30 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
In reference to the letter dated 30 June 2020 from the President of the Security
Council relating to the draft resolution under the agenda item entitled “Maintenance
of international peace and security”, contained in document S/2020/607, I would
like to hereby inform you, Sir, that Viet Nam votes in favour of said draft resolution.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the United Nations

20-0890219/27

S/2020/638

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: English and Chinese]
China voted in favour of the draft resolution on the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) (S/2020/607). COVID-19 is the most severe global challenge facing
the world today. The Security Council shoulders the primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security, and, at this critical moment, the
Council is duty-bound to take action within its mandate to tackle the negative impact
of COVID-19 on international peace and security.
The adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) demonstrates the general consensus
of Council members and the States Members of the United Nations in promoting
more prominent roles for the United Nations and its specialized agencies, as well
as solidarity and cooperation in the fight against COVID-19. It shows the Council’s
leadership and its ability to act. It is an important outcome for the Council and
the United Nations and a victory for multilateralism. China thanks France and
Tunisia for their tireless efforts as co-penholders and appreciates the responsible and
cooperative attitude of the vast majority of Council members.
This resolution was not easily adopted. One country insisted on a unilateral
stance, ignoring the call of the international community. It went back on its words
and broke its promise and the consensus, and delayed the consultation process
again and again. The Council was thus prevented from taking action to support
the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire and the COVID-19 Global
Humanitarian Response Plan. That country has also refused to lift unilateral coercive
measures against relevant countries, turning a blind eye to the call of the SecretaryGeneral and countries around the world to do so. That has exacerbated the suffering
of innocent civilians and deepened the humanitarian crisis in some countries and
regions amid COVID-19.
From the very beginning, China has been supportive of the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for a global ceasefire and the Global Humanitarian Response Plan,
and has voiced its support on various occasions. Most recently, China was one of the
172 Member States and observers that issued the joint statement of support for the
Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire. China constructively engaged in
consultations on the resolution, worked tirelessly with most of the Council members
to build the widest possible consensus and showed maximum flexibility. As a result,
we have managed to overcome all obstacles to ensure that the Council can send a
positive message of solidarity and cooperation at this difficult time.
China appreciates that the resolution refers to Assembly resolution 74/270,
which reflects Member States’ full recognition of the central role played by the
United Nations and the World Health Organization in the global fight against
COVID-19. In addition, China welcomes the inclusion of the concept of putting the
people at the centre, which is conducive to addressing root causes of conflicts and is
highly significant, as it reflects the demands and concerns of developing countries.
China calls on the international community to seize the opportunity of the
adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) to encourage parties to conflict to respond to the
Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire, immediately cease hostilities, work
together to combat COVID-19, save lives, commit to resolving disputes peacefully
through political and diplomatic means, ensure access to humanitarian assistance
and enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers.
20/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

COVID-19 is the common enemy of humankind. In the face of that
unprecedented test, all countries should put people at the centre, always put people’s
lives and health first and do their utmost to save lives. We must have a responsible
attitude and adopt resolute measures to fight the virus. Moreover, we must be guided
by science and reject politicizing, labelling and stigmatizing. The international
community must cooperate and work together to combat COVID-19, and particularly
to assist developing countries in that regard.
China has consistently given top priority to people’s lives. China has adopted
the most comprehensive, thorough and stringent measures, which have helped to
bring the outbreak under control at the lowest possible cost. At the same time, China
is working for recovery in collaboration with the international community. China
has provided support to more than 150 countries and international organizations,
including all those on the Council’s agenda.
The Council’s adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) once again proves that
multilateralism is the only right choice in a world facing multiple challenges.
Unilateralism, by contrast, has no support and will only come to a dead end. At this
critical juncture, China firmly takes the side of multilateralism, the vast majority of
Member States and fairness and justice. China calls upon all countries to envisage
a global community with a shared future, advance multilateralism, strengthen
solidarity and collaboration and uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the United Nations-centred international system to jointly
create a better future for humankind.

20-0890221/27

S/2020/638

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Indonesia to the
United Nations
Indonesia welcomes today’s adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), on the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We appreciate the efforts of Tunisia and France, as
co-penholders, to facilitate the negotiations. We also commend all Council members
for their constructive engagement and spirit of compromise in order to ensure that
the Council signals its readiness and unity in dealing with the issue.
As the Secretary-General has made very clear, the COVID-19 pandemic is a
health crisis with far-reaching effects, including with regard to the maintenance of
peace and security. The Council’s adoption of this resolution is therefore a welcome,
albeit long-overdue, commitment.
We voted in favour of the resolution because we believe that COVID-19 has
a profound effect on security and humanitarian situations, particularly those on the
Council’s agenda. It is therefore important to send a strong message to all parties to
armed conflict to cease hostilities and engage in a humanitarian pause in order to
ensure the delivery of, and access to, humanitarian assistance.
This resolution is also an important step towards ensuring an accelerated
response to the COVID-19 pandemic in countries and situations affected by armed
conflicts and humanitarian crises. It calls for United Nations missions on the ground,
including peacekeeping and special political missions, to support host countries and
continue performing their mandated tasks while ensuring the safety, security and
health of their personnel.
Indonesia believes that, given the unprecedented nature of the COVID-19
pandemic, a coordinated international response is necessary. The United Nations
must rise to the occasion, and we must show that we support the role of all United
Nations bodies in that regard.
In conclusion, we would like to salute all front-line personnel at the forefront
of the battle against COVID-19, including international health and humanitarian
relief personnel.

22/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations
[Original: English and Russian]
The Russian delegation voted in favour of resolution 2532 (2020), on countering
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), drafted by France and Tunisia.
Although the co-penholders did not fully take into account all of our
approaches, we decided to support a document of exceptional importance for the
entire international community. The tough negotiations, which nevertheless led to
an agreement on the text of the resolution, demonstrated that the Security Council
members are able to rise above their narrow national interests and respond to the
global challenges of our time.
We would like to draw attention to the fact that the resolution includes
a reference to the measures proposed by the Secretary-General concerning the
response to the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on countries affected
by armed conflict. We would like to recall that, in his March 2020 report Shared
Responsibilities, Global Solidarity: Responding to the Socio-Economic Impacts of
COVID-19, the Secretary-General stresses the urgent need to waive unilateral
sanctions, which seriously limit the capacity of countries to respond to challenges
related to the pandemic.
We also fully support the Secretary-General’s 23 March appeal for a global
ceasefire. The Russian Federation was among the first to officially respond by
posting a statement the very next day through its Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
We consider it extremely important that the text of the resolution clearly states
that the humanitarian pause and cessation of hostilities do not apply to counterterrorism operations. We note with concern that some negative forces are already
trying to take advantage of the current situation to obtain some benefits on the
ground. We are particularly concerned about the increased terrorist activity in
the Sahara-Sahel subregion, which is already facing a serious humanitarian crisis.
That highlights the importance of the counter-terrorism exception agreed upon by
the Council.
We note that the resolution emphasizes the importance of a coordinated,
inclusive, comprehensive and global international response to the COVID-19
pandemic, with the United Nations playing a key coordinating role. Such a task fits
into our consistent efforts to support the World Health Organization (WHO) as the
leading and coordinating body in international efforts to protect and promote public
health. We underline the crucial role of that specialized agency of the United Nations
system in ensuring the coherence of the multilateral response to the COVID-19
pandemic and its impact, especially the medical aspects of the global response to the
outbreak. WHO is the leading mechanism for mobilizing the efforts of all nations to
fight epidemics and infections like the one we are currently witnessing. We consider
it extremely important that the international community jointly support the work
of WHO.
The pandemic, which — and we can say this without exaggeration —
steamrolled the entire world and changed the usual course of everyday life, froze
economies and entire continents, clearly demonstrated that humankind must be
united in countering global challenges. Today the Security Council contributed to
doing just that.

20-0890223/27

S/2020/638

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the adoption, by unanimity, of
resolution 2532 (2020), which acknowledges that the unprecedented extent of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security. COVID-19 necessitates a firm recommitment to the
values of multilateralism in order to address the interlocking health, socioeconomic,
political and security challenges of the crisis, and to stimulate a sustainable and
inclusive recovery that serves the interests of all nations and peoples. To that end,
our delegation considers it an obligation to support this resolution, which lays the
foundation for an immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on the Council’s
agenda, thereby allowing conflict-affected countries the time and space to repair
their societal fractures and rebuild in order to best respond to COVID-19.
Given the disproportionate implications of the pandemic on the developing
world, including those resulting from lockdown measures, supply chain disruptions,
a sharp decline in remittances and a general decrease in travel, trade and other
economic activities, we must cast our collective gaze towards building capacities,
reducing inequalities and promoting social and economic justice for all, in accordance
with the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Otherwise, we can
expect the further escalation of social tensions in many conflict-affected societies.
We must also address the urgent humanitarian needs exacerbated by the
pandemic. As such, we welcome calls for a sustained humanitarian pause for at least
90 consecutive days in order to enable the safe, unhindered and sustained delivery of
humanitarian assistance, in accordance with the principles of international law. We
also emphasize the appeal for peacekeeping operations to provide critical support,
within their mandates and capacities, to host-country authorities, and further call for
an immediate end to all unilateral coercive economic measures that impede national
efforts to respond to the pandemic and undermine multilateral cooperation at a time
when it is most crucial.
As the current pandemic, the likes of which we have not experienced in over
a century, continues to wreak havoc on our societies and our economies, we must
renew our collective commitment to global health cooperation by crafting effective
networks that facilitate rapid early detection, prevention, treatment and response.
We must also recommit to providing social protections for the most vulnerable.

24/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
South Africa today voted in favour of resolution 2532 (2020), on the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as contained in document S/2020/607. We would,
however, like to provide the following explanation of vote.
South Africa reiterates its position that the role of the Security Council with
regard to global public health emergencies should be clearly understood and linked
to issues that fall directly in the ambit of the Council’s mandate. I also wish to put on
record the following observations regarding the substance of the text.
It is unfortunate that the resolution before us excluded key elements related
to the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic as well as its impact. The SecretaryGeneral called for a global ceasefire and a humanitarian pause on 23 March in order
to focus undivided attention on the fight against the pandemic and successfully
mitigate its impact. He subsequently called for the waiving of measures and sanctions
to allow affected Governments and societies to secure much-needed humanitarian
aid, life-saving and medical supplies, and personal protective equipment.
Following that call, the Council was briefed on numerous occasions by
the Secretariat and civil society representatives about the severe impact of
sanctions on ordinary citizens. We therefore regret that the resolution neglected
to address the impact of sanctions or unilateral coercive measures, despite the
Secretary-General’s appeal.
South Africa is further dismayed that the acknowledgment of the critical role
and leadership of the World Health Organization (WHO) in combating the COVID-19
pandemic has been removed from the final version of the resolution. South Africa
reaffirms the indispensable role of WHO and commends its work in assisting affected
countries and regional organizations to overcome the COVID-19 pandemic. We
underscore the vital need for national, regional and international coordination and
cooperation with WHO in order to win the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
The resolution should have reflected that need.

20-0890225/27

S/2020/638

Annex 22
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
The United Kingdom expresses its thanks to the French and Tunisian
delegations for their tireless patience over many months in taking forward resolution
2532 (2020). We commend them for their ingenuity and flexibility in proposing the
necessary compromises to allow for its adoption today.
The United Kingdom strongly supports the central demand in the resolution
for a general and immediate cessation of hostilities. As is stressed in the resolution,
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has had a devastating impact
across the world, especially in countries ravaged by armed conflicts or affected by
humanitarian crises. We particularly welcome the acknowledgement in the resolution
of the critical role that women are playing in COVID-19 response efforts.
While we are pleased that Council members have been able to adopt the
resolution, the Council’s delay in adopting the resolution since the Secretary-General
23 March ceasefire call is deeply disappointing. We must delay no longer. We call on
all parties to conflict to act on this resolution, for the sake of their own peoples and
so the world can best defeat COVID-19. The Council should now hold such parties to
account if they fail to cease hostilities or permit humanitarian access.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s updates to the Council and thank
him for his leadership on this issue.

26/27

20-08902

S/2020/638

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United States of America
Throughout our engagement in fighting the spread of this pandemic, we
have consistently emphasized the need for complete transparency, objectivity and
the timely sharing of public health data and information with the international
community. We have also stressed the importance of collecting accurate, sciencebased data and analysing the origins, characteristics and spread of the virus. While
the United States generally supports resolution 2532 (2020), adopted today, we would
like to note that it does not include crucial language to emphasize transparency and
data-sharing as critical aspects in fighting this virus. We consistently expressed this
concern throughout the consultation process on the resolution.
Additionally, we would like to note that the United States supports the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire, while recognizing the imperative
for critical counterterrorism operations to continue the fight against terrorists who
seek to exploit this pandemic and that of course nothing in this resolution can or
is intended to prejudice actions by States in the exercise of their inherent right of
sovereignty and self-defence, consistent with international law. We welcome the
efforts of parties to armed conflicts to respect existing ceasefire agreements and
urge continued efforts to negotiate new humanitarian ceasefires in implementation
of the political commitments expressed in the resolution.
The United States continues to lead the world’s humanitarian and health
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We are working directly with Governments
and authorities, multilateral organizations within their existing mandates,
non-governmental organizations, the private sector, faith-based and other
organizations responding on the ground to combat this virus.
That said, the United States remains seriously concerned about terrorist
groups posing as humanitarian actors to exploit and benefit from humanitarian
assistance, which is why Member States must remain committed to fulfilling
their counterterrorism finance-related obligations, including by implementing
appropriate domestic legislation, in compliance with resolution 2462 (2019) and
other international obligations. Therefore, we note that nothing in this resolution
is meant to call into question the lawful application of domestic laws, as required
by and in a manner consistent with international law, to prevent the provision of
financing and other material support to terrorists and terrorist groups, or to call into
question non-arbitrary restrictions on humanitarian assistance that may be imposed
consistent with international humanitarian law.
The United States has already made available more than $1.3 billion in
emergency health, humanitarian and economic assistance to combat COVID-19, in
addition to the funding we already provide to non-governmental and international
organizations. This assistance is part of more than $12 billion allocated by agencies
and departments across the United States Government to benefit the global
response, including vaccine and therapeutics development, preparedness efforts and
humanitarian assistance.

20-0890227/27
