United Nations

A/RES/67/146

General Assembly

Distr.: General
5 March 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 28 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2012
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/67/450 and Corr.1)]

67/146. Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female
genital mutilations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/117 of 9 December 1998 and 56/128 of
19 December 2001, Commission on the Status of Women resolutions 51/2 of
9 March 2007, 1 52/2 of 7 March 2008 2 and 54/7 of 12 March 2010 3 and all other
relevant resolutions,
Reaffirming that the Convention on the Rights of the Child 4 and the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 5 together with the
Optional Protocols thereto, 6 constitute an important contribution to the legal
framework for the protection and promotion of the human rights of women and girls,
Reaffirming also the Beijing Declaration 7 and Platform for Action, 8 the
outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled
“Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century”, 9 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development 10 and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social
Development 11 and their 5-year, 10-year and 15-year reviews, as well as the United
_______________
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2007, Supplement No. 7 (E/2007/27), chap. I,
sect. D.
2
Ibid., 2008, Supplement No. 7 (E/2008/27), chap. I, sect. D.
3
Ibid., 2010, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2010/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. D.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
5
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378; and resolution 66/138, annex.
7
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
8
Ibid., annex II.
9
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
10
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
11
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

12-48736

*1248736*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/146

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilations

Nations Millennium Declaration 12 and the commitments relevant to women and girls
made at the 2005 World Summit 13 and reiterated in Assembly resolution 65/1 of
22 September 2010, entitled “Keeping the promise: united to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals”,
Recalling the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights
on the Rights of Women in Africa, adopted in Maputo on 11 July 2003, which
contains, inter alia, undertakings and commitments on ending female genital
mutilation and marks a significant milestone towards the abandonment and ending
of female genital mutilation,
Recalling also the decision of the African Union, adopted in Malabo on 1 July
2011, to support the adoption by the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session of a
resolution banning female genital mutilation,
Recalling further the recommendation of the Commission on the Status of
Women at its fifty-sixth session that the Economic and Social Council recommend
to the General Assembly the adoption of a decision to consider the issue of ending
female genital mutilation at its sixty-seventh session under the agenda item entitled
“Advancement of women”, 14
Recognizing that female genital mutilations are an irreparable, irreversible
abuse that impacts negatively on the human rights of women and girls, affecting
about 100 million to 140 million women and girls worldwide, and that each year an
estimated further 3 million girls are at risk of being subjected to the practice
throughout the world,
Reaffirming that female genital mutilations are a harmful practice that
constitutes a serious threat to the health of women and girls, including their
psychological, sexual and reproductive health, which can increase their vulnerability
to HIV and may have adverse obstetric and prenatal outcomes as well as fatal
consequences for the mother and the newborn, and that the abandonment of this
harmful practice can be achieved as a result of a comprehensive movement that
involves all public and private stakeholders in society, including girls and boys,
women and men,
Concerned about evidence of an increase in the incidence of female genital
mutilations being carried out by medical personnel in all regions in which they
are practised,
Recognizing that negative discriminatory stereotypical attitudes and
behaviours have direct implications for the status and treatment of women and girls
and that such negative stereotypes impede the implementation of legislative and
normative frameworks that guarantee gender equality and prohibit discrimination on
the basis of sex,
Recognizing also that the campaign of the Secretary-General entitled “UNiTE
to End Violence against Women” and the database on violence against women will
contribute to addressing the elimination of female genital mutilations,

_______________
12

Resolution 55/2.
See resolution 60/1.
14
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2012, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum
(E/2012/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A.
13

2/6

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilations

A/RES/67/146

Welcoming the efforts of the United Nations system to end female genital
mutilations, in particular the commitment of 10 United Nations entities 15
announced in their joint inter-agency statement of 27 February 2008 on eliminating
female genital mutilation, as well as the Joint Programme on Female Genital
Mutilation/Cutting: Accelerating Change, of the United Nations Population Fund
and the United Nations Children’s Fund, to accelerate the elimination of the
practice,
Deeply concerned that, despite the increase in national, regional and
international efforts and the focus on the abandonment of female genital mutilations,
the practice continues to exist in all regions of the world,
Deeply concerned also that a tremendous gap in resources continues to exist
and that the shortfall in funding has severely limited the scope and pace of
programmes and activities for the elimination of female genital mutilations,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on ending female
genital mutilation, 16
Stresses that the empowerment of women and girls is key to breaking the
1.
cycle of discrimination and violence and for the promotion and protection of human
rights, including the right to the highest attainable standard of mental and physical
health, including sexual and reproductive health, and calls upon States parties to
fulfil their obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child4 and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,5 as
well as their commitments to implement the Declaration on the Elimination of
Violence against Women, 17 the Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development,10 the Beijing Platform for Action8 and the outcomes
of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000:
gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”,9 and of the
special session of the Assembly on children; 18
Calls upon States to enhance awareness-raising and formal, non-formal
2.
and informal education and training in order to promote the direct engagement of
girls and boys, women and men and to ensure that all key actors, Government
officials, including law enforcement and judicial personnel, immigration officials,
health-care providers, community and religious leaders, teachers, employers, media
professionals and those directly working with girls, as well as parents, families and
communities, work to eliminate attitudes and harmful practices, in particular all
forms of female genital mutilations, that negatively affect girls;
Also calls upon States to strengthen advocacy and awareness-raising
3.
programmes, to mobilize girls and boys to take an active part in developing
preventive and elimination programmes to address harmful practices, especially
female genital mutilations, and to engage community and religious leaders,
educational institutions, the media and families and provide increased financial
support to efforts at all levels to end those practices;
_______________
15
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS, United Nations Development Programme, Economic Commission for Africa, United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations Population Fund, Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, United Nations Children’s Fund, United Nations
Development Fund for Women and World Health Organization.
16
E/CN.6/2012/8.
17
Resolution 48/104.
18
Resolution S-27/2, annex.

3/6

A/RES/67/146

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilations

4.
Urges States to condemn all harmful practices that affect women and
girls, in particular female genital mutilations, whether committed within or outside a
medical institution, and to take all necessary measures, including enacting and
enforcing legislation, to prohibit female genital mutilations and to protect women
and girls from this form of violence, and to end impunity;
Also urges States to complement punitive measures with
5.
awareness-raising and educational activities designed to promote a process of
consensus towards the elimination of female genital mutilations, and further urges
States to protect and support women and girls who have been subjected to female
genital mutilations and those at risk, including by developing social and
psychological support services and care, and to take measures to improve their
health, including sexual and reproductive health, in order to assist women and girls
who are subjected to the practice;
Further urges States to promote gender-sensitive, empowering
6.
educational processes by, as appropriate, reviewing and revising school curricula,
educational materials and teacher-training programmes and elaborating policies and
programmes of zero tolerance for violence against girls, including female genital
mutilations, and to further integrate a comprehensive understanding of the causes
and consequences of gender-based violence and discrimination against women and
girls into education and training curricula at all levels;
Calls upon States to ensure that national action plans and strategies on the
7.
elimination of female genital mutilations are comprehensive and multidisciplinary in
scope and incorporate clear targets and indicators for the effective monitoring, impact
assessment and coordination of programmes among all stakeholders;
Urges States to take, within the general framework of integration policies
8.
and in consultation with affected communities, effective and specific targeted
measures for refugee women and women migrants and their communities in order to
protect girls from female genital mutilations, including when the practice occurs
outside the country of residence;
Calls upon States to develop information and awareness-raising
9.
campaigns and programmes to systematically reach the general public, relevant
professionals, families and communities, including through the media and featuring
television and radio discussions, on the elimination of female genital mutilations;
10. Urges States to pursue a comprehensive, culturally sensitive, systematic
approach that incorporates a social perspective and is based on human rights and
gender-equality principles in providing education and training to families, local
community leaders and members of all professions relevant to the protection and
empowerment of women and girls in order to increase awareness of and
commitment to the elimination of female genital mutilations;
11. Also urges States to ensure the national implementation of international
and regional commitments and obligations undertaken as States parties to various
international instruments protecting the full enjoyment of all human rights and the
fundamental freedoms of women and girls;
12. Calls upon States to develop policies and regulations to ensure the
effective implementation of national legislative frameworks on eliminating
discrimination and violence against women and girls, in particular female genital
mutilations, and to put in place adequate accountability mechanisms at the national
and local levels to monitor adherence to and implementation of these legislative
frameworks;
4/6

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilations

A/RES/67/146

13. Also calls upon States to develop unified methods and standards for the
collection of data on all forms of discrimination and violence against girls,
especially forms that are underdocumented, such as female genital mutilations, and
to develop additional indicators to effectively measure progress in eliminating
the practice;
14. Urges States to allocate sufficient resources to the implementation of
policies and programmes and legislative frameworks aimed at eliminating female
genital mutilations;
15. Calls upon States to develop, support and implement comprehensive and
integrated strategies for the prevention of female genital mutilations, including the
training of social workers, medical personnel, community and religious leaders and
relevant professionals, and to ensure that they provide competent, supportive
services and care to women and girls who are at risk of or who have undergone
female genital mutilations, and encourage them to report to the appropriate
authorities cases in which they believe women or girls are at risk;
16. Also calls upon States to support, as part of a comprehensive approach to
eliminate female genital mutilations, programmes that engage local community
practitioners of female genital mutilations in community-based initiatives for the
abandonment of the practice, including, where relevant, the identification by
communities of alternative livelihoods for them;
17. Calls upon the international community, the relevant United Nations
entities and civil society and international financial institutions to continue to
actively support, through the allocation of increased financial resources and
technical assistance, targeted comprehensive programmes that address the needs and
priorities of women and girls at risk of or subjected to female genital mutilations;
18. Calls upon the international community to strongly support, including
through increased financial support, a second phase of the United Nations
Population Fund-United Nations Children’s Fund Joint Programme on Female
Genital Mutilation/Cutting: Accelerating Change, which is currently due to end in
December 2013, as well as national programmes focused on the elimination of
female genital mutilations;
19. Stresses that some progress has been made in combating female genital
mutilations in a number of countries using a common coordinated approach that
promotes positive social change at the community, national, regional and
international levels, and recalls the goal set out in the United Nations inter-agency
statement15 that female genital mutilations be eliminated within a generation, with
some of the main achievements being obtained by 2015, in line with the Millennium
Development Goals;
20. Encourages men and boys to take positive initiatives and to work in
partnership with women and girls to combat violence and discriminatory practices
against women and girls, in particular female genital mutilations, through networks,
peer programmes, information campaigns and training programmes;
21. Calls upon States, the United Nations system, civil society and all
stakeholders to continue to observe 6 February as the International Day of Zero
Tolerance for Female Genital Mutilation and to use the day to enhance awarenessraising campaigns and to take concrete actions against female genital mutilations;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Population
5/6

A/RES/67/146

Intensifying global efforts for the elimination of female genital mutilations

Fund, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
the United Nations Development Programme and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, individually and collectively, take into
account the protection and promotion of the rights of women and girls against female
genital mutilations in their country programmes, as appropriate and in accordance
with national priorities, in order to further strengthen their efforts in this regard;
23. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly,
at its sixty-ninth session, an in-depth multidisciplinary report on the root causes of
and contributing factors to the practice of female genital mutilations, its prevalence
worldwide and its impact on women and girls, including evidence and data, analysis
of progress made to date and action-oriented recommendations for eliminating this
practice on the basis of information provided by Member States, relevant actors of
the United Nations system working on the issue and other relevant stakeholders.
60th plenary meeting
20 December 2012

6/6
