S/2018/1130

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 December 2018
English
Original: French

Letter dated 12 December 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my letter dated 5 December 2017 ( S/2017/1034),
in which I informed the President of the Security Council of the progress made by the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, and to his reply dated 8 December 2017
(S/2017/1035), in which he took note of my intention to continue the activities of the
United Nations support team to the Mixed Commission, with funding from the regular
budget. In this regard, I would like to inform you of the latest activities and
achievements of the Mixed Commission.
As you know, the United Nations established the Mixed Commission to
facilitate the implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice of
10 October 2002 on the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary and territorial dispute. Through
my good offices, and with the support of the Secretariat, I have continued to facilitate
the implementation of the judgment.
The mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation of
the land boundary and the delineation of the maritime boundary, facilitating the
withdrawal and transfer of authority, addressing the situation of affected populations
and making recommendations on confidence-building measures. Achievements to
date in the implementation of the judgment include the withdrawal of Nigeria and the
transfer of authority to Cameroon in the Lake Chad area (December 2003), along the
land boundary (July 2004) and on the Bakassi peninsula (a process that b egan in June
2006 and was completed in August 2008); the delineation of the maritime boundary
(May 2007); and the end of the special transitional regime of five years and the
exercise by Cameroon of its full right of sovereignty over the Bakassi zone (Augu st
2013).
The Mixed Commission also approved the recommendations of the Working
Group on the Maritime Boundary, including the provisions for cross -border
cooperation on hydrocarbon deposits straddling the maritime boundary (March 2011).
While 2,005 km of the land boundary have been assessed and agreed upon,
efforts are ongoing to break the deadlock regarding the 95 km of the boundary that
are still disputed. My Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel, Mohamed
Ibn Chambas, undertook two mediation missions in 2018 with a view to resolving the
issue with the heads of delegation of the two parties. The impetus for the mediation
missions was the submission of written comments by Nigeria and Cameroon
expressing differing opinions on the proposal for a final settlement. In an effort to
reconcile the positions of the parties, the Special Representative travelled to Abuja
and Yaoundé to meet the heads of delegation. Discussions are under way and both

18-22140 (E)

191218

*1822140*

191218

S/2018/1130

parties are showing increasing willingness to bring their differing interpretations of
various sections of the Court’s judgment closer together. These efforts must continue
and will produce satisfactory results if both parties continue to act in good faith.
Of the estimated 2,696 boundary pillars that will be required, a total of 991 have
been successfully constructed as at October 2018. In November 2018, work resumed
on the construction of 335 pillars in lot 4, following the implementation of robust
security measures by the parties.
In September 2018, the United Nations support team held a working session
with the parties on the production of final maps, with a view to discussing and
agreeing on toponyms for a 30-km stretch of the land boundary that require the
approval of both parties. As a result of the working session, 100 of the 132 maps have
been updated to reflect the toponyms recognized by the parties. Work is under way to
update the remaining 32 maps with additional information.
I am also pleased to inform you that the parties continue to demonstra te the
political will to resolve the territorial dispute definitively. They have pledged to
contribute $6 million to the trust fund of the Mixed Commission, of which
$1.5 million has already been transferred.
The United Nations support team and the parties are making headway in terms
of boundary demarcation. At the same time, renewed efforts must be made to promote
early recovery and sustainable development. To this end, the United Nations support
team and the parties, with the assistance of the United Nations country teams, have
come up with several projects aimed at helping communities affected by the
demarcation process. The projects are intended to strengthen confidence -building
measures and relations between cross-border communities and improve basic
services. The Mixed Commission will seek the support of the United Nations country
teams to implement these projects.
The following activities are required to conclude the work of the Mixed
Commission:
(a) Agreement by the two parties on outstanding demarcation areas using an
in-office, desktop evaluation and demarcation methodology;
(b) Facilitation of the construction and emplacement of boundary pillars
financed by the trust fund for demarcation activities;
(c)

Production of final maps and a boundary statement;

(d) Promotion of cross-border cooperation, including maritime cooperation,
and coordinated security monitoring along the land boundary;
(e) Finalization of confidence-building initiatives for local communities
affected by the demarcation process;
(f) Implementation of the completion strategy by progressively handing over
the activities of the Mixed Commission to the Joint Bilateral Commission and other
subregional structures.
I would like to recall that, until 2003, the Mixed Commission had been funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. Thereafter, from 2004 to 2018, its activities were
funded through the regular budget. The Governments of Austria, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Canada, Italy, Norway, Pakistan, Sweden and Uruguay have provided in -kind
contributions for the substantive and technical work of the Commission (military and
legal experts). In addition, logistical support has been provided by the Governments
of Cameroon and Nigeria, and voluntary contributions to the trust fund for
demarcation activities have been made by both countries, as well as by Canada, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the European Union.
2/3

18-22140

S/2018/1130

As has been the case in recent years, and given the cost-effectiveness of the
operation and the important tasks remaining at this juncture to help to advance the
peaceful implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice, it is
my intention to ask for resources from the regular budget for the United Nations
support team to cover the year 2019.
I should be grateful if you would bring the text of the present letter to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-22140

3/3
