UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page
1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2550) .*.*......I.......**.,.......*,...*...
Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*....**......*...........

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16692) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~,... I.,,,.....
~.~~. . . . . ~.

1

S/PV.2550

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures..vention
of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of th&‘OfJicicrl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions md
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2550th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 17 August 1984, at 10.30 a.m.
Mr. Leandre BASSOLE

President:

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Congo, Indonesia, Kuwait, Qatar and Sri Lanka in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

(Burkina Faso).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2550)

of the agenda
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Samory
(Congo), Mr. Alatas (Indonesia),
Mr. Abulhassan
(Kuwait), Mr. Al-Kawari (Qatar) and Mr. Wijewardane
(Sri Lanka) took theplaces reservedfor them at the side
of the Council chamber.

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Algeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16692)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The first speaker for this meeting is the representative
of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

The meeting was called to order at 11.50 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

4. Mr. VELAZCO SAN JOSE (Cuba) [interpretation
from Spanish]: I wish first of all, Sir, to thank you and

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16692)

the other members of the Council for giving me this
opportunity to make a statement during the Council’s
consideration of this important item. It also pleases me
to be participating during the presidency of a representative of an African country with which Cuba maintains
close ties of friendship. We are certain that, with your
experience and diplomatic skill, you will effectively
guide the work of this body.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken at the 2548th and
2549th meetings, I invite the representative of Algeria
to take a place at the Council table, I invite the representatives of Argentina, Benin, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Mongolia, Nigeria, South Africa, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago and
Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

5. On 15 November 1983, the General Assembly considered the problem of the new racist constitution imposed by the Pretoria regime on the broad majority of
the South African population. By 141 votes to none,
with seven abstentions, resolution 3801 was adopted
by the General Assembly which declared that the socalled constitutional proposals were contrary to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, that the
results of the referendum held on 2 November 1983
were of no validity whatsoever and that the enforcement of the new constitution would inevitably aggravate tension and conflict in South Africa and in
southern Africa as a whole.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Muriiz
(Argentina),
Mr. Ogouma (Benin), Mr. Velazco San
Jose (Cuba), Mr. Cksar (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Nyamdoe (Mongolia), Mr. Onobu (Nigeria), Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa),
Mr, El-Fattal
(Syrian Arab
Republic), Mr. Kasemsri (Thailand), Mr. Alleyne (Trinidad and Tobago) and Mr. SiloviC (Yugoslavia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. The General Assembly rejected the so-called constitutional proposals because it considered them to be
an insidious
manoeuvre by the racist minority regime
..
1

capitals
is striving to show that true transformations
being ma& in apartheid, and that there is no longer

are
any
need for the internal struggle by the oppressed masses
in that country or for international
pressure on or isolation ofpretoria, because racism has begun to disappear,
Nothing could be further from the truth. There has not
been a single change in South Africa which alters the
wretched existence of the more than 23 million Africans
of the bantustans, or even for the “Coloureds”
and
citizens of Asian origin, whom they are now trying to
separate
from the joint struggle with their black brethren for full civil rights, by means of a so-called parliamentary chamber, which is no chamber at all, and
possesses no real powers.

designed to strengthen the power of the white minority
and the apartheid regime.
7. Any “negotiated settlement” based on the bantustan structure or on the so-called constitutional proposals was also rejected. The Assembly then declared
yet again that only the total eradication of apartheid and
the establishment of a democratic, non-racial society,
based on majority rule through universal suffrage exercised by the entire adult population in a united, nonfragmented South Africa, could lead to ajust and lasting
solution to the explosive situation in South Africa.
8. The General Assembly requested the Security
Council to consider the implications of the so-called
constitutional
proposals and to take the necessary
measures, in accordance with the Charter, to avert the
aggravation of tension in South Africa and in southern
Africa as a whole.

15. Even the Western press has no alternative but to
recognize that there must be a question mark over the
so-called reforms of the system. For example, Newsweek has admitted:
“Despite all his rhetoric, Botha has continued the
harshest racial practice in the country’s history,
Each year about 250,000 blacks have been obliged to
go to desolate homelands, where they are confronted
with a picture of a lack of schools, few jobs and little
food, water and medical care. In the name of ‘national security’, thousands of blacks are routinely
arrested. Last year alone more than 200,000 blacks
were arrested for violations of the pass laws, an
increase of 90 per cent since 1981. The Government
destroys the houses of blacks, obliging them to emigrate from their marginal slums of corrugated iron
shacks and mud huts, and their ‘new houses’ frequently consist of junked automobiles on vacant lots
with branches and plastic planks all tacked together.”

9. Moreover, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which comprises the majority of the membership
of the United Nations, considered and denounced the
“constitutional
proposals”, stating that, apart from
excluding the black population of South Africa and not
granting real civil rights to Coloured or Asian persons,
these are a massive fraud and an attempt to turn back
the process of the emancipation of African peoples.
10. The position of the Non-Aligned Movement has
been consistent and clear. The Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983, expressed
‘indignation
at the introduction by the South African
rBgime of these alleged reforms, and unreservedly condemned this act as another attempt to divide the oppressed people of South Africa and to consolidate and
perpetuate apartheid and the dictatorship of the white
minority .

16. It is here, in the oppression of the overwhelming
majority of the population of South Africa, that we must
seek true changes and also the true reforms of apartheid, if any are to take place. For those broad majorities
the only reform is that there has been more brutal
repression and more systematic violations of human
rights, with an even gloomier future for their descendants.

11. That is a portion of the background to the position
taken by the Governments that make up the United
Nations and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
concerning the so-called constitutional reforms.
12. In fact, they have already been declared to be
openly contrary to the Charter, a manoeuvre by the
racist rdgime and its Western allies, especially the
United States, and a fraud perpetrated upon international public opinion,

17. Who adopted the new constitution? The answer is
that 2.7million white South Africans, barely 10 per cent
of the total black population, have arrogated to themselves the right to draft the fundamental law of lhe
country. It would be simple-minded to suppose that in
the circumstances of aparfheid even those whites can
express, or be guided by, the finest sentiments of the
human being. They went to the polls to vote on a
constitution which will guarantee the continuation of
their privileges and which will certainly not endanger
white supremacy or hegemony in South Africa.

13. Actually, the new South African constitution has
not changed any of the basic elements of apartheid, nor
has it accepted any decision which could be considered as a peaceful development-however
moderatewhich might indicate the possibility of a future of
equality and full civil rights for the more than 70 per
cent of the South African population which continues to
live in oppression under the abhorrent racist system,

18. The South African Parliament
now has three
chambers, with one for Coloureds and another for
Asians. But will they be able to discuss in those chambers, which are designed from a racist point of view, the

14. What is new in South Africa? The press in the host
country of the United Nations and in other Western
2

26. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Mongolia,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

real problems of the country? They will not. The problems which are deemed to be of national importance
will continue to be taken up only by the whites, for the
whites, as a function of the privileges of the whites. But
even those two communities together have fewer seats
allocated to them than those reserved for the white
minority.
19. If the new constitution
has not changed the
wretched existence of the black majority of South
Africa, nor given them any rights, and if the limited civil
rights received by the Asians and Coloured persons are
not truly such, what has been reformed? Nothing has
been reformed.

27. Mr. NYAMDOO (Mongolia): Allow me, first, Sir,
to offer you the sincere congratulations of the Mongolian delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the current month. We are convinced
that under your able leadership the Council will successfully discharge its responsibilities. My delegation
expresses its gratitude to you and to the other members
of the Council for giving me an opportunity to address
the Council on the matter under consideration.

20. What is new in South Africa is the increasing
awareness in the African masses that their rights will be
won only through sweat and blood and that the upartheid regime and its allies are being obliged to seek
formulas to attempt to cover up the dirty and universally condemned face of apartheid, obliged by the
African masses’ struggle and the international pressure
initiated by the Non-Aligned Movement, the socialist
countries and other progressive forces, which have
finally been joined by a number of Western countries,
perhaps a little reluctantly, while the United States has
done its best to block this movement.

28. The’attention of the Council has once again been
drawn to the situation in southern Africa in connection
with the so-called constitutional reforms undertaken by
the Pretoria regime. As is known, these so-called constitutional reforms have already been condemned and
rejected by the General Assembly at its last session as
another criminal action of South Africa, designed further to entrench white minority rule and apartheid. The
General Assembly also requested the Security Council
to consider the serious implications of the so-called
constitutional proposals as a matter of urgency [resoletion 38111 of 15 November

21. Only a short time ago one of the most important
capitalists in South Africa said clearly that it was necessary urgently to seek formulas which would make it
possible, without modifying the system, “to adopt
measures to prevent an uprising among the 20 million
blacks”.

19831.

29. These manoeuvres of the Pretoria regime must be
viewed in the overall context of the racist policy of
South Africa aimed at the perpetuation of minority
supremacy. At the same time the so-called constitutional reforms are designed to divide the unity of the
oppressed people of South Africa, as well as to sow and
foment the seeds of enmity and hatred among them.
Thus, new attempts are being made to consolidate the
abhorrent policy of apartheid, which has been repeatedly condemned and qualified by the world community
as a crime against humanity and as a threat to international peace and security. It should also be noted
that this inhuman policy not only is practised in South
Africa itselfbut is also extended to Namibia, a Territory
illegally occupied by the racist regime.

22. The adoption of the new constitution of South
Africa, the open support of the present United States
Administration
for Pretoria, Botha’s tour of Western
Europe and the press campaign to which I have already
referred are all component parts of the campaign to
make Pretoria, its racist policy and its acts of aggression
against the front-line States palatable to the public opinion of Europe and the United States.
23. It is not possible to analyse any element of the
situation in southern Africa if we disregard apartheid,
the occupation of Namibia and the acts of aggression
and destabilization against those countries. It is all one
package, designed to preserve and extend racism and
its rule.

30. Moreover, new acts of aggression are being perpetrated by Pretoria against neighbouring independent
African States. This can be seen in the continued occupation by Pretoria of a part of the territory of Angola.
It is evident that the apartheid regime of South Africa
would have been unable arrogantly to defy world public
opinion and the numerous decisions and resolutions of
the United Nations had it not enjoyed every assistance
and support on the part of certain Western Powers.

24. I cannot conclude without recalling here the
heroic struggle of the fighters of the African National
Congress of South Africa (ANC), truly a factor which
will one day bring about real change in South Africa,
resulting in a democratic system under which South
Africans of all races will have equal rights.

31. The position of Mongolia on the problems of
southern Africa is well known. My Government has
consistently supported the just struggle of the peoples
of the African continent against colonial domination,
racism and apartheid. This invariable policy of my
Government is a matter of record in the United
Nations,

25. The Security Council has an obligation to condemn and reject the new constitution of South Africa
and to make it quite clear that in the Council’s view
nothing has changed and that the uparthcidrkgime
must
be ostracized, never to emerge from that ostracism.
3

40. It is fallacious to claim that the new constitution is
a positive development in the policy of the Government
of South Africa: it is a constitution presented by the
ruling party, the Nationalist
Party, without the participation of the other parties. It is aimed at hegemony
over the people as a whole. We do not beheve it to be
a step towards any kind of self-determination.
It is
merely a cover which has been described as constitutional, which aims at dividing a people and determining its fate without that people’s participation. On
November last, the international
community took a
very clear stand on the subject. In General Assembly
resolution 38/l 1, it declared that these constitutional
proposals were contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and that the proposed constitution would inevitably aggravate tension in South
Africa, The international community rejected those
proposals and solemnly declared:

32. Today we reaffirm our support for and solidarity
with the peoples of South Africa and Namibia, which
are waging a heroic struggle against the racist regime of
Pretoria for freedom and independence.
33. My delegation expresses its hope that the Security
Council will take all necessary measures to force the
South African regime to comply with the United Nations decisions and to renounce its repressive policies.
34. The PRESIDENT
(ilzterpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Kuwait.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
35.

Mr.

jlom

Arabic]:

ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait) [interpretation
May I be permitted at the outset, Sir, to
congratulate you sincerely on your accession to the
presidency of the Council for the month of August. You
are a prominent son of Africa and a representative of
your friendly country Burkina Faso. I am confident that
you will preside over the work of the Council with
your well-known wisdom and firmness.

“that only the total eradication of apartheid and the
establishment of a non-racial democratic society
based on majority rule, through the full and free
exercise of adult suffrage by all the people in a united
and non-fragmented South Africa, can lead to a just
and lasting solution of the explosive situation in
South Africa”.

36, I also wish to convey to your predecessor,
Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
the representative of the
United States, our appreciation for her stewardship of
the Council during the past month.

41. Our deliberations today are to be viewed in the
context of the stand which the international community has taken since last November when the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of the aforementioned resolution, requested the Security Council to consider the
serious implications of the so-called constitutional proposals and to take all necessary measures, in accordance with the Charter, to avert the further aggravation
of tension and conflict in South Africa and in southern
Africa as a whole. If the members of the Council are to
be true to themselves, their responsibility is clear. The
international responsibility of this Council is to refuse
to give legitimacy to fake allegations and to reject the
so-called constitutional proposals which are aimed at
enslaving the vast majority of the population. Finally, it
must not pay heed to any allegations which describe the
imaginary advantages of that constitution, We sincerely hope that the Council, and particularly its permanent members, will live up to the responsibility which
has been placed upon them as members of the organ
responsible for considering questions of international
peace and security and unequivocally reject the latest
manoeuvres by South Africa.

37. The Council is meeting once again in a context
which has become familiar to the international community: the persistence of the South African Government in its oppressive practices. These practices have
taken numerous forms and aspects-military,
economic, political-there
are regional aspects to the attacks against neighbouring African States, there are
colonial aspects to the occupation of Namibia, as there
are also internal aspects to the persecution and repression of the black majority in South Africa, who have a
legitimate right to live and to participate in government.
38. Our current deliberations represent an attempt to
deal with these practices, despite the unfounded argument of South Africa’s representatives that these discussions are to be considered as intervention in the
internal affairs of that country. The fact of the matter is
that it is the so-called Government of South Africa that
is imposing its will by force and persecution, intervening in the affairs of a people which has not been provided a genuine, legitimate chance to choose its rulers,
or to participate in setting up a political model and a
constitutional framework for its country.

42. Mr. ICAZA GALLARD
(Nicaragua) [interpretation from Spanish]: I should like, Sir, to offer to you
our most sincere and cordial congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. Your country and mine are united by a number
of common factors, by faith in the same principles and
by a shared desire for peace. We are quite sure that
under your guidance the work of the Council will reach
a successful conclusion. Your diplomatic and political
abilities will be called upon to give this important organ
the necessary dynamism in order to discharge the lofty

39. The racist South African Government’s exploitation of institutions which it calls “constitutional”
cannot confer legitimacy upon unfair laws or upon the
practices undertaken by these institutions, Those laws
and practices are based on the spurious policy of apartheid, of hegemony of the minority over the majority, of
making the original inhabitant a stranger in his own
country.
4

functions accorded to it by the Charter of the United
Nations. Representing, as you do, a small but independent, proud and vigorous African country with great
hopes and potential, we may rest assured that the Council will take a proper, just and consistent approach to
the grave problem now before us.

in the white chamber. The Coloureds and Asians would
not be able to discuss, for example, the Group Areas
Act, which directly affects them and which constitutes one of the legislative foundations of the apartheid
system.

43. Once again the international
community must
speak out to condemn the conduct of South Africa
which shows conspicuous contempt for human values
and the international norms and principles shared by
the Member States of this Organization-norms
and
principles that are the basis for the harmonious and
peaceful existence of States and for the development
and self-determination
of peoples.

48. In this way, the so-called new constitution, which
was approved on 2 November 1983 by an exclusively
white electorate of South Africa, does not alter the
bantustanization policy of the apartheid rtlgime. Far
from that, it institutionalizes
that policy and perpetuates the power of the Nationalist Party of the white
minority. That is what really lies hidden behind what
some have been touting as a recipe for “gradual
change” or a “step in the right direction”.

44. It is with just indignation that the whole of Africa
has come to the meetings of the Council in order to
condemn and reject the insidious manoeuvres of the
apartheid regime, which are designed to perpetuate
that odious system, to divide the heroic people of South
Africa and to deceive the international community. But
their efforts will be in vain, because all of us present
here, without exception and regardless of the special
interests which may connect certain Members to that
odious rkgime, clearly understand what really lies hidden behind those so-called constitutional reforms. With
equal certainty the heroic people of South Africa will
prove able to foil this crude trap and will renew its
struggle to eradicate the apartheid rkgime with increased force and unity.

49. The situation which we are now debating in the
Security Council and the related question of the socalled elections provide a good opportunity for the
super-Power allied to South Africa, a super-Power
which gives lectures on democracy and elections, to
reveal what in practice it understands democracy and
elections to mean.
50. It is evident to all that South Africa is perpetuating
and perfecting its ignominious racist rkgime, committing constant acts of aggression against the front-line
brother States and continuing its illegal occupation of
Namibia, creating an explosive situation in the whole of
southern Africa, posing a terrible threat to international
peace and security. And this it is able to do precisely
because of the protection and encouragement it enjoys
from the policy of so-called constructive engagement.

45. Through the so-called new constitution, the South
African Government proposes to establish a tricameral
parliament, consisting of 178 white representatives,
85 representatives of so-called Coloureds-or
persons
of mixed race-and 45 representatives of persons of
Asian origin.
46. Together the whites, Coloureds and Asians make
up 7.8 million, which is barely 27 per cent of the total
population of South Africa. This system, apart from the
fact that it denies the indigenous population, which
make up the large majority, their legitimate rights, is
designed to perpetuate the power of the white minority.

51. An intensive campaign is taking place to rehabilitate the apartheid regime. South Africa is being armed
with ultra-modern weapon systems. Foreign economic
investments exceed $14 billion, This military and economic co-operation is creating a whole series of political and diplomatic links which, with each passing day,
are making it more difficult for certain countries to
condemn and reject the odious Nazi system designed
by Pretoria. This trend should give us food for thought
and reason for alarm, because behind it Pretoria is
widening and entrenching its apartheid system.

47. The exclusion of the indigenous majority has been
“justified” by the establishment of 10 entities known as
“independent bantustans”. About 10 million Africans
have been expelled and compelled to live in those bantustans, which cover only an area of 12.7 per cent of the
total territory of South Africa. The other 87.3 per cent
has been declared the territory of “white South
Africa”, in which the indigenous inhabitants, the true
masters of the soil of South Africa, are deemed to be
foreigners. The so-called reforms do not end there.
According to those reforms, it is to be decreed that each
“racial group” should only be able to discuss in its
respective chamber its “own affairs”. And the one who
would have final say over what constitutes each racial
group’s “own affairs” would be the President, who
would always be a member of the party of the majority

52. My country’s position with regard to this abominable situation has been clear ever since the revolutionary triumph that put an end to the Somozist dictatorship on 19 July 1979. Last year, during the debates
that preceded the adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 38/l 1, the Nicaraguan delegation made it
quite clear that in the case of apartheid there could be
but one single and immutable goal: the total eradication
of apartheid from the face of the earth. The problem of
southern Africa cannot be resolved as long as the apartheid system exists. Only a non-fragmented
South
Africa where a racist and inhuman minority does not
hold sway and where the dignity of all its citizens is
recognized and they are all treated as human beings on
an equal footing can provide the basis for a just and
lasting peace in the region.
5

seeksto shatter the liberation struggle of the oppressed
people of South Africa and sow hatred and enmity
amongthem as they struggle for freedom, equahty and
prosperity
in their own land. That is a horrendous and
disgusting ploy which is clearly in line wtth the old
colonial motto: divide and rule.

53. Faced with the situation now before us, the Council must take an unequivocal stand, vigorously rejecting
and declaring as null and void the new constitution and
the elections soon to be organizedin South Africa under
cover of this bogus legality. At the sametime, it must
demand of the Governments of all Member States a
political conduct consistent and in conformity with its
resolutions and in active solidarity with the oppressed
people of South Africa in its legitimate struggle for a
democratic and just society.

59. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR supports the
initiative of the Group of African States,which has seen
fit to request the Council to stateits views on the force
of the constitutional transformation of the apartheid
regime. We have no illusions about the counter-reaction of the Pretoria regime. As has happened so often in
the past, the South African racists this time also will
disregard the decision of the Council. However, once
again the will of the international community will be set
forth in a document of the supreme body of the United
Nations system, whose decisions are binding on all
Member States.

54. We place our faith and hope in the determination
of the people of South Africa to stay united. The revolutionary and fighting spirit of Soweto must eventually
triumph over obscenity and barbarity. We are even
more encouraged after the statementmade by the representative of the ANC. The movement to boycott
these so-called elections, co-ordinated by the United
Democratic Front, comprising more than 600organizations with a common purpose, is additional proof of the
unity and determination of the South African people
once and for all to put an end to the Pretoria regime.
This great movement deserves our full support and
admiration, and it must be seen as an invitation for
concerted international action which, above and beyond mere words and declarations, will bring effective
pressure to bear and thus mark the beginning of the end
of this disgrace to mankind.

60. The bogus constitutional reforms by South
Africa confer half-baked pseudo-rights on the Coloured
people and the people of Asian origin in South Africa
and legalize the deprivation of any rights whatsoever
for the indigenous black population, comprising three
quarters of the population. They seekto perpetuate this
shameful, inhuman system of apartheid. The statements made at times by certain delegations that the
constitutional reforms in South Africa are a step in the
right direction are absolutely groundless.

55. Mr. KRAVETS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) [interpretation from Russian]: Sir, allow me
first to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We are convinced that under
your wise and able guidance the Council will successfully discharge its responsibilities.

61. Like the overwhelming majority of States Members of the United Nations, the Ukrainian SSRbelieves
that the nefarious manoeuvres of the racist regime of
Pretoria and cosmetic prettying up of the policy and
practices of apartheid are an affront to the conscience
of mankind; they trample underfoot elementary human
rights and fundamental freedoms and grossly violate
the principles and norms of international law.

56. We should also like to pay tribute to the representative of the United States,who presided over the
Council last month.

which is a heinous international crime
anda sinister threat to international peace in the region,
cannot be transformed into a democratic system. Only
its total elimination will mark the beginning of progressive reforms in South Africa.

62. Apartheid,

57. Despite the clearly and unequivocally expressed
will of the international community in its decisive condemnation of the farce of constitutional reforms in
South Africa, the Pretoria racist regime intends to hold
so-called elections, on 22 and 28 August, and officially
to implement the “new” constitution of South Africa.

63. The implementation of the policy of apartheid
would be impossible without the all-round assistance
given to the South African racists by the United States
of America and a number of other Western countries.
The American Administration’s policy of “constructive engagement” with South Africa, the diplomatic
cover-up and the political support of the Pretoria racists
by the United States internationally-including in the
Security Council, where the United Statesand some of
its allies block the adoption of truly effective measures
against the illegal apartheid regime-the broad-based
economic and nuclear collaboration between the
United Statesand South Africa, the contravening of the
many United Nations decisions and appeals by the
international community-all have acted as guarantees
for the inhuman systemof apartheid and made it invulnerable.

58. The General Assembly, in its resolution 38/11,
adopted on 15 November 1983, the Organization of
African Unity and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, in documents issuedthis year, categorically
rejected these manoeuvres by the South African racists
as running counter to the principles of international law
and the fundamental provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations. They indicated that the results of the
white referendum had no validity whatsoever and that
the imposition of the proposed constitution would inevitably lead to an aggravation of tension and conflict in
South Africa and in southern Africa as a whole. The
election of “Coloured” people and people of Asian
origin to the South African parliament, pursuant to the
odious plot of the racist Government of South Africa,
6

64. The Ukrainian SSR decisively rejects the criminal
system of apartheid and any manoeuvres aimed at
keeping it going. We express full solidarity with the
peoples of South Africa and Namibia and their national
liberation struggle led by the ANC and the South West
Africa People’s Organization. We unreservedly support the adoption of effective measures to eradicate
apartheid, including the adoption by the Council of
comprehensive binding sanctions against South Africa
in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

soever and that the enforcement of the proposed constitution would inevitably aggravate tension and conflict in South Africa andin the whole of southern Africa.
70. This so-calledconstitution createsthree houses in
Parliament: a house for the whites, a house for the
representatives of the Coloureds and a house of deputies for persons of Asian origin. It ignores the very
existence of 24 million black Africans who are denied
the right to citizenship in their native land.
71. As the Council is aware, this is not the first misdeedby the apartheid regime. Its very existenceis but a
long successionof pretences, and the dastardly laws
that now constitute its arsenal of repression against the
black majority of the South African people have not
come about only today. I shall cite some of them: the
South Africa Act of 1909,which confiscated all power
for the white minority and denied African blacks their
most elementary rights, in particular their inalienable
right to a fatherland; the Group Areas Act of 1948,
which instituted segregation in residential areas and in
work places; the Population Registration Act of 1950,
which divided the people into racial categories and
made it obligatory for Africans to hold identification
cards known as passesthat must be presented at all
times and in all places. Finally, I do not think there is
any needto recall the birth certificate of the Republic of
South Africa, which as everyone knows was created in
1961following a racist referendum limited exclusively
to a white electorate.

65. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Benin, I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
66. Mr. OGOUMA (Benin) [interpretation
from
French]: Mr. President, at the outset I should like to

expressmy gratitude for the honour you have conferred
upon me in allowing me to address the representatives
of States members of the Council at a time when it is
considering the question of the so-called new racial
constitution of South Africa. We are indeed pleased to
see you presiding over the work of the Council this
current month. As a worthy son of Africa, and more
specifically of the great Burkina Be people, with which
my people is honoured to share the same ideals of
peace, prosperity, freedom and dignity, and with your
qualities and skills, you are very well placed not only to
understand the tribulations of our oppressed brothers
of South Africa but also to induce the Council to face up
to its responsibilities in the struggle the international
community is waging against racism and apartheid.

72. The most deplorable consequences of all these
misdeeds were the 1960Sharpeville massacre and the
1976 Soweto massacre. Despite the magnitude of the
means of repression of the racist regime, the black
people have constantly struggled heroically to assert
their rights. They will certainly foil this latest provocation, as they have past provocations,

67. I should like to offer your predecessor, the representative of the United States,our congratulations on
having conducted the work of the Council last month.
68. As if all the crimes it has committed thus far have
not already exceeded all bounds, as if we could still find
in the world an individual or State that could believe
all its lies, the racist clique of Pretoria has once again
been cynically preparing to add a charade to all its
misdeeds. What other word is there for this masquerade
the apartheid regime intends to conduct in the near
future? What can we call this electoral referendum
in which more than 73 per cent of the population has
not been asked to participate, the purpose of which
is merely to strengthen a system that has been so condemned, the apartheid system?

73. The recent charade was merely an act of desperation, a last-ditch attempt by the racists to protect
themselves from the death-blows being dealt by the
resistance of the South African freedom fighters. By
giving limited political rights to Coloureds and persons
of Asian origin, the so-called constitution imposes on
them conscription into the racist South African army
and seeks to break the united front that blacks, Coloureds and Asians have always formed against oppression, thus obliging the oppressed to take up arms
against the oppressed.
74. Above and beyond this cynicism we cannot fail to
see a confession here: a confession of weakness, if not
failure, by a regime which to keep itself going needs to
divide, which to survive needs to pursue its inhuman
policies of repression and needs more cannon fodder.

69. A category of people, the Coloureds and persons
of Asian origin, will be voting in the near future, in
implementation of the so-called new constitution of
South Africa, which has been unanimously condemned
by the entire international community and in particular
by the General Assembly, which in its resolution 38/l 1
of 15 November 1983 rejected the so-called constitutional proposals as contrary to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and declared that the
results of the referendum were of no validity what-

75. But this confession could not be stated. Quite
the contrary: a shameful propaganda campaign was
launched in an effort to pass off the so-called constitutional proposals as reforms of the apartheid sys7

I

tern. But unfortunately apartheid, even in a reformed
version, is still apartheid, it is still a crime against
humanity and it is still as reprehensible. Apartheid cannot be touched up; it can only be destroyed.

is seeking, little by little, to liquidate the so-called inferior races; it will never change its nature. That is why
the so-called constitutional reforms the white racists of
South Africa are talking about are part of a public
relations exercise designed to legitimize a regime which
has been deplored by the entire international community and to lessen the wrath that Governments and
peoples which cherish peace, justice and freedom have
shown against this odious and anachronistic system.
The use of Coloureds and people of Asian origin-who
had been purely and simply relegated to the ranks of the
inferior-against
the blacks is an injustice and a crime
against the conscience of mankind.

76. It is up to the Council, like the General Assembly,
categorically to reject this sham, which merely institutionalizes apartheid. It is up to the Council to impress
upon the South African racists that only the complete
eradication of apartheid and the establishment of a
democratic society free of distinctions as to race, based
on the principle of majority government, with full and
free exercise of the right to vote by all adults in a united,
non-bantustanized
South Africa, can lead to a just and
lasting solution to the explosive situation prevailing in
South Africa,
77.

Ready for the revolution;

83. The shameful stubbornness of South Africa-now
legendary-in
flouting the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly cannot and shall never conquer our
commitment and our determination to see justice and
peace triumph throughout the world, and especially
in that part of Africa. Therefore, we shall never tire
of reacting whenever the racist, minority, unrepresentative regime of South Africa commits criminal acts
against our South African brothers. The purpose of the
present debate, as we have said many times before, is to
call on the Security Council to continue to shoulder its
responsibilities by using all the resources conferred on
it by the Charter of the United Nations when international peace and security are threatened.

the struggle continues.

78. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Congo.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
79.

Mr.

SAMORY
(Congo) [interpretation
from
I should like, first of all, Sir, to say that it is a
real pleasure and an agreeable duty for me to offer you
my delegation’s congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month of August,
a very decisive month, since it calls upon our struggling
brothers in South Africa and the entire international
community to prepare themselves to foil the latest plot
now being hatched by the racist regime of Pretoria. In
doing so, I wish to stress our legitimate pride in seeing
the representative of Burkina Faso, a friendly sistercountry with which my country is united by very recent
links of solidarity and co-operation, assuming with enthusiasm the weighty task of presiding over the Council
at such a decisive time. Your personal qualities, combined with the seriousness you have always demonstrated, are a guarantee of the success of the current
deliberations.
French]:

84. Yesterday [254&h meeting] we listened with indignation to the snide comments made by the representative of South Africa. They deserve no comment from
us, except the scorn they warrant. We wish only to
remind that representative that apartheid is a crime
against human conscience and dignity. Therefore, the
international community must take full cognizance of
that crime in order to castigate it. What we are considering today is not a South African domestic problem; it
is neither more nor less than a formula aimed at making
apartheid more sophisticated and at lulling the international community.
85. General Assembly resolution 38111 of 15 November 1983 is more relevant than ever before. The
elections to take place on 22 and 28 August, we are
convinced, have been causing and will continue to
cause a real exacerbation of social tension among the
South African populations. The international community has condemned the very principle of these socalled constitutional reforms; it must be consistent and
must strongly condemn their implementation.

80. I should also like to pay tribute to your predecessor, the representative of the United States, whose
leadership of the work of the Council last month was
outstanding.
81. The purpose of the present meetings is clear. This
Council, as many who spoke before me have already
stressed, must reaffirm forcefully and solemnly the
international community’s condemnation of the South
.African regime and its obstinate determination to implement so-called constitutional reforms.

‘86. The international community, through the Council, has now been called upon to act. My delegation is
convinced that, at the end of the current debate, based
on the purposes and principles of the Charter, it will
take the appropriate counter-measures that will strip
any legitimacy from the pernicious manoeuvres of the
racist regime of South Africa.

82. Everyone knows that South Africa has been one
of the most serious problems for the world conscience
since the end of the Second World War. The segregationist regime-apartheid-which
has ruled there since
1948 is nothing less than modern-day nazism. Having
established domination of the white race over the nonwhite races, apartheid, like nazism, has persecuted and

87. Let me say a few words about the situation in
Namibia and Angola; where South Africa-for
it is
8

always South Africa-defies
the international community, blithely flouting international law and ethics, to
say nothing of the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations. We wish merely to reaffirm Congo’s position,
that there can be no linkage of any kind between the
presence of Cuban troops in Angola and the process
leading to the independence of Namibia, The Namibian
people’s right to independence is just and legitimate,
That independence is inevitable and imminent. South
Africa’s delaying tactics will be overcome by the combined efforts of the international community and the
heroic people of Namibia.

Sri Lanka has over a very long recorded history, going
back 2,500 years, extended the spirit of loving-kindness
to bring help and succour to all humanity, especially in
times of need. It is in accord with those noble traditions
of the oneness and unity of all mankind that our people
have been nurtured, The practice of distinguishing between man and man is repugnant and abhorrent to our
way of thinking and acting.
95. The concept of liberty, justice and equality demands an appreciation of the dignity of man. All Member States subscribing by word and deed to such ideals
must surely speak out against a practice that makes
invidious distinctions based on the colour of one’s skin.
The very concept of dividing mankind on the basis of
skin pigmentation reveals immediately an immaturity
of understanding and lack of appreciation of mankind’s
greatest cultural inheritance-namely,
his dignity as a
human being. A community or State which refuses to
recognize the dignity of man must surely wander into
the wilderness in the course of time and perish there,
unwept and unsung.

88. Finally, the delegation of Congo, having taken
note of the draft resolution submitted by Burkina Faso,
Egypt, India, Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru and
Zimbabwe [S/16700], supports it fully and calls for its
adoption by the Council.
89. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Sri Lanka,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

96. Over 70 per cent of the inhabitants of South Africa
cannot be bypassed by the mainstream of twentiethcentury society, and it is our moral duty to speak up for
them at this moment of history. The United Nations
helped rapid decolonization and the establishment of
States on the basis of the inherent right of all men to
determine their own systems of government without let
or hindrance from outside and external pressures. The
right to self-determination can be established to the full
satisfaction of that term only in a milieu where human
dignity and human rights are respected and preserved.
In terms of that definition, the constitution of a State
must, while assuring the right of the State to its sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence, assure
all the citizens, without distinction, their inheritance as
human beings of their rights and privileges, enshrined
for all time in the Charter of the United Nations, on the
basis of principles for which men have fought and laid
down their lives.

90. Mr. WIJEWARDANE
(Sri Lanka): I take this
opportunity, Sir, to thank you, and through you the
members of the Council, for giving me this opportunity
of addressing the Council on the question of South
Africa.
91. It is also my pleasant duty to extend to you our
congratulations and good wishes on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of August. My delegation
is confident that, under your wise counsel and guidance, and with your known diplomatic skills, the deliberations of the Council will see to it that the entire
international
community is satisfied that justice and
impartiality will prevail.
92. It is my pleasure also to thank Mrs. Kirkpatrick of
the United States, the President of the Council for the
month of July, for the able manner in which the work
was guided during that month.

97. The nation which plays host to us in New York is
but one striking example of the principle that “all men
are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights”. My country imbibed this message through the intervention of a distinguished American citizen, who, in the latter part of the
nineteenth century, through his ministrations to the
indigenous population, aroused in them a dignity and
determination to take Sri Lanka along the peaceful path
to regain its sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.

93. My delegation has asked to speak to support the
Member States that have already addressed the Council
rejecting the so-called constitutional
reforms of the
Pretoria regime. The subject we are discussing was the
focus of the attention of the international community
during the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly, when the Assembly by an overwhelming majority
adopted resolution 38/11 of 15 November 1983 which
categorically rejected the “ ‘constitutional proposals’
and all insidious manoeuvres by the racist minority
regime of South Africa further to entrench white minority rule and apartheid”.

98. We are passing through the last years of a century
distinguished in the annals of human history for its
liberal thinking, and with the next millennium on our
doorstep it is our duty and obligation to the rest of our
fellow human beings, wherever they are fighting oppression and tyranny, to help them stand on their own
feet at the earliest possible opportunity so that they may

94. My delegation was one of the sponsors of that
resolution. Sri Lanka has time and again spoken out in
all forums against discriminatory practices which violate the ethics of human conduct, and it is totally opposed to distinctions based on class, creed and colour.
9

join the mainstream of human endeavour to give the
world, our planet, an environment we can all be proud
of.
99. It is in a spirit of compassion for the vast majority of the South African people that we point out to
the Government of South Africa that it should not halt
this march of mankind by perpetuating distinctions between its citizens on the basis of skin pigmentation,
If the Government of South Africa is committed to
hastening the progress of all its people to the goal of a
democratic and egalitarian society, as it professes, it
must choose the right modality for hastening that progress. It must remember that a minority cannot impose
authoritarian
rule on a majority people in any form,
guise or design.
100. The Government of South Africa would do very
well to remember that by its policies it is perpetuating
its isolation from the community of nations, Let not that
isolation be total in the future.

105. The raison d’&tre for the system of apartheid is
the unlimited exploitation of the large majority of the
non-white population by the white minority. At the
same time, apartheid ensures conditions favourable to
the exploitation of the African work-force and also to
the interests of the foreign accomplices of the Pretoria
regime and their monopolies, by the use of methods
which elsewhere are no longer legally admissible.
106. The apartheid theories are being carried out in
the policy of the Pretoria regime by means of many
reprehensible measures: systematic segregation, the
programme of bantustanization,
and violation of the
political and civil rights of the non-white population.
Any opposition or resistance to these measures by the
people results in cruel punishment. Administrative
repression, arbitrary action, violence and murder are
used against the opponents of apartheid and fighters for
racial equality.
107. Such are the concrete manifestations of upartof Pretoria is doing all it can
to maintain the system of apartheid in spite of the
increasing opposition at home and protests from
abroad. This is also the purpose of the so-called constitutional reforms approved by a whites-only vote on
2 November 1983. It is intended to drive a wedge’ between the oppressed victims of apartheid, to expand, at
least partially, its social basis, so as to include in the
repressive apparatus other groups of the population and
make apartheid more acceptable to some strata of the
population of Western countries. It is an attempt to
hoodwink public opinion, which has been rightfully and
resolutely condemned by the Organization, with the
exception of some Western States, and by the entire
international community.
Such manoeuvres confirm
the justification of resolute forms of struggle for the
consistent eradication of apartheid, including armed
struggle.
heid. The Government

101. My intervention now is to add the voice of Sri
Lanka to the international chorus that vibrates and
reverberates in all the councils of nations demanding
freedom, justice and equality as the inherent right of the
70 per cent of South Africans left out in the cold. Our
deliberations, hopefully, will result in a common response from the Council, demanding that South Africa
abandon its so-called constitutional reforms and be
guided by its conscience and introduce such reforms as
would confer upon all its citizens, without distinction,
the dignity and rights that they must enjoy.
102. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia, whom I invite to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
103. Mr. C&AR (Czechoslovakia): Sir, let me thank
you and all the other members of the Council for giving
me this opportunity
to express the position of the
Czechoslovak delegation on the issue before the Council. At the same time, I congratulate you on your
assumption of the important and responsible office of
President of the Council and express my conviction that
your professional and personal qualities are a guarantee
of your successful conduct of this office in the spirit
of the progressive, non-aligned and peaceful policy of
your country.

108. This struggle has become even more inevitable
because apartheid does not confine itself to acts of
oppression and repression in South Africa, but carries out attacks on other States. The Pretoria rCgime,
using naked armed force, is continuing to occupy Namibia illegally and to prevent the Namibian people from
exercising its rights to self-determination.
In the interests of the United States strategy directed against the
progressive development of Angola, it has made inadmissible and totally illegal demands linking the issue
of granting the Namibian people independence with the
withdrawal of the internationalist
Cuban forces in
Angola. The rulers of South Africa can take credit for
the many acts of direct armed aggression and subversive activities which have been carried out against independent African States. The broad-scale aggression of
the Pretoria rdgime has led to a situation in which the
southern part of Africa has been turned into a dangerous hotbed of international tension.

104. The negative internal and international consequences of the racist policy of apartheid pursued by the
Government of South Africa have been on the agenda
of the leading bodies of the Organization practically
since its very establishment. The Security Council, too,
is compelled to deal with a number of manifestations of
the apartheid policy, which treads underfoot the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law and threatens international peace and security.

109. The factor enabling Pretoria to carry out, and in
many respects to strengthen, the system of apartheid,
10

with all its aggressive consequences for other countries, is the political, diplomatic, military as well as
economic support by the United States, certain Western States and Israel. Particularly encouraging and, one
might say, life-giving for the maintenance of that systern is the policy of the so-called constructive engagement pursued by the United States Government and
adopted by some of its allies. Clearly, it did not help
eliminate apartheid or reach a lasting just settlement
of the situation in southern Africa. On the contrary, it
represents a serious obstacle to the adoption and implementation
of effective measures by the United Nations and, specifically, the Security Council, that would
lead to the elimination of apartheid in accordance with
the will of the international
community.

Minister of South Africa to several Western European
countries offered evidence of this.
111. The Czechoslovak people and Government resolutely reject the crimes of the system of apartheid and
are in full solidarity with the struggle of the people of
South Africa against racial oppression. They condemn
all attempts by Pretoria at introducing
any cosmetic
changes of apartheid, and similar manoeuvres, such
as the so-called constitutional
reforms. They are convinced that these measures will lead to a further limitation of fundamental human rights of the large majority
of the South African population, to a further deterioration of the situation in that country; that these measures will create increased tension and delay possibilities for resolvinn the serious Droblems created bv
South Africa’s aggressive polici&s in the southern pak
of Africa. Czechoslovakia fully associates itself with
the content of General Assembly resolution 38111, of
15 November 1983, and it will support such measures
adopted by the Security Council that will constitute a
reaffirmation and further elaboration of that resolution.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

110. The Western States co-operating with South
Africa are willingly accepting Pretoria’s argumentation
about the process of gradual changes in the system of
apartheid within the so-called constitutional reforms
and thus justify their open co-operation with South
Africa in all fields and even its further expansion. The
course and the results of the recent trip by the Prime

11

,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UMTED

NATIONS

publications
ma> be obtained
from hookstnrcs
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nation\.
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprbs
des venter;. New York ou Gentve.

COMO

CONSECUlR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

sent en vente dam les librairies
et Its agences
de votre libraire
1x1 adressez-vous
B : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Nqciones
todas panes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLKCATIONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
esthn en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

w3w

depositaires
du
U&s.
Section

UNIDAS
y casas distrihuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn de Venras.

904x31?--Fobnrsry

1993-2,050

’
