S/PV.9235

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9235th meeting

Thursday, 5 January 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Cunha Pinto Coelho
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 29 December 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/1016)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-00700 (E)
*2300700*

S/PV.9235

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Expression of welcome to new members and of
thanks to outgoing members of the Security Council
The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Security Council this year, I should like to extend
my warm wishes on the occasion of the New Year to all
members of the Security Council, the United Nations
and the Secretariat.
In presiding over this first formal meeting of
the Council in 2023, I am happy to welcome the new
members — Ecuador, Japan, Malta, Mozambique and
Switzerland. We look forward to their participation in
the work of the Council. Their experience and wisdom
will be of invaluable assistance in the discharge of the
Council’s responsibilities.
I also take this opportunity to express the Council’s
gratitude to the outgoing members — India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico and Norway — for their important
contributions to the work of the Council during
their terms.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to Her Excellency Ambassador Ruchira Kamboj,
Permanent Representative of India, for her service as
President of the Council for the month of December
2022. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Kamboj
and her team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 29 December 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/1016)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
2/13

05/01/2023

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Adedeji
Ebo, Director and Deputy to the High Representative,
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/1016, which contains the text of a letter
dated 29 December 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ebo.
Mr. Ebo: I thank Security Council members for
the opportunity to brief them on the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the
chemical weapons programme of the Syrian Arab
Republic. I am conducting this briefing on behalf of
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, who is currently away from
the office.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the
new non-permanent members of the Council — Ecuador,
Japan, Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland. The High
Representative looks forward to working closely with
all of them on this important issue.
Since the Council’s previous consideration of this
matter (see S/PV.9207), and consistent with established
practice, the Office for Disarmament Affairs has been in
regular contact with its counterparts at the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on
its activities related to resolution 2118 (2013).
Efforts by the OPCW Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT) to clarify all outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration and subsequent declarations of
the Syrian Arab Republic have not progressed since the
Council previously met on this matter. Unfortunately,
all efforts by the OPCW Technical Secretariat to
organize the next round of consultations between the
DAT and the Syrian National Authority continue to
be unsuccessful.
As Council members were previously informed, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat provided the Syrian Arab
Republic with the list of pending declarations and other
documents requested by the DAT since 2019, with the
aim of assisting the Syrian Arab Republic in resolving
the current 20 outstanding issues. However, I have been
23-00700

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

advised that the OPCW Technical Secretariat has not
yet received the requested information from the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Due to this situation, and in pursuit of its ongoing
efforts to implement its mandate, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has informed the Syrian National Authority
of its intention to send a reduced team to conduct limited
in-country activities in the Syrian Arab Republic from
17 to 22 January. It is my understanding that the Syrian
Arab Republic has welcomed the intention by the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to send a reduced team
and has requested supplementary information in order
to make the necessary arrangements.
Full cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic with
the OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to closing
all outstanding issues. As has been stressed many times
before, due to the identified gaps, inconsistencies and
discrepancies that remain unresolved, the Technical
Secretariat continues to assess that, at this stage, the
declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic
cannot be considered accurate and complete in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. The
OPCW Technical Secretariat remains fully committed
to ensuring the complete implementation by the Syrian
Arab Republic of all its declaration requirements and
to assisting Syria in fulfilling its obligations under
the Convention, the OPCW policymaking organs’
decisions and resolution 2118 (2013). I want to take
this opportunity to reiterate the High Representative’s
support for the integrity, professionalism, impartiality,
objectivity and independence of the OPCW’s work.
With regard to the inspections of the Barzah
and Jamrayah facilities of the Scientific Studies and
Research Centre, I have been advised that the OPCW
Technical Secretariat will continue to plan the next
round of inspections, to be held in 2023. I regret to
inform the Council that the Syrian Arab Republic has
not yet provided sufficient technical information or
explanations that would enable the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to close the issue related to the detection in
November 2018 of a Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah
facilities. Neither has it received the information
requested from the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the
unauthorized movement of the two cylinders related to
the chemical-weapon incident in Douma on 7 April 2018
that were destroyed in an attack on a chemical-weapon
production facility. I call on the Syrian Arab Republic
to respond with urgency to all of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat’s requests.

S/PV.9235

With regard to the invitation to an in-person
meeting extended by the OPCW Director-General to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Syrian Arab Republic, I note that while the Technical
Secretariat was still awaiting a response from Syria
on the most recent version of the agenda, submitted in
December 2021, the Syrian Arab Republic suggested
holding a preliminary meeting in Beirut. Since then,
as Council members were previously informed,
communication between the focal points in charge of
the preparations for the meeting between the DirectorGeneral and the Syrian Minister has been reinitiated
by the Technical Secretariat, and the Syrian Arab
Republic has responded. With regard to the tripartite
agreement concluded between the OPCW, the United
Nations Office for Project Services and the Syrian Arab
Republic, it is my understanding that on 8 December
2022 all the parties finalized an extension for a period
of six months from 1 January up to and including
30 June.
I have been advised by the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission that it remains in the process of studying all
the available information related to allegations of the
use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
In the context, I understand that the Fact-Finding
Mission was deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic
from 6 to 12 November 2022 to conduct interviews
with witnesses regarding several of the incidents under
review. The Investigation and Identification Team is
also continuing its investigations into incidents in which
the Fact-Finding Mission has determined that chemical
weapons were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The Investigation and Identification Team
will issue further reports in due course.
With regard to the decision entitled “Addressing the
possession and use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
Arab Republic” (C-25/DEC.9), adopted on 21 April
2021, I have been informed that unfortunately the
Syrian Arab Republic has not yet completed any of the
measures stipulated in paragraph 5 of decision EC-94/
DEC.2. The OPCW Technical Secretariat will continue
to engage with the Syrian Arab Republic with regard to
their completion and to report to the OPCW Executive
Council, as mandated.
Any use of chemical weapons is unacceptable and
the absence of accountability for that use is a threat to
international peace and security and a danger to us all.
It is therefore imperative to hold accountable all who
would dare to use chemical weapons. As we start the

23-007003/13

S/PV.9235

The situation in the Middle East

new year, I state my sincere hope that Council members
will unite on the issue. The United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs stands ready to provide whatever
support and assistance it can.
The President: I thank Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We
also welcome the other new non-permanent members
of the Council — Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland
and Ecuador. We wish them every success and
productive work.
It is a shame that we are starting the new
working year with yet another meeting on the Syrian
chemical-weapons issue, whose complete lack of
added value has us fed up to the back teeth. Like other
Council members, we have said repeatedly that it is
pointless for the Security Council to discuss this topic
every month just for the record to please the domestic
political agendas of a number of Western countries.
It devalues the Council’s discussion and undermines
its authority. Given that the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
Fernando Arias, continues to invent excuses to avoid
coming to the Security Council for briefings, getting
done with the job every month with carbon copies of
the previous reports, we call for respect to be shown for
Council members’ time and for the schedule for these
meetings to be improved once and for all. Until then,
we see no point in engaging in substantive discussions
on the issue.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I would like
to join others in welcoming the new members of the
Security Council. We look forward to working with
them. My delegation is glad to see them aboard. And
we congratulate you, Mr. President. We cannot think
of a better, more experienced hand at the helm than
that of the Japanese delegation to lead us as we start
our new year. I would also like to thank Mr. Ebo for
his useful and informative briefing. I would like to
begin by saying that we also appreciate the efforts of
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) to provide credible and detailed
information about Syria’s progress, or lack thereof,
4/13

05/01/2023

towards the complete and verifiable elimination of its
chemical-weapons programme.
My Russian colleague said it is a shame to start our
new year with this discussion. I disagree. Tragically, it
is sadly fitting that we are yet again starting a new year
in the Security Council by addressing the Al-Assad
regime’s repeated use of chemical weapons and failure
to comply with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013).
It was positive news to hear that the Declaration
Assessment Team will be in Syria soon. We appreciate
that news. It is essential that the OPCW Declaration
Assessment Team be allowed to meaningfully resume
its work, and that is because many questions regarding
Syria’s declaration remain unanswered. Notably, the
regime has yet to provide a credible explanation for
the detection in 2018 of a scheduled chemical at the
Scientific Studies and Research Centre in Barzah. The
Al-Assad regime has also yet to provide a credible
explanation for the destruction of two chlorine
cylinders implicated in the chemical weapons attack on
Douma. And it has yet to provide documents repeatedly
requested by the Declaration Assessment Team since
2019, which would shed light on the regime’s chemical
weapons programme overall.
Despite the Russian Federation’s repeated assertions
in the Council that the OPCW Director-General has not
met with the Al-Assad regime, we note that in fact the
regime has stalled the scheduling of such a meeting
since June 2021. The Al-Assad regime and its Russian
enablers have complained that the OPCW experts have
exceeded their mandate, which is patently false. But
what else should we expect from Russia, a country
which itself has barely attempted to mask its own
pattern of chemical weapons use and disinformation?
It is hardly intrusive to demand the regime to
comply with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention, which it willingly joined in
2013 only to violate one of its core prohibitions shortly
thereafter. The OPCW and the United Nations have
concluded independently that the regime has used
chemical weapons on eight occasions, and the tireless
efforts of the Declaration Assessment Team have caused
the regime to amend its declaration 17 times. That is
hardly a pattern of behaviour that engenders trust in the
Al-Assad regime.
In conclusion, the United States once again calls
on the regime to comply with its obligations and
23-00700

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

immediately cease its obstruction of the OPCW expert
teams so that we can resolve the issue of Syria’s
chemical weapons use once and for all.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of Japan for assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I also warmly welcome Japan and all the
other new non-permanent members of the Council,
namely, Ecuador, Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland.
The three African members of the Council (A3) look
forward to working closely with them during their
tenure. We also pay tribute to India, the President of the
Council for the month of December 2022, and the other
outgoing members of the Council — Ireland, Kenya,
Mexico and Norway — and we cherish the work that
we did together over the past year. I have the honour
to deliver the following joint statement on behalf
of the A3, comprising Gabon, Mozambique and my
country, Ghana.
We thank the Deputy to the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Adedeji Ebo, for his briefing
and acknowledge the participation in this meeting of
the representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Türkiye.
We welcome the 111th monthly report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2022/1016), as well as the
submission to the OPCW of the 109th report of the
Syrian Arab Republic. We note with regret that, as
has been the case in recent times, there has not been
any significant development on this matter, which
we consider on a monthly basis. The lack of progress
towards a definitive resolution of the issues continues
to be a matter of concern to us. Considering the threat
chemical weapons pose to international peace and
security, the Council must adopt a pragmatic approach
to assist in the resolution of this matter, in accordance
with international law. To do so, we must constructively
support the OPCW in its efforts to verify the accuracy
and completeness of the declarations made by Syria’s
national authorities.
While we acknowledge the efforts that have been
made by Syria’s national authorities, including a sixmonth extension of the tripartite agreement until
30 June, and their reaction to the intention of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat to send a reduced team to conduct
limited in-country activities for a week this month, we
believe that much more could be done. We encourage

S/PV.9235

the Syrian Arab Republic to elevate constructive
cooperation with the Technical Secretariat, in line
with resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention, in order to help resolve, among others,
the following lingering issues: first, the organization
of the next round of consultations with the Declaration
Assessment Team; secondly, the 20 outstanding issues
that have been pending for some time now; thirdly, the
issue of detection of a Schedule 2.B.04 chemical at
the Barzah facilities in November 2018; and fourthly,
the full declaration of all chemical weapons and their
production facilities in the country’s possession,
including those not intended for purposes prohibited
under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We underscore the importance of the proposed highlevel in-person meeting between officials of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the OPCW, as such dialogue and
consultations among key players of the two sides could
foster the momentum needed and speed up the process
towards a conclusive resolution of the outstanding
issues. We hope that the two sides will expedite action
to prepare an early meeting.
In conclusion, the A3 collectively reiterates the call
for enhanced and constructive engagement between
the OPCW Technical Secretariat and Syria’s national
authorities, in order to urgently address all outstanding
issues that constrain meaningful progress in the full
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013).
Mr. Cunha Pinto Coelho (Brazil): At the
outset, I would like to extend a warm welcome to the
newly elected members of the Security Council and
congratulate Japan for assuming the presidency this
month. I would also like to thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo,
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for his briefing. I would also like to thank the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for his latest report (see
S/2022/1016).
Like in previous months, little seems to have
changed in the situation on the ground or in the
relationship between the Syrian Arab Republic and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, which reinforces our perception that there is
a mismatch in the frequency of these meetings. While
the Council should pay close attention to the progress in
the elimination of chemical weapons in Syria, holding
monthly meetings when there is little or no relevant

23-007005/13

S/PV.9235

The situation in the Middle East

development on the ground does not seem efficient, in
terms of both time and resources.
Brazil welcomes the efforts made to hold a meeting
between representatives of the OPCW and the Syrian
authorities in Beirut this past November. We regret,
however, that the meeting could not take place. Noting
the impossibility to conduct full rounds of consultations,
we welcome efforts to send a reduced team to conduct
limited in-country activities in Syria later this month.
Furthermore, we welcome the six-month extension of
the tripartite agreement between the United Nations
Office for Project Services, the OPCW and the Syrian
Arab Republic.
In the face of absence of relevant recent
developments in the Syrian chemical weapons file,
allow me to reaffirm our traditional positions on the
matter. Such weapons are utterly incompatible with
international humanitarian law and must therefore
have no place in the practices and doctrines of today’s
world. The use of such weapons violates international
agreements and poses serious threats to international
peace and security. Incidents must be addressed with
transparency and be subject to thorough and impartial
investigations, in accordance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Since this is the first formal
meeting of the Security Council for 2023, and Malta’s
first as an elected member, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank all Council members for their warm
welcome and the wider membership for the confidence
and trust that they have placed in us. We look forward
to engaging in an open and constructive manner over
the next two years and contributing to the work of the
Council in a meaningful way. I also congratulate Japan
on assuming the presidency of the Council for the
month of January. Last, but definitely not least, I thank
the Deputy to the High Representative of the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Adedeji
Ebo, for the briefing that he has just provided.
The lack of progress on this particular file remains
worrisome. Malta attaches great importance to the
universalization of the global norm on the prohibition
of chemical weapons, which is underpinned by the
Chemical Weapons Convention. There can never be any
justification for the use of those abhorrent weapons.
We call on Syria to cooperate with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
resolve all the pending queries related to its initial
6/13

05/01/2023

declaration. The Syrian Arab Republic must uphold its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention,
and that includes the settlement of all issues related to
its initial declaration.
Recalling resolution 2118 (2013), which was
unanimously adopted by the Council, we regret to have
to note that the list of pending declarations and other
documents that the Declaration Assessment Team has
been requesting since 2019 has not yet been provided
by the Syrian Arab Republic and that the declaration
submitted is inaccurate and incomplete. We also urge
Syria to agree on an agenda and engage with the
OPCW so that a meeting between the OPCW DirectorGeneral and the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs
can take place.
Malta fully supports the OPCW and its Technical
Secretariat. We would also like to underline our
support for the work of the Fact-Finding Mission and
its task of determining the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. We look forward to the publication of
additional reports on that work, including by the
Investigation and Identification Team. We should all
strive to uphold the international ban on the use of
chemical weapons. The lack of progress, as reported
by the Technical Secretariat and the OPCW, remains
a grave concern. We call on Syria to engage with the
OPCW and to present the necessary assurances on its
chemical-weapons programme in accordance with the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Let me begin by warmly
welcoming the five newly elected members to the
Security Council and wishing you, Mr. President, every
success in presiding over the Council for the month
of January. I want to assure you of my delegation’s
readiness to work together constructively. I also thank
Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
The repeated use of chemical weapons against
civilians by the Al-Assad regime is an affront to the most
basic rules of international society and should be met
with decisive action on the part of the Council. Syria’s
persistent lack of cooperation with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is
unacceptable. The declarations it has submitted are
neither accurate nor complete. It has refused to issue a
visa to a member of the Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT), despite paragraph 7 of resolution 2118 (2013),
which compels it to accept OPCW-appointed personnel.
Let us hope that the eventual visit of the reduced
23-00700

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

DAT team will bring about a change in the situation.
Syria refuses to respond to the list of 20 issues of the
Declaration Assessment Team, creating uncertainty
about its elimination of its chemical-weapons
programme. That is unacceptable, and we condemn
it. Syria’s lack of cooperation continues to block the
holding of a high-level meeting between the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Syria and the
Director-General of the OPCW. We encourage those in
charge of preparations to hold such a meeting as soon
as possible.
The use of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad
regime and the uncertainty about the chemical-weapons
programme are deeply troubling. We look forward to
the twenty-fifth round of consultations between the
Declaration Assessment Team and Syria to shed light
on those matters. Likewise, we await the results of the
ninth round of inspections at the Barzah and Jamrayah
facilities. We call on Syria to cooperate promptly and
honestly with the OPCW. We commend the Fact-Finding
Mission, which is continuing its activities determining
the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We also commend
the Office of the Investigation and Identification Team,
which is working to identify those responsible for the
use of chemicals as weapons in Syria. We look forward
to the publication of their reports. Albania reiterates
its full support for the objective, impartial and
professional work of the OPCW teams. We welcome
the decision adopted at the twenty-fifth session of the
Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention suspending the voting rights and privileges
of the Syrian regime owing to its non-compliance with
the Convention.
The use of chemical weapons by the regime in
Syria is a horrific act that should unite the international
community against such weapons and in ensuring that
those responsible are held to account. Albania will
continue to offer active support for the fulfilment of
the fundamental objective of the OPCW in 2023, which
is the final destruction of all declared stockpiles of
chemical weapons and a world free of them.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome our new colleagues, Ecuador,
Japan, Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland, to the
Security Council. We wish you, Mr. President, success
during your presidency of the Council this month. I also
thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo, Deputy High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for his briefing.

S/PV.9235

We would like to recall that the Secretary-General
opened the Chemical Weapons Convention for signature
in Paris in January 1993. It was signed at the time by
130 countries, indicating a broad consensus in the
international community, and making the Convention
one of our most important historical achievements in
the field of disarmament. However, the Syrian chemical
dossier is unfortunately still one of the most politicized
dossiers in the Council today, as we saw during the first
half of our current term on the Council. In that regard,
I would like to once again reiterate the firm position
of the United Arab Emirates in clearly rejecting and
condemning the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere and in any circumstances. Their use
constitutes a flagrant violation of the provisions of the
Chemical Weapons Convention and international law.
Making tangible progress on this dossier requires
engaging in a constructive dialogue. From that
standpoint, the United Arab Emirates stresses the
importance of communication and dialogue between the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and Syria. We call on the parties to work in a
spirit based on the principles that form the foundation
of the OPCW and its technical nature, including a
consensus-based approach and non-politicization.
In that context, we welcome the agreement to send a
reduced team to conduct limited activities in Syria this
month, and we hope that bilateral consultations will be
held as soon as possible.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates
emphasizes the importance of making progress on the
Syrian chemical-weapons dossier and all other dossiers
related to resolving the Syrian crisis.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate Japan and
wish you every success in presiding over the Security
Council for the month of January. I thank the Deputy
to the High Representative of the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Adedeji Ebo, for
his briefing.
Ecuador has closely observed the Security
Council’s meetings on the chemical-weapon situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic. We appreciate the work
of the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) in providing comprehensive,
reliable and independent information on the

23-007007/13

S/PV.9235

The situation in the Middle East

complete and verifiable elimination of the country’s
chemical-weapons programme.
Ecuador regrets the lack of progress, despite the
efforts made by the OPCW Declaration Assessment
Team, in clarifying all outstanding issues on the
Syrian declarations. In that regard, we hope that the
Team will be allowed to return to resume its work. It is
unacceptable that, nine years after Syria’s accession to
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on their Destruction, its national declaration still
cannot be considered accurate and complete. We call on
the Syrian authorities to remain committed to the full
implementation of their obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the respective Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2118 (2013),
and to cooperate fully and in good faith with both the
OPCW and its technical and investigative teams.
Ecuador supports the Technical Secretariat of the
OPCW and its technical teams, which, despite countless
obstacles, carry out their work in a professional manner,
while adhering to international standards. We firmly
believe that incidents involving chemical weapons must
be dealt with in a transparent manner and be subject
to thorough and impartial investigations in accordance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Ecuador expresses its solidarity with all the victims
of chemical-weapon attacks in Syria. We strongly
condemn the use of such weapons by anyone, anywhere
and under any circumstances.
One of Ecuador’s priorities for its 2023–2024
mandate is precisely the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. That and our historic commitments
to disarmament will also guide our contribution in
this organ.
Finally, as this is my first intervention in the
Security Council, allow me to acknowledge the work
of the elected members that have completed their term
of office — India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico and Norway.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to wish you, Mr. President, all
the best for your presidency. I would also like to express
my gratitude to all the members of the Security Council
for the kind words of welcome addressed to Switzerland
and the other incoming States. We look forward to
working with them and wish them every success.
8/13

05/01/2023

I thank Mr. Ebo, Deputy to the High Representative
of the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
for his detailed briefing.
As we begin our term in the Security Council,
Switzerland wishes to affirm its unwavering commitment
to respect for international law, including the Chemical
Weapons Convention. Throughout our presence in the
Council, we will work to support this important pillar
of our collective security. Ratified by almost all States,
including Syria in 2013, the Convention offers overall
protection against the threats and devastating effects of
chemical weapons. However, over the past decade, its
obligations have been repeatedly violated, particularly
in Syria. We call on Syria to comply with its obligations
as a State party and under resolution 2118 (2013).
One such obligation is Syria’s full cooperation
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). The OPCW’s monitoring activities
play a key role in achieving the common goal of
States — to completely exclude the possibility
of the use of chemical weapons. To that end, the
organization’s fact-finding missions and investigation
and identification teams must be able to operate on the
ground. Their work is fundamental, and their integrity
and professionalism are beyond doubt. Switzerland
wishes to stress its full confidence in the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its support
for all its missions.
Since April 2021, the experts of the OPCW
Declaration Assessment Team have been unable to enter
Syria. That is of great concern to us. We call on Syria
to allow the Team unhindered access to its territory
so that it can carry out the necessary investigations
and verifications. We are still not certain that the
chemical-weapons stockpiles have been completely
eliminated. There are currently 20 outstanding issues in
that regard, and only four have been resolved in almost
10 years. All those obstacles must be removed without
delay in order to verify Syria’s initial declaration.
Resolution 2118 (2013) was adopted unanimously.
Through it, the Security Council made a clear
commitment to ensure the non-use of chemical weapons
in Syria. For almost 10 years, regular Council meetings
have served to remind us of a central issue — preventing
the development, production, stockpiling, use and
transfer of such weapons and ensuring their destruction.
Those who use such weapons must be brought to justice;
23-00700

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

their impunity is unacceptable. That principle remains
crucial today.
Switzerland will continue to take the strongest
possible stance against the use and proliferation of
chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under
any circumstances. Our collective security and the
credibility of the instruments of the disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture that guarantee depend
on it.
Considering the frightening images of the effects
of chemical weapons, we can only say “never again”.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese): As
the first order of business, I would like to congratulate
Japan on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We welcome Ecuador, Japan,
Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland to the Security
Council as new non-permanent members. We look
forward to greater coordination and cooperation with
them and other members of the Council in order to
promote unity among Council members and effective
mandate implementation by the Council in the new year.
I thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo, Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for his
briefing. We also regret that the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) did not accept the invitation to brief
the Council.
China has consistently opposed the use of chemical
weapons by any country, organization or individual,
under any circumstances and for any purpose. We look
forward to a world free from all chemical weapons as
early as possible. There is no alternative to dialogue and
negotiation for resolving the Syrian chemical-weapons
issue. The Syrian Government and the OPCW
Technical Secretariat should strengthen engagement
and communication between them and move in the
same direction in order to settle any outstanding issues
promptly. In that regard, we welcome the successful
extension of the tripartite agreement among the Syrian
Government, the Technical Secretariat and the United
Nations Office for Project Services.
With regard to the meeting between the OPCW
Director-General and the Syrian Foreign Minister,
China encourages increased coordination between
the Syrian Government and the Technical Secretariat
in order to jointly advance the preparations for the
meeting. We also call on the Technical Secretariat

S/PV.9235

to fully consider the realities faced by the country
concerned and facilitate its participation in the twentyfifth round of technical consultations. The Technical
Secretariat must fully take into account the information
provided by the Syrian Government earlier on terrorist
organizations possessing and using chemical weapons.
Finally, China reiterates its call that the Council
reduce the frequency of deliberations on the Syrian
issue or consider combining the different tracks of
the dossier. That would enable us to adopt a holistic
approach to the Syrian issue and to make the Council’s
work more efficient.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to congratulate Japan on its assumption
of the functions of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January, and I would also like
to welcome all the new non-permanent members who
are at this table today for the first time. I thank Mr. Ebo
for his briefing.
As everyone knows, we are in this Chamber once
again because the Syrian regime used weapons of mass
destruction against its own population. Independent
investigations conducted by the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) have demonstrated this on eight occasions.
I recall that resolution 2118 (2013) was adopted
unanimously and that the reality of the deadly attack
on Ghouta in August 2013 has never been disputed
by anyone.
The lack of progress since then is frustrating, but
the responsibility for that lies exclusively with the
Syrian regime. It is the regime that stubbornly refuses
to cooperate, in obvious bad faith. It is the regime
that chose to derail the bilateral meeting scheduled in
November with the Technical Secretariat by setting
conditions that it knew were impossible to meet.
In the face of this, the Technical Secretariat is
making tireless efforts to implement its mandate. In
yet another attempt to make progress on the initial
declaration, the OPCW has informed Syria of its
intention to send a small team to the field in the near
future. We call on Syria to facilitate the deployment of
this team and to finally cooperate.
It is urgent that Syria shed light on its
chemical-weapons stockpiles, not all of which have
been destroyed. It is time for Syria to comply with its

23-007009/13

S/PV.9235

The situation in the Middle East

international obligations, which is the only way for it to
have its rights and privileges restored.
France will continue to pay close attention to
the conclusions of the forthcoming reports of the
Investigation and Identification Team on the attacks
in Douma and Marea. There must be no impunity for
the perpetrators of chemical-weapons use. The fight
against impunity is a priority for France and the basis
for the effectiveness and credibility of the prohibition
regime. We will continue to mobilize to this end.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
the United Kingdom join others in welcoming you
to the Security Council and assuring you of our full
support during the Japanese presidency of the Council.
We would also like to extend a warm welcome to
our colleagues from Ecuador, Malta, Mozambique
and Switzerland.
I would like to thank Mr. Ebo for his briefing
and the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for his
monthly report (see S/2022/1016).

05/01/2023

action to uphold resolution 2118 (2013) have been
consistently blocked in the Security Council. There has
also been a relentless disinformation campaign designed
to undermine the OPCW and protect the Syrian regime
from accountability for its crimes.
It is not too late to turn this around. We welcome the
Technical Secretariat’s latest initiative to send a reduced
team to Syria this month. This is an opportunity for the
Syrian regime finally to start to come into compliance
with its obligations. The responsibility rests with it.
We are approaching 10 years since resolution
2118 (2013) was adopted. As a Council we must insist
on its full implementation. This means the complete
destruction of Syria’s chemical-weapons stockpile and
accountability for the use of such weapons. As Mr. Ebo
said today, the absence of accountability is a threat to
international peace and security and a danger to us all.
As a Council, we cannot turn a blind eye; we too must
uphold our responsibilities.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

Last year we marked the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the entry into force of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Each of us has a responsibility to ensure
that it is upheld.

I thank Mr. Ebo for his briefing. Japan commends
the professional and impartial work conducted by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and its Technical Secretariat.

We all know the facts. Prior to the start of the conflict
in 2011, Syria had an extensive chemical-weapons
programme. In 2013, after multiple chemical-weapons
attacks, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2118 (2013). But it became clear that
Syria had retained a chemical-weapons capability in
contravention of resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical
Weapons Convention. And, worse than that, further
attacks took place. OPCW and joint United NationsOPCW investigations confirmed that the Syrian regime
used chemical weapons, including chlorine and sarin,
on at least eight occasions.

The use of chemical weapons should never be
tolerated anywhere, at any time, by anyone, under any
circumstance. Those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons must be held accountable.

These were shocking attacks by the Syrian regime,
designed to inflict mass casualties and extreme
suffering on its own people. Syria has since done
everything possible to deflect and deny OPCW efforts
to resolve the many serious gaps and omissions in its
chemical-weapons declaration.
And, as we have heard, Syria still today shows
its contempt for its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). Sadly,
over the last nine years, accountability and effective
10/13

It is regrettable that we have not seen concrete
progress on this file, and the most recent report by the
OPCW Director-General once again confirmed that
“the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab
Republic still cannot be considered accurate and
complete” (S/2022/1016, annex, para. 18).
Japan welcomes the joint statement delivered by
the French delegation at the twenty-seventh Conference
of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention last month. In the statement, 57 Member
States, including Japan, jointly reiterated their call on
Syria to resolve the numerous gaps and inconsistencies
in its declaration and live up to its obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
Japan urges Syria to fully comply with its
obligations under both the Convention and resolution
2118 (2013). The decision made at the twenty-fifth
23-00700

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

session of the Conference of the States Parties to
the Chemical Weapons Convention should be taken
seriously by Syria. Syria must engage in good faith
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat and provide all
required documents to resolve the outstanding issues
related to the initial and subsequent declarations
submitted by Syria.
We regret that all efforts during the past year to
hold the next round of consultations between the
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and the Syrian
National Authority have been unsuccessful. Syria
should take the necessary steps to facilitate the holding
of these consultations and refrain from making further
excuses to impede the entry of a DAT technical expert
to its territory.
We welcome the Investigation and Identification
Team’s continuing its investigations, including the
investigation on the Douma incident in 2018. We
sincerely hope its upcoming reports will lead to further
clarification of the incidents of use of chemical weapons
in Syria.
The use of chemical weapons in Syria poses a
serious threat to international peace and security and to
the global non-proliferation regime. Japan believes the
Security Council should remain seized of this matter.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): First and foremost, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on Japan’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I would also to congratulate the five new Council
members that joined the Council at the beginning of
this year. We stand ready to work with them in the
Council on questions pertaining to Syria.
We still believe that there is a need to rationalize the
Council’s use of its time and resources, and to not hold
discussions in the absence of developments requiring
the convening of such a meeting. The fact that five new
members have joined the Council gives us a reason
today to present a brief overview of Syria’s position on
aspects related to that issue. I would therefore like to
note the following.

S/PV.9235

First, the Syrian Arab Republic has repeatedly
condemned the use of chemical weapons by whomever,
wherever, whenever and under any circumstances. We
have always affirmed that we have never used such
prohibited weapons or toxic chemical materials.
Secondly, the first incident of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria took place on 19 March 2013, when
terrorist groups launched a bomb containing toxic
chemical material on Khan Al-Assal, in the Aleppo
governorate, killing 25 people, most of whom were
from the Syrian Arab Army. It also affected 110 people,
who were asphyxiated and lost consciousness. It is
regrettable that despite the fact that, at the time, Syria
presented an official request to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations to dispatch an independent team
to investigate that incident, no visit to the site took
place, and no investigation has been conducted to date.
Thirdly, the Syrian Arab Republic voluntarily
joined the Chemical Weapons Convention in September
2013. It concluded the destruction of all its stockpiles
and their production facilities in 2014, despite the
difficult situation in the country at the time. We were
careful to fully cooperate with the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and we
undertook to implement the Convention, even before it
entered into force.
Fourthly, over the past nine years, the Syrian
National Authority granted more than 500 entry visas
to officials from the OPCW Technical Secretariat. That
included all the teams from the organization that work
in Syria. We also facilitated 24 rounds of negotiation for
the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and 9 rounds
for the inspection of the Syrian Scientific Studies and
Research Centre. Furthermore, we facilitated several
visits of the Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) to Syria, the
most recent of which took place in November 2022. We
also approved repeatedly the renewal of the tripartite
agreement between Syria, the OPCW and the United
Nations Office for Project Services, thus facilitating
the work of those teams visiting Syria.
Fifthly, Syria welcomed the holding of high-level
negotiations between the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
the Head of the National Authority and the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW. We are looking forward to
negotiations being held as soon as possible after
agreeing on its agenda.
Sixthly, the Syrian Arab Republic has underscored
the illegal nature of the establishment of what is called

23-0070011/13

S/PV.9235

The situation in the Middle East

05/01/2023

the Investigation and Identification Team, given that
the Chemical Weapons Convention did not confer
upon the OPCW Technical Secretariat a mandate for
determining responsibility in the case of the use of
chemical weapons. That means that there has been
manipulation of the text of the Convention, with the
aim of conferring upon the Team an illegal mandate.
Thus, Syria does not recognize any conclusion of that
illegal Team.

behaviour and its dealing in good faith prove that it has
nothing to hide. Suspicion and denial by some Western
countries that are seeking to promote their well-known
political agendas will not lead to anything other than
more complications with the aim of obstructing the
closure of this dossier.

Regarding developments in the cooperation
between Syria and the OPCW, I would like to draw the
attention of those present to the following. Syria offered
access to all facilities to ensure the success of the visit
undertaken by the FFM team in November 2022. We
reiterated our appeal to ensure that the team publish its
report on the five incidents that were reported by Syria.
We called on the team to abide by the working document
that was agreed upon and to respect the provisions of the
Convention to uphold the principles of professionalism
and independence in its work, in particular as regards
maintaining the chain of custody for samples, holding
interviews with witnesses, examining documents and
registers and not relying on open sources.

Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): At the outset, let me join
other delegations in congratulating Japan, as well as
Ecuador, Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland, on
beginning their terms as non-permanent members
of the Security Council. We thank the Deputy High
Representative, Mr. Ebo, for his briefing. We also
commend the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Technical Secretariat
for upholding its independence, impartiality
and professionalism.

The report of the eighth round of inspections by
the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre
welcomed the significant cooperation and the access to
facilities granted by Syria to the inspection team during
that round and confirmed the absence of any prohibited
activities, in line with the Convention.
The Syrian Arab Republic submitted its 109th
report, dated 14 December 2022, which included the
activities mentioned regarding the destruction of
chemical weapons and their production facilities.
Syria welcomed the request of the Technical
Secretariat for a reduced group from the DAT to visit
the country and carry out limited activities during this
month. That shows the commitment and determination
by Syria to cooperating with the DAT. We look
forward to that visit, and we do hope that it will yield
successful results.
In conclusion, Syria reiterates its commitment
to ongoing cooperation with the OPCW to close this
dossier. We call on the Technical Secretariat of the
OPCW to demonstrate professionalism and neutrality.
We also call on Member States to deal with this dossier
in line with its technical nature, to refrain from its
politicization and to not jump to premature conclusions.
Syria also underscores the fact that its responsible
12/13

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.

The latest report of the OPCW Director-General
(see S/2022/1016) shows that the outstanding issues
around the Syrian regime’s initial and subsequent
declarations persist. Owing to the gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies that have been identified and
remain unresolved, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
still cannot consider Syria’s declaration accurate and
complete. Moreover, the Technical Secretariat’s efforts
to organize the next round of consultations with the
Declaration Assessment Team either in Syria or Beirut
have so far been unsuccessful. Furthermore, the
Technical Secretariat is still waiting for responses to
its inquiries regarding the regime’s chemical-weapons
production facilities and the unauthorized movement of
chlorine cylinders related to the 2018 Douma attack.
We look forward to receiving information at the next
Council meeting on the results of the limited in-country
activities to be carried out from 17 to 22 January in
Syria by a reduced team from the Technical Secretariat.
We call on the Syrian regime to fully cooperate with
the Technical Secretariat and to provide the necessary
information, as it is obligated to do under the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
The work of the Fact-Finding Mission and the
current investigations by the Investigation and
Identification Team are critical if we are to establish the
truth about the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We
therefore look forward to the completion of the ongoing
study and investigations by the Fact-Finding Mission
23-00700

05/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

and the Investigation and Identification Team, as well
as their next reports.
The use of chemical weapons is unacceptable under
any circumstances. It is our collective responsibility
to ensure accountability for that egregious crime and
to honour the hundreds of innocent lives lost to the
chemical-weapon attacks in Syria. Finally, as a neighbour
of Syria, we believe that the Council’s continued regular
consideration of Syria’s chemical-weapons programme
is a necessary and crucial item on the monthly calendar.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, both on Japan’s election
as a new member of the Security Council and on taking
over the Council presidency this month. I also want to
congratulate the other newly elected Council members,
Ecuador, Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland. We also
acknowledge India, one of the outgoing members, for
effectively and successfully completing its presidency
in December. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank all the outgoing elected members for their
diligent and commendable work over the course of their
two-year terms as Council members.
There have been no new developments since the
previous meeting held on this issue (see S/PV.9207).
Neither did Mr. Ebo’s briefing today include any new
points about the situation. Today’s meeting once again
makes it clear that the lack of progress and developments
revealed in the regular monthly repetitions on this
matter are wasting United Nations resources and
Council members’ time.

S/PV.9235

Iran supports the resolution of the open issues on
their own technical track in the OPCW through dialogue
and constructive cooperation between Syria and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). In order to achieve that, any investigation
must be impartial, professional, credible and objective
and fully compliant with the requirements and
procedures of the Chemical Weapons Convention. We
strongly reject all efforts to undermine the Convention
and the authority of the OPCW and call for a balanced,
full and non-discriminatory implementation of the
Convention. We continue to believe that politicizing the
Convention’s application and exploiting the OPCW for
political reasons jeopardizes the credibility of both the
OPCW and the Convention.
We commend the Syrian Arab Republic for its
positive engagement with the OPCW and believe that it
merits acknowledgement. It is also essential to address
the Government of Syria’s legitimate concerns, including
its position on the illegality of the establishment of the
Investigation and Identification Team, which was given
an unlawful mandate. Syria has regularly submitted its
monthly reports to the OPCW Director-General, most
recently its report of 15 December 2022, which included
a thorough account of its efforts to destroy chemical
weapons and their manufacturing facilities. We hope
that the high-level meeting between the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW and the Foreign Minister of Syria
takes place and that it will pave the way for the parties
to settle the unresolved issues.
The meeting rose at 11:15 a.m.

23-0070013/13
