Re11olution11 adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

latter on any basis and which would fail to recognize
the inalienable right oí the people of Zimbabwe to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Condemns the Governments of Portugal and
South Africa for their support of the illegal racist
minority régime in Southern Rhodesia ;
5. Condemns the activities of those foreign financia}
and other interests which, by supporting and assisting
the illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia,
are preventing the African people of Zimbabwe from
attaining freedom and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and calls
upon the Governments of the States concemed to take
all necessary measures to bring to an end such activities;
6. DrOIWs the attention of the Security Council once
again to the grave situation prevailing in Southern
Rhodesia, in order that it may decide to apply the
nccessary enforcement measures envisaged under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to take prompt and effcctive measures to prevent
any supplies, including oil and petroleum products,
from reaching Southern Rhodesia ;
8. Calls once again upon the Government of the
United Kingdom to take ali the necessary measures,
including in particular the use of force, in the exercise
of its powers as the a.dministering Power, to put an
end to the illegal racist minority régime of Southern
Rhodesia and to ensure the immediate application of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions ;
9. Calls upon the administering Power to report on
its actions in the implementation of the present resolution to the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
10. Calls upon ali States to extend ali moral and
material support to the people of Zimbabwe in their
legitimate struggle to overthrow the illegal racist régime and to achieve freedom and independence ;
11. Requests the specialized agencies concerned and
other international assistance organizations to aid and
assist the refugees from Zimbabwe and those who are
suffering from oppression by the illegal racist minority
régime in Southern Rhodesia ;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
study of the situation in Southern Rhodesia;
13. Decides to keep the question of Southem
Rhodesia on its agenda.
1468th plenary meeting,
17 November 1966.

2183 (XXI). Question of Aden
The General Assembly,
H aving considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Aden, 8 which includes, in addition to Aden, the Eastern and Western Aden Protectorates, and the Islands of Perim, Kuria Muria, Kamaran and other off-shore islands,
8 [bid.., chapter VI.

69

Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1949 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and
2023 (XX) of 5 November 1965, and the related
resolutions adopted by the Special Committee on 22
March and 15. June 1966,9
H aving heard the statements ot the petitioners,
H aving taken note of the declaration of the representati ve of the administering Power on his Government's readiness to co-operate with the United Nations
in the full implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions at the earliest possible time,
H aving taken note of the assurances given by the ·
representative of the administering Power, on 10 November 1966, 10 concerning the territorial integrity and
the unity of South Arabia as a whole,
Having taken note also of the statement by the representative of the administering Power, on 17 November 1966,11 that the United Nations mission will
have free and unimpeded contact with the representatives of ali shades of opinion in the Territory,
Taking note of the statement by the administering
Power that it will grant independence to the Territory
of South Arabia not later than 1968,
Having further taken note of ,the dcclaration by the
administering Power on the question of the termination
of all treaties and the removal of military bases by the
time of independence, and in particular of its commitment not to enter into any defence arrangement with
South Arabia,
Considering that the United Nations mission should
ha ve full freedom of action and unrestricted access to
all parts of the Territory and that the administering
Power should guarantee to the people the free exercise
of political rights and freedoms throughout the Territory,
Deeply disturbed by the reports issued by various
international humanitarian organizations on the maltreatment of political detainees and prisoners and by
the continuation of th"e military operations against the
people of the Territory,
Deeply concerned at the critica} and explosive situation which might threaten peace and security in the
area owing to the failure of the administering Power to
implement the relevant United Nations resolutions,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory of Aden, and the conclusions contained
therein, and endorses the resolutions adopted by the
Special Committee on 22 March and 15 June 1966;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory to self-determination and independence
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
3. Reaffirms paragraph 8 of the resolution adopted
by the Special Committee on 15 June 1966 and urges
the administering Power to implement it;
4. Further reaffirms that the only authority responsible to the United Nations for the full implementation
of the- United Nations resolutions with regard to the
Territory is the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and N orthern Ireland;
9 !bid., paras. 99 and 382.

1 0 !bid.,

Twenty-first Ses.non, Fourth Committee, 1633rd

meeting, paras. 8-14.
11 Ibid., 1636th meeting, paras. 2-10.

70

General Assembly-Twenty-fil'!lt Se!l!lion

5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee and the administering
Power, to appoint immediately a special mission to be
sent to Aden for the purpose of recommending practical steps for the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, and, in particular,
for the purpose of determining the extent of the United
Nations participation in the preparation and supervision
of the elections and submitting a report to him as soon
as possible for transmission to the Special Committee;
6. Requests the United Nations Special Mission on
Aden to consider recommending, inter alia, practical
steps for the establishment of a central caretaker government in the Territory to carry out the administration
of the whole Territory and to assist in the organization
of the elections ;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to take the
necessary measures, in accordance with paragraph 3
above, so that the United Nations Special Mission on
Aden can discharge its responsibilities on the basis of
the resolution adopted by the Special Committee on
15 June 1966;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all the
necessary assistance and facilities for the implementation of the present resolution ;
9. Decides to maintain the question of Aden on its
agenda.
1490th plenary meeting,
12 December 1966.

•

•

•

The Secretary-General, in pursuance of paragraph 5 of the
above resolution, appointed the members of the United Nations
Special Mis.1ion on Aden.12
The Mission will be composed as follows: Manuel PÉREZ
GUERRERO (Venezuela), Chairman, Mr. Abdul Satar SHALIZI
(Afghanistan) and Mr. Moussa Léo KEITA (Mali).

2184 (XXI). Question of Territories under Por•
tuguese administration
The General Assembly,
H aving examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories under Portuguese administration, 18
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also Security Council resolutions 163
(1961) of 9 June 1%1, 180 (1963) of 31 July 1963,
.183 (1963) of 11 December 1963 and 218 (1965) of
23 November 1965,
Recalling further General Assembly resolutions 1807
(XVII) of 14 December 1962, 1819 (XVII) of 18
December 1962, 1913 (XVIII) of 3 December 1963
and 2107 (XX) of 21 December 1965, also the relevant resolution adopted by the Special Committee on
22 June 1966, 14
12 See A/6636.
1 3 Official Records

of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l),
chapter V.
14 !bid., para. 675.

Deeply concerned at the critica! and explosive situation which is threatening peace and security owing to
the intensification of the measures of repression and
military operation against the people of the Territories
under Portuguese administration,
N oting with deep concern that the activities of the
foreign financia! interests in these Territories which impede the African people in the realization of their aspira tions to freedom and independence continue undiminished,
Further noting with deep concern that Portugal continues to use the aid and weapons that it receives from
íts military allies against the population of these Territories,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
the Territories under Portuguese domination to freedom and independence, in accordance with General Assem bly resolution 1514 (XV), and recognizes the legitimacy of their struggle to achieve this right;
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oí Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories under Portuguese administration and
endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained therein ;
3. Condemns, as a crime against humanity, the policy of the Government of Portugal, which violates the
economic and political rights of the indigenous population by the settlement of foreign immigrants in the
Territories and by the exporting of African workers to
South Africa;
4. Further condemns the activities of the financial
interests operating in the Territories under Portuguesc
domination which exploit the human and material resources of the Territories and impede the progress of
their peoples towards freedom and independence ;
5. Calls upon Portugal to apply immediately the
principie oí self-determination to the peoples of the
Territories under its administration, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and Security Council resolutions 183 (1963) and 218 (1965);
6. Appeals to ali States to give the peoples of the
Territories under Portuguese domination the moral
and material support necessary for the restoration of
their inalienable rights and to prevent their nationals
from co-operating with the Portuguese authorities,
especially in regard to investment in the Territories;
7. Recommends· to the Security Council that it make
it obligatory for ali States, directly and through their
action in the appropriate international agencies of
which they are members, to implement the measures
contained in General Assembly resolution 2107 (XX),
and in particular those mentioned in paragraph 7
thereof;
8. Requests ali States, and in particular the military
allies of Portugal within the framework of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, to take the following
steps:
(a) To desist forthwith from giving the Portuguese
Government any assistance which enables it to continue
its repression of the African peoples in the Territories
under its domination ;
( b) To take ali the necessary measures to prevent
the sale or supply of arms and military equipment to
the Government of Portugal ;
