VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

6. Expresses the view that measures to promote the
economic and social development of Anguilla are an
essential element in the process of self-determination and,
in that connection, calls upon the administering Power, in
close co-operation with the territorial Government, to
continue to intensify and diversify its programmes of
development assistance to Anguilla;
1. Requests the administering Power, in the light of the
observations, conclusions and recommendations of the
Visiting Mission, 36 to continue to enlist the assistance of
the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system, as well as other regional and international bodies, in the development and strengthening of
the economy of the Territory;
8. Further requests the administering Power to facilitate the participation of the Territory as an associate member of various organizations of the United Nations system,
as well as other regional and international bodies;
9. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to Anguilla at an appropriate time should
be kept under review;
IO. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch ofa visiting mission to Anguilla at an
appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/40.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling the inalienable right of all peoples to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 38/40 of 7 December 1983 on
the question of Western Sahara,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 37
Taking note of the report of the Implementation Committee of the Organization of African Unity on Western
Sahara, 38
Recalling resolution AHG/Res. l 04 (XIX) on Western
Sahara, 39 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
nineteenth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 6
to 12 June 1983,
1. Reaffirms that the question of Western Sahara is a
question of decolonization which remains to be completed
on the basis of the exercise by the people of Western
Sahara of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence;
2. Reaffirms that the solution of the question of Western Sahara lies in the implementation of resolution AHG/
36 A/AC.109/799, sect. IV.
37 Official Records of the General Asscmhli·. Thmr ninth Sesswn. Supp/emenl No. 23 (A/39/23), chap. X.
38 A/39/680, annex.

247

Res. I 04 (XIX) of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity, which
establishes ways and means for a just and definitive political solution to the Western Sahara conflict;
3. Requests, to that end, the parties to the conflict, the
Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Popular para la
Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, to undertake direct negotiations with a view to bringing about a
cease-fire to create the necessary conditions for a peaceful
and fair referendum for self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara, a referendum without any administrative
or military constraints, under the auspices of the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations;
4. Welcomes the efforts of the Organization of African
Unity and its Implementation Committee with a view to
promoting a just and definitive solution to the question of
Western Sahara in accordance with the resolutions and
decisions of that organization and the United Nations on
the question;
5. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations
to co-operate fully with the Organization of African Unity
with a view to implementing the relevant decisions of that
organization, in particular resolution AHG/Res. l 04
(XIX);
6. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western
Sahara as a matter of priority and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session;
7. Invites the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity to keep the Secretary-General of the United
Nations informed of the progress achieved in the implementation of the decisions of the Organization of African
Unity relating to Western Sahara;
8. Invites the Secretary-General to follow the situation
in Western Sahara closely with a view to the implementation of the present resolution and to report to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/41.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations40
and the action taken by the Committee in respect of that
information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the question. 41
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
I 963, in which it requested the Special Committee to
study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter and to
take such information fully into account in examining the
situation with regard to the implementation of the Decla39 For the text. see resolution 38140. para. I
40 Otfina/ Records of the Genaal AssemNi·. Thtr1i·-n1111h Semon. S11p,,/,•
men/ S,, .'./ (A 0 39!23). chap \'Ill
41 A ,q , I 9

248

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

ration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution I 514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 38/49 of 7 December 1983,
in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution
1970 (XVIII),
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government under
the terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information
under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that
Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General
the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
within a maximum period of six months following the
expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures, and to report thereon to the Assembly
at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/42.

Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
in Namibia and in all other Territories under
colonial domination and efforts to eliminate
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
Namibia and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and
racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the item, 42
Taking into consideration the relevant chapters of the
report of the United Nations Council for Namibia, 43
Recalling its resolutions I 514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV)
of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action
42 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Suppl,·ment No. 23 (N39/23), chap. V.
43 !hid., Supplement No. 24 (A/39/24), part two, chap. II, sect. C chap. Ill,
sects. D and G; and chap. IX, sect. C'.
4 4 See Report of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle o/
the Namibian People for Independence. Paris. 25-29 April /98.1 (Ai
CONF. I 20/13), part three.

for the full implementation of the Declaration, and 35/118
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the
Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other resolutions of the United Nations
relating to the item,
•
Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering
Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to promote the political, economic, social and educational
advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under
their administration and to protect the human and natural
resources of those Territories against abuses,
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the Paris
Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action on
Namibia, 44 adopted at the International Conference in
Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for
Independence,
Reaffirming that any economic or other activity which
impedes the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination of
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa and other colonial Territories is in direct violation of the rights of the inhabitants and of the principles of
the Charter and all relevant resolutions of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming that the natural resources of all Territories
under colonial and racist domination are the heritage of
the peoples of those Territories and that the exploitation
and depletion of those resources by foreign economic
interests, in particular in Namibia, in association with the
occupying regime of South Africa, constitute a direct violation of the rights of the peoples and of the principles of
the Charter and all relevant resolutions of the United
Nations,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Economic Declaration and other documents of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, 45
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the Bangkok Declaration and Programme of Action on Namibia, 40
adopted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 25
May 1984 at its extraordinary plenary meetings held at
Bangkok, and the conclusions and recommendations of
the Seminar on the Activities of Foreign Economic Interests in the Exploitation of Namibia's Natural and Human
Resources, organized by the Council at Ljubljana, Yugoslavia, from 16 to 20 April 1984,47
Noting with profound concern that the colonial Powers
and certain States, through their activities in the colonial
Territories, have continued to disregard United Nations
decisions relating to the item and that they have failed to
implement, in particular, the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970
and 38/50 of 7 December 1983, by which the Assembly
called upon the colonial Powers and those Governments
that had not yet done so to take legislative, administrative
or other measures in respect of their nationals and the
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly in
Africa, which are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put an end to such
enterprises and to prevent new investments that run
45 See N38/l 32-S/ I 56 7 5 and Corr. I and 2, annex.
46 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supple

men/ No. 24 (N39/24), part two, chap. III, sect. B.
47 Ibid., sect. D.
