United Nations

S/PV.5097

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

5097

th meeting
Thursday, 9 December 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Baali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Algeria)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Valle
Mr. Andereya
Mr. Li Song
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Trautwein
Mr. Akram
Mr. Baja
Mr. Dumitru
Mr. Denisov
Mr. Colomina
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Rostow

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Letter dated 8 December 2004 from the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2004/958)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-64019 (E)

*0464019*

S/PV.5097

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Letter dated 8 December 2004 from the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2004/958)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Mihnea Ioan Motoc, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Motoc to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/958, containing a letter, dated
8 December 2004, from the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), transmitting the Committee’s first report
to the Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Mihnea Ioan Motoc, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). I now give him the floor.
Mr. Motoc: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the floor and, more importantly, for affording me
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) the opportunity to
make this briefing to the Council, in what appears to be
a very tight December agenda. Before starting the
presentation proper of the first report of the Committee
to the Security Council, I would first like to express
my deep appreciation to all its members for their

2

constructive approach and valuable contributions to the
foundation and the initial activities of the Committee.
As Chair of the Committee, I would like to thank
all delegations for their hard work and express my
hope that our enterprise will continue in the same
positive spirit it has proceeded in thus far. A special
commendation should go to the wonderful people from
the Secretariat, from both the Department of Political
Affairs and the Department for Disarmament Affairs,
for their invaluable, competent support.
The efforts sustained in the period covered by
this report, 11 June to 5 December 2004, were
concentrated mainly on making the Committee fully
functional and operational before it starts consideration
of the first national reports submitted by Member
States pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). While the
Committee has been able to draw from the valuable
experience of similar subsidiary bodies, I would
venture to say that the subject matter of the
Committee’s work has an added degree of both
complexity and sensitivity. To a great extent, the
Committee is called upon to cover new ground.
On 28 April 2004, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1540 (2004), which
affirms that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, as well as their means of delivery,
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
Acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, the Security Council decided that States
should refrain from providing any support to non-State
actors that attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture,
possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery.
The Security Council also decided that States
shall adopt and enforce appropriate and effective laws
which
prohibit
any
non-State
actor
from
manufacturing, acquiring, possessing, developing,
transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery. The
Council further decided that States shall take and
enforce effective measures to establish domestic
controls to prevent the proliferation of such weapons
and their means of delivery. Controls include measures
to secure and protect such items, export and border
controls, law-enforcement efforts, and the development
and improvement of appropriate legislation and
administrative provisions.

S/PV.5097

The adoption of the resolution was preceded by
intensive consultations and discussions within and
outside the Security Council. Resolution 1540 (2004)
imposes binding, far-reaching obligations on all
Member States to take legislative and administrative
actions in accordance with their national procedures.
In that light, all States have to present to the
Committee a first report no later than six months after
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) — namely,
28 October 2004 — on the steps they have taken, or
intend to take, to implement that resolution. By
5 December 2004, only 86 States and one organization
had submitted their national reports. Therefore, with
the approval of the Committee, the Chairman has sent
to all Member States two notes reminding them of their
reporting obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) and
encouraging them to submit to the Committee their
first national reports. Annexed to the Committee’s
report are lists of countries that have or have not,
respectively, met their obligation to submit their first
national report.
In my contacts as Chairman of the 1540
Committee, I have had quite a few opportunities to
learn of the difficulties experienced by States Members
of the United Nations in compiling these first reports.
The Committee will look into further ways of dealing
with these kinds of situations.
There are already, in some of the reports,
indications that future assistance will be needed in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). It is our joint
responsibility to support all those who are willing to
embark, in good faith, on that path and to uphold nonproliferation objectives. I trust that the 1540 Committee
will be able to address demands for assistance effectively;
performance in terms of implementation will
undoubtedly increase significantly as a result.
The Committee, which is chaired by Romania and
has appointed three Vice-Chairmen — the Philippines,
Benin and the United Kingdom — decided to establish
three subcommittees with a view to sharing the task of
considering Member States' reports, with each
subcommittee covering an equal number of States,
according to alphabetical order; the Vice-Chairmen
each will chair a subcommittee.
Since its establishment, the 1540 Committee has
worked continuously, on both a formal and an informal
basis, to adopt the necessary initial documents to
enable it to become fully operational, namely the

guidelines for the conduct of its work and the
guidelines for the preparation of national reports to be
submitted to the Committee pursuant to paragraph 4 of
resolution 1540 (2004).
The 1540 Committee also adopted guidelines for
the hiring of the experts who will help the Committee
in the process of considering the national reports
submitted pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). On
1 December 2004, at its third formal meeting, the
Committee endorsed the recruitment of four experts.
Furthermore, the Committee decided that, in the
process of recruiting other experts, it would invite
further nominations of persons with expertise in the
required areas, particularly from the Asian and African
regional groups, which are not yet represented in the
context of the recruitment of the first group of experts.
When the process of the recruitment of experts
has been completed, the Committee will be fully
equipped to begin the substantial stage of its work,
namely the consideration of the national reports
submitted by Member States pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).
Cooperation is foreseen with international
organizations such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, the Nuclear Suppliers Group and
the Zangger Committee, as the 1540 Committee may
require future technical assistance from those
organizations. It is relevant to note that all the
organizations I have mentioned have made specific
offers in that regard, which were welcomed and deeply
appreciated by the 1540 Committee.
In the spirit of transparency that characterized the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) and represents an
integral component of the 1540 Committee's
guidelines, I have conducted, in my capacity as
Chairman, outreach activities vis-à-vis the United
Nations general membership and relevant international
bodies. On 15 September, I held an informal meeting
with the wider United Nations membership to offer an
update on the work of the Committee and to answer
questions pertaining to national reports, which, at the
time, were due in a little over a month.
I have also frequently made myself available to
the media. With the approval and consent of the
Committee, I have attended, during the past trimester,
several intergovernmental, regional and academic
conferences and symposiums, which has enabled the

3

S/PV.5097

Committee to keep various constituencies abreast of
developments in its activities. Conversely, reporting
back to the Committee, we were able to benefit from
feedback, evaluations and ideas pertaining to the
implementation of resolution 1540 from relevant and
informed circles. I wish to express gratitude to those
Governments and academic institutions that took the
initiative of fostering such constructive debate on these
issues, which are of such great importance to all of us.
In the same vein, I would like to inform the
Council of the upcoming availability of the web page
of the 1540 Committee. A dozen national reports have
been processed and translated and are awaiting posting
on the web.
These are, by and large, the factual highlights of
the report that is before the Council today. On behalf of
the Committee, I look forward to the cooperation of all
States as the Committee goes forward with its work in
the coming months.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Motoc for his comprehensive briefing.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank Ambassador Motoc for his report
to us on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Thanks to his
efforts, the Committee has now been able to establish
itself and take all the administrative decisions it needed
to ensure that its substantive work can proceed well.
Recent proliferation crises have highlighted the
need for coordinated action by the international
community. They have also shown that there is a need
to supplement the international commitments of States
with domestic legislative and regulatory measures and
also by effective control mechanisms.
The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), which
my country co-sponsored, was an important milestone
in the efforts of the international community. The
Committee is now going to be able to start considering
the national reports. As we know, half of the Member
States have already submitted their reports, and we
must encourage those countries that have not yet done
so to submit their national reports as soon as possible.
It is also important that countries that have technical
difficulties be able to get assistance they might need to
draft their reports. Reading the reports that have
already been submitted shows that overall, in our
opinion, they are of good quality. There are some

4

indications of requests for assistance in order to
implement the measures to meet the obligations in the
resolution.
I believe it is our duty to provide rapid follow-up
to the reports. When States have taken measures or
indicated that they are about to take measures to be in
compliance with the resolution, they should be
recognized as soon as possible. When they have
requested assistance, the Committee should help them
obtain such assistance from other Members of the
United Nations. France believes the Committee should
start work quickly, in a spirit of cooperation, in order
to attain its goals. To that end, we have begun
considering the reports that have been received,
particularly those to be considered by Subcommittee
III, of which we are a member.
As the reports are translated into the official
languages of the United Nations, and their substantive
consideration can begin, we will be submitting our
observations to members of the Committee and to the
experts for their information. We trust our contribution
will facilitate the effective and transparent work of the
Committee.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): May I thank the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), the Permanent Representative of Romania
to the United Nations, Ambassador Motoc, for his
detailed briefing on the initial results of the work of the
Committee he chairs. The documents recently adopted
by the 1540 Committee organizing its activity and the
approval of the group of experts will enable the
Committee to get down to the practical work assigned
to it by the Council, namely analysing the national
reports of States on measures to implement resolution
1540 (2004).
I would like to join in the appeal by the
representative of France to countries that have not yet
submitted their reports to submit them as soon as
possible. Having weapons of mass destruction fall into
the hands of non-State entities primarily for terrorist
purposes is one of the major threats to international
peace and to the national security of States. We are
convinced that the struggle against the proliferation of
such weapons must be waged on a collective basis,
strictly in accordance with the rules of international
law. We also believe the 1540 Committee must work in
close coordination and collaboration with the expertise

S/PV.5097

of leading organizations and structures that are active
in non-proliferation, primarily such organizations as
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Later, one might think about following a practice
similar to that of the Counter-Terrorism Committee of
the Security Council, namely to hold regular meetings
between the 1540 Committee and relevant regional and
international organizations.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): I also take this
opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for this open
briefing and thank Ambassador Motoc as Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) for its timely progress report
on the activities and decisions taken so far by the
Committee in implementing its mandate. Allow me just
to briefly note two points: first, it is important that the
general membership have ample opportunities to be
informed of developments in the work of the 1540
Committee in accordance with the spirit of utmost
transparency agreed upon by the Committee to
characterize the conduct of its work. These
opportunities will not only serve to keep Member
States abreast of what the 1540 Committee is doing,
but also sustain their interest in effectively
implementing the resolution.
At this stage, the Chairman’s report focused on
the organizational activities of the 1540 Committee. As
the Committee commences consideration of the
national reports submitted, it would to be useful for
Member States to be regularly updated both on positive
developments, as well as on difficulties that may be
encountered by Member States in the implementation
of the resolution.
My second point is that my delegation welcomes
the 1540 Committee’s approval of the recruitment of
the first four experts. We look forward to their early
appointment, to signal the start of the consideration of
national reports. As the reports continue to be
submitted and considered, my delegation fully supports
the decision taken by the Committee to invite further
nomination of experts in the necessary areas of
expertise, particularly from Asia and Africa. These are
the two regions where most developing countries are
situated, and the perspectives of their experts would
certainly be constructive and useful in the work of the
Committee and in effectively achieving the objectives
of resolution 1540 (2004).

Mr. Rostow (United States of America):
Resolution 1540 (2004) reflects a shared conviction
that States should keep the most dangerous weapons
and materials and delivery systems out of the hands of
non-state actors and terrorists. President Bush made
this point in his address to the General Assembly in
2003 and called on us all to act. Others did so as well.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is supposed to enhance
everyone’s security. That is why the United States is
committed to helping make the resolution an effective
non-proliferation tool.
While the resolution highlights the challenge of
preventing non-State actors and terrorists from
obtaining weapons of mass destruction, it also
addresses more generally the threat posed by the
proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, their related materials and means of delivery.
Resolution 1540 (2004) also makes specific reference
to catchall or user controls to ensure that States adopt
them, in order to prevent misuse of the devices and
materials specified in the resolution.
I would like to thank Ambassador Motoc and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for the statement and report.
The United States commends Ambassador Motoc and
his Mission colleagues for organizing and leading the
1540 Committee, a task which has not proved to be
simple. The Committee’s work is important. The
Committee should help ensure implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We are pleased that many
countries have submitted reports to the Committee and
welcome all the efforts to date to meet the resolution’s
requirements. We encourage States that have not yet
submitted reports to do so as soon as practicable.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): We join our colleagues in
thanking the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for presenting the first report on the activities
and results achieved by the Committee during the
period from 11 June to 5 December. We express our
deep appreciation to Ambassador Motoc, Chairman of
the 1540 Committee, for his efforts in advancing the
organizational aspects of the Committee, which have
not always proved to be a simple task.
Since this is the last opportunity which my
delegation will have to express its views on the
important work of the 1540 (2004) Committee in the

5

S/PV.5097

Security Council, I would like to address some of the
fundamental issues involved.
The scope and purpose of resolution 1540 (2004)
are clearly defined in its eighth, ninth and fourteenth
preambular paragraphs. Operative paragraph 1 of the
resolution is also self-explanatory:
“[A]ll States shall refrain from providing
any support to non-State actors that attempt to
develop, acquire, manufacture, possess, transport,
transfer or use nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons and their means of delivery.”
To that end, all States are required to adopt, enforce
and report to the Committee on the steps taken or
intended to be taken in accordance with their national
legislation and administrative procedures. It is
important to note that, as explicitly agreed in resolution
1540 (2004), those measures have to be achieved by
Member States through national measures.
As the Chairman’s report clearly indicates, the
Committee has got off to a good start. With the
adoption of necessary guidelines and the submission of
a large number of national reports by Member States,
including Pakistan, the Committee is now well placed
to begin in earnest the substantive work of considering
those national reports. However, by its very nature, the
work of the 1540 (2004) Committee will be complex
and difficult. Ambassador Motoc therefore not only has
our admiration, but also our commiseration for the
challenging tasks which lie ahead of him.
First, as we all know, there are no agreed
international standards in areas in which the
Committee would be examining the actions to be taken
by Member States. There are various levels of
adherence, acceptance and implementation of regimes
pertaining to nuclear, chemical or biological weapons
and means of delivery. Regardless of the number of
States parties, the level of national implementation in
the context of the Chemical Weapons Convention is
less than satisfactory, despite the fact that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) is a properly constituted and fully functional
organization equipped with specialized back-up and
support and aided by executive and deliberative bodies.
The OPCW has found it difficult to raise the level of
implementation of obligations by States even after the
lapse of seven years.

6

The case of the Biological Weapons Convention
is even more difficult. There is a provision for
verification of States’ compliance with their treaty
obligations, but at present there are no means to
determine violations of the Biological Weapons
Convention by some Member States, especially in the
context of alleged research and development of
defensive bio-weapons.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) is an important instrument. However,
its provisions are in several respects now unrelated to
reality. There are three nuclear-weapon States,
including Pakistan, that are not recognized by the NPT
but whose cooperation is obviously essential to
realizing the objectives of nuclear non-proliferation.
And, in the area of means of delivery, it is the most
difficult to define. There are no universally agreed
norms, let alone an international treaty on missiles and
other delivery systems.
Secondly, the Committee will have to grapple
with the largely unresolved issue of definitions that not
only will leave many legal and technical loopholes, but
will also create problems about where, when and how
the provisions of the resolution would be applied or
implemented by Member States. While the resolution
has tried to come up with certain definitions, many
questions remain.
Thirdly, there are other equally important
questions, such as the capacity of States in terms of
resources, qualified manpower and expertise that will
arise. All of us know of the vast differences in the
economic, industrial, financial, legal and trade profiles
of Member States, especially the differences between
the developed and the developing countries. Moreover,
administrative, legal and law enforcement capabilities
vary considerably among Member States. That has
become obvious in the context of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. It is therefore not surprising that
over 100 States, including developed countries, have
not yet been able to submit their national reports.
Fourthly, there are also valid questions regarding
the capacity of the 1540 (2004) Committee in the
context of its expertise, manpower, resources and,
more importantly, limited time frame. We wonder if the
Committee can do its job with only four experts. We
hope that the Committee will approve the hiring of
more experts, particularly from developing countries of
Asia and Africa, to assist in its work. Such a decision

S/PV.5097

would also help to dispel the widely held perception —
outside the Council, perhaps, if not inside — that the
whole process of drafting the resolution, the push for
its implementation and the composition of the
Committee’s experts and staff are being led by the
developed countries to the exclusion of a large number
of developing Member States. It is obvious that the
provisions of technical assistance that may be required
by some States will have to be sought from other States
or concerned international organizations, and not from
the Committee itself.
Fifthly, the Committee will have to ensure that it
does not infringe upon, or erode the authority, or
duplicate or complicate the work of established treaty
regimes and international bodies established under
them. In that context, it will have to recognize the
differentiated nature of the obligations of Member
States.
We hope that the Committee will keep some of
those complexities in perspective while it proceeds
with the consideration of national reports. Those
complexities will be compounded further if attempts
are made to enlarge the scope of the 1540 (2004)
Committee beyond its mandate to prevent the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by nonState actors, including terrorists. We hope that the
Committee, when considering national reports, will
keep its focus on that specific scope and the objective
of resolution 1540 (2004). Nor should it lose sight of
the fact that the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is, in the final analysis, inextricably linked
to the achievement of the disarmament of chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons and other means of
delivery.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): I want to thank Ambassador
Mihnea Motoc, Chairman of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for his very
thorough briefing. I would also like to commend him
and his staff for leading the Committee to the
conclusion of this important initial stage, aimed at
building the functional and operational capacities
required to start with its consideration of national
reports.
The Brazilian delegation welcomes
the
submission of the first national reports within the
period established in resolution 1540 (2004) and
encourages Member States that have not yet done so to

submit their reports to the Committee as soon as
possible.
Brazil is committed to the objectives set forth in
resolution 1540 (2004), which was adopted with a view
to addressing an existing gap in international law,
namely, the risk that terrorists and non-State actors
may acquire, develop, traffic in or use weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. In our
view, that objective is to be promoted on the basis of
international cooperation and by safeguarding the
integrity of multilaterally negotiated instruments, in
particular, the rights and obligations of their States
parties.
At the beginning of this new phase in the
Committee’s work, Brazil reaffirms its unequivocal
commitment to the cause of a safer world, in which
weapons of mass destruction — nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons — will no longer exist. We would
expect that, in parallel, concrete actions towards
effective disarmament by States possessing such arms
would also be pursued in good faith.
Mr. Colomina (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like to thank Ambassador Motoc for
the concise briefing he has just made and for his
excellent work and great efforts at the head of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).
Spain shares the concern of those who believe
that the possibility that non-State actors — terrorists in
particular — may acquire weapons of mass destruction
and related materials poses a real, serious and present
threat to international peace and security. We therefore
believe that it is necessary to take urgent action to
close the legal gap that results from the fact that
international non-proliferation and disarmament
instruments and regimes do not adequately address this
sensitive matter.
As part of the global struggle against terrorism
and of the process begun by resolution 1373 (2001),
Spain decided to co-sponsor resolution 1540 (2004)
and called for the establishment of a Council
committee to serve as a follow-up mechanism to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Spain would like to congratulate the States that
have already submitted national reports on the
measures adopted to implement resolution 1540
(2004). We encourage States that have not yet done so

7

S/PV.5097

to submit their reports as soon as possible. We also call
upon States that are encountering technical difficulties
in the preparation of their national reports to so inform
the Committee and to request the assistance they deem
necessary to overcome those difficulties.
Given the considerable number of national
reports received, my country welcomes the fact that the
Committee has been given the necessary tools to
enable it to begin the vital task of studying those
reports and to eventually brief the Security Council on
the degree of compliance with the resolution. In that
connection, we are relieved to know that the
Committee has now agreed to immediately hire four
experts to assist it with its work, and that two
additional experts will be hired in the near future.
In order to facilitate the Committee’s work and to
avoid overlap, we believe it especially relevant that it
establish as soon as possible a fluid working
relationship with international organizations and
regimes with experience in the area of nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction, as well as
with subsidiary bodies of the Security Council with
competency in the field of counter-terrorism, including
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban. We also
find very relevant the suggestion made by the Russian
delegation that, following the practice of the CTC, the
Committee in the future consider holding periodic
meetings with international, regional and subregional
organizations working in the area of non-proliferation.
We welcome the fact that the Committee’s
functioning is following a path similar to that of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, which is to say that it is
governed by the same principles of cooperation, equal
treatment and transparency. We believe it essential for
that to continue. To ensure that there is transparency in
the Committee’s work, we encourage the Committee
leadership to continue the sound practice, begun today
and also followed by the CTC, of submitting regular
reports to the Security Council, at least every three
months. We also urge it to continue to hold periodic
informal meetings with all interested Member States.
The imminent launch of the Committee’s web site will
also make an important contribution to transparency in
its work.
Lastly, I would like to say that we are convinced
that, as was the case with the Counter-Terrorism

8

Committee, providing technical assistance to Member
States for the implementation of the resolution will
become another essential aspect of the Committee’s
work as it moves forward with its tasks.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): I would like to join
previous speakers in expressing our gratitude to
Ambassador Mihnea Motoc, Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his first report on the activities of, and
results achieved by, the Committee since its inception.
By adopting resolution 1540 (2004), the Security
Council decidedly addressed the critical aspect of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
risk that terrorists and other non-State actors may
acquire, develop, traffic in or use nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery. My
country fully shares those goals, based on the
universally affirmed assumption that the efforts to
fulfil the objective of denying weapons of mass
destruction to terrorists must be matched by
strengthening the existing international regimes aimed
at disarmament and the non-proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons.
We have taken note of the report on the work of
the 1540 Committee. The adoption of guidelines for
the conduct of the Committee’s work and the provision
of guidance to Member States in the preparation of
national reports were significant steps forward,
enabling the Committee to start to carry out its tasks.
Furthermore, the report states that by recruiting experts
in accordance with the relevant provisions of resolution
1540 (2004) and the guidelines adopted by the
Committee, the Committee is now equipped to enter
the substantial stage of its work. We hope that the
principle of equitable geographical representation will
be strictly enforced in the recruitment of other experts
in the necessary areas of expertise of the work of the
Committee.
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) calls
upon all States to present to the Committee national
reports on the steps they have taken, or intend to take,
to implement the resolution. The prompt response by
many Member States, translated into the submission of
more than 80 reports to the Committee, demonstrates
the concern for and importance attached to
international cooperation to address the threat of
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of
terrorists and other non-State actors. The very large

S/PV.5097

number of States that did not present their reports
demonstrates the difficulties that many States
encounter in complying with the provisions of the
resolution. As mentioned in the report submitted to the
Committee, Angola has taken a number of legislative
and administrative measures to comply with the
binding legal obligations of the treaties to which it is
party and with other commitments in the context of
preventing the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons.
In conclusion, we acknowledge that only
international cooperation can provide the foundation
upon which countries can strengthen their capacities to
implement the goals set out in resolution 1540 (2004).
We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to the full implementation of the
resolution as well as to the work of the Committee,
which we consider of great importance in addressing
such dangerous, real and present threats to
international peace and security.
Mr. Andereya (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the detailed information provided by the
Permanent Representative of Romania, Ambassador
Mihnea Motoc, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
Among the relevant activities accomplished by
the 1540 Committee relating to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction in the course of the
current year, we single out and indicate our
appreciation for the efforts that have been made by the
Chairman and the members to ensure that the
Committee fully carries out its work, thanks to which it
now has the necessary guidelines for completing its
work, including the preparation of the reports of
Member States and the hiring of experts.
With regard to the latter item, we appreciate the
decisions adopted by consensus in the Committee,
making it possible to initially recruit four experts, who
can begin by studying, analysing and transmitting the
reports submitted by Member States, in accordance
with the provisions of paragraph 4 of resolution 1540
(2004), as well as by preparing the letters of reply to
the reports that have already been submitted by 86
States.
The exchange of reports and replies to those
reports, will make it possible to maintain a dialogue
between Member States and the Committee, with a

view to satisfactorily discharging the provisions that
govern the measures that will contribute to nonproliferation — especially towards avoiding having
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons or their
vectors, reaching the hands of non-State actors — and
thereby actively cooperating to combat terrorism.
Resolution 1540 (2004) demonstrated the concern
of the Security Council and its decision to take
decisive action to thwart threats to international peace
and security, resulting from the proliferation of
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and their
vectors and the fact that they might fall into the hands
of non-State actors, including terrorists, who could take
advantage of gaps within the legal regimes governing
imports and police and border security. The compliance
of Member States with the obligations set forth in the
resolution is of great importance as it will contribute to
ensuring their security, as well as that of the
international community.
That is how we think that each and every Member
State, in accordance with its own domestic legislation,
should set up its own controls on material, equipment
and even information about weapons of that nature. It
is also a good idea for States that do not have the
necessary legal measures to ensure domestic control to
quickly comply with measures set forth in resolution
1540 (2004), with a view to ensuring that there is
appropriate border control. With regard to the illicit
trade of such materials they should also request the
necessary assistance of the Committee.
In that connection, it is also a good idea to devise
international and regional measures of cooperation that
will effectively impede the illicit traffic of weapons of
mass destruction. The control and non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction pose growing challenges
to States that are trying to prevent the use of such
weapons by non-State actors who engage in terrorist
activities and do great damage to freedom and the
collective human rights that should be enjoyed by all
people.
In conclusion, I would like to say that unity and
cooperation in combating the proliferation of terrorism,
have also been reflected in the cooperative nature of
the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). That is
similar to the work done by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee as well as the work carried out by the
Al Qaeda/Taliban Sanctions Committee, with

9

S/PV.5097

consultations in the form of joint meetings of the
chairmen
of
those
committees.
Establishing
cooperation among the three committees, as stipulated
in Security Council resolution 1566 (2004), is an
additional challenge to the 1540 Committee, its
Chairman and its membership, to whom we wish once
again to give our support.
Mr. Li Song (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank Ambassador
Motoc for briefing us on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). We appreciate the work he has done in his
capacity as Chairman of that Committee.
Over the past seven months since the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004) by the Council on 28 April this
year, the 1540 Committee has made encouraging
progress in its work. With about 90 countries having
submitted their initial reports, the Committee will
begin its considerations very soon.
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) is
significant for enhancing international cooperation in
addressing the problem of the illicit trafficking in
nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons and their
means of delivery and related materials by non-State
actors and in preventing the further proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
China hopes that, in the implementation of the
resolution, States will strive to achieve the goal of nonproliferation by peaceful means and enter into
international cooperation on the basis of equality and
trust and in strict accordance with international law.
We also hope that the Committee will consider its
national reports in a fair, transparent and cooperative
manner and will hire more experts from developing
countries to assist in its work.
China is one of the first countries to submit its
national report. We hope that report will afford an
opportunity for others to gain comprehensive
knowledge of our efforts in combating the trafficking
of weapons of mass destruction. China will continue to
implement resolution 1540 (2004) in good faith and
will make its own contribution to the work of the
Committee.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the delegation of Benin, I wish to express our great
appreciation to Ambassador Motoc of Romania for his
dedication and the professional approach he has taken

10

towards the great responsibility entrusted to him by the
Security Council. Under his able guidance, the
Committee established to ensure and monitor
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) has now organized its work and adopted the
basic documents it needs to ensure its functioning.
The Chairman’s first report to the Council clearly
shows the methodical approach he has taken towards
the work of the Committee. The Committee has
established its structure, taking into account the
complexity of its task and the sense of urgency
required in order to eliminate the risk of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and to
ensure that such weapons are neither acquired by nonState actors nor fall into the hands of terrorists.
Members of the Committee participated
constructively and productively in the lively
discussions on the resolution. The international
community is in agreement as to the relevancy and
usefulness of the resolution as a way of filling the legal
gaps identified within the international instruments that
seek to deal with the problem of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.
We confirm our commitment to the Council’s
goals, which are that States should take appropriate
measures as part of collective and vigilant efforts to
combat that particularly worrisome threat, which could
give rise to such extensive destruction. We would urge
the Governments of Member States to follow up on the
resolution and to rationalize their domestic measures
for monitoring the production and transfer of sensitive
materials. We believe that since the adoption of the
resolution, Member States have become fully aware of
what is at stake and have rightly perceived the need for
all involved to actively and fully participate in the
ongoing and cooperative efforts to prevent any illegal
transfers of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery.
I would recall the importance of the presentation
of the first report pursuant to the resolution. This report
will enable us to assess national policies’ alignment
with the objectives of the resolution. We welcome the
diligence of those States that have already submitted
their initial reports. Those reports provide the
Committee with information that is critical for
assessing States’ efforts to implement the resolution for
the benefit of all.

S/PV.5097

Mr. Trautwein (Germany): We express our
sincere gratitude to Ambassador Motoc and his team
for the able and forward-looking guidance of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We thank him for this morning’s briefing,
which we welcome as a further step in transparency
and inclusiveness. Germany considers this openness
towards the broader membership essential in achieving
the goals of the resolution. The full engagement of
every Member State is needed for the successful
implementation of this important resolution.
We highly appreciate the support by the
Department for Disarmament Affairs for the
Committee in the recruitment of four experts, and we
welcome the invitation for further nominations for two
more experts from as wide of a geographic basis as
possible. The Committee is now well-equipped to fulfil
its mandate.
We encourage States in a position to do so to
offer assistance in response to specific requests by
States lacking the legal and regulatory infrastructure,
implementation experience or resources for fulfilling
their obligations under the resolution. As noted by both
the report of the Secretary-General’s Advisory Board
on Disarmament Matters and the report of the Highlevel Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, the
Committee should assist Member States in achieving
an effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
inter alia by offering model legislation for security,
tracking, criminalization and export controls.
Germany also welcomes the recommendations
contained in the two reports aiming at developing
minimum standards for the implementation and
improvement of non-proliferation policies and
legislation regarding the transfer of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) and related material to non-State
actors. We reiterate our position that determined efforts
and further steps in nuclear disarmament and in the
implementation of the Chemical and Biological
Weapons Conventions, as well as in the areas of the
means of delivery, are necessary to effectively close
existing gaps in the non-proliferation regimes. We
would thus prevent the further proliferation of WMDs
and related materials and their means of delivery,
including to non-State actors.
We encourage the Chair to deepen contacts with
the heads of the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical

Weapons, as well as with the relevant non-proliferation
bodies, in order to establish close working relations.
Germany looks forward to continued active support for
the Committee and the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Allow
me to join others in thanking Ambassador Motoc, both
for the terrific job he is doing as Chairman and for his
update to the Council this morning. The efforts in
which he and the other committees in this area are
engaged remain urgent. They are — and must be — a
very high priority for the United Kingdom, and also,
more widely, for the Council and the Members of the
United Nations as a whole.
As I have said in previous discussions, the
prospect of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
reaching the hands of terrorists is the ultimate
nightmare. It is a terrifying prospect, and terrorist
groups have already demonstrated their wish to obtain
and their willingness to use WMDs. When the Council
voted unanimously to adopt resolution 1540 (2004), we
demonstrated a common determination to take concrete
steps to mitigate that risk. That requires an effort by all
States, first, to adopt robust national legislation that
criminalizes attempts by non-State actors to acquire or
to traffic in WMDs and secondly, to establish and
enforce national controls to catch those who try to
evade the law. Shutting off the sources of supply and
shutting down the complicated networks of suppliers
will take a joint effort by all of us. As is evident where
there is any leakage in the system, the weak points in
the system are always exploited by terrorists. That
requires a global response by all of us.
The United Kingdom is fully behind a
collaborative approach to the implementation of this
resolution, with all States working together and
learning from each other. I would be less than frank if I
did not wonder why it has taken us so long to get to
where we are this morning. The rapidity with which we
have responded to the adoption of this resolution
actually does not do us much credit. The need now to
continue on this path, expedite progress and actually
achieve the goals of the resolution is, it seems to me,
quite apparent.
We were one of the first countries to submit a
report to the 1540 Committee. We welcome the large
number of reports that have already been submitted.
We must all call on the States that have not already

11

S/PV.5097

done so to submit their reports as a matter of priority.
The process of reporting is not in itself the goal of the
exercise, and in some cases it is difficult for States to
complete it. However, without the information that the
reports provide, we will not be able to plug the gaps in
the national and international systems that we want to
address and have to address. Otherwise, as I said, these
gaps will be exploited as points of weakness in the
international system.
The 1540 Committee has put in place the
essential foundations for its work, but, clearly, a lot
remains to be done. We look forward to getting down
to business, and the United Kingdom is ready to play
its full part in that process. The presence of experts
with the Committee should allow us to make swift
progress in the analysis of national reports. I hope then
to progress further and build on that foundation
through the second round of appointments in order to
fill the maximum quota with the necessary expertise.
The emphasis, however, must be on expertise, on
people who can actually do the job. That must be the
priority.
We look forward to the Committee developing
contacts with the Member States and with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
They have a key role to play in promoting the
understanding both of standards and of what we must
do to meet our obligations. The expertise and
experience of those organizations will help the Council
greatly, especially in those areas in which, by
definition, we lack experience and expertise.
Technical assistance is very important to the
implementation of the resolution. In our national
report, the United Kingdom stated that we would be
ready to provide assistance where we could. We stand
prepared to respond to specific requests from States
who may lack the legal infrastructure, the
implementation experience or the resources necessary
to fulfil the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004).
The Committee has a busy time ahead. What we
have to do is carry on our responsibilities undaunted by
the task but committed to actually achieving the
results. So, in the next phase we will be taking a long,
hard look at how each of us is doing against the
standards set in resolution 1540 (2004) with regard to
national legislation and controls and the implementation
and enforcement of legislation. We must reassure
ourselves as we move forward that we are each doing

12

everything that we can to prevent the worst nightmare
from coming true. That is why the relationship between
the Committee and the Member States is so important
and needs to be built upon. If the States are not sure
what the standards are, then we have to find ways to
actually provide the assistance and the advice
necessary. If States need help putting controls in place,
then we have to provide the concrete help to do so.
I will conclude by saying that the coordination
and the cooperation between the 1540 Committee and
the Committees established under resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1267 (1999) seem to us very important. The
Committees should pool their knowledge and skills so
that we have, in the end, a global effort which will help
us to combat terrorism and the threats identified in the
resolution.
My concluding thought is that with this
Committee — and I fear with the others — there has
been an excessive emphasis put on process rather than
substance. Process may be important, but the substance
has to be got right; otherwise we do not deliver what
we need to deliver. I was encouraged by the SecretaryGeneral when, in presenting the report of the Highlevel Panel to the General Assembly yesterday, he said
very clearly that he intends in the early part of 2005 to
offer to the Assembly and to all of us a concerted
overall strategy to combat terrorism. That is long
overdue, and I think we should encourage the
Secretary-General in his efforts to identify and shape
that proposal. Then I hope we can move forward
rapidly to develop the substance and achieve what he
set out yesterday as a priority. We very much agree
with that.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now will
make a statement on behalf of Algeria.
First, I would like to thank the Chairman of the
1540 Committee, Ambassador Motoc, for the valuable
report. I also would like to thank the 1540 Committee
for its tireless work during recent months.
Considerable progress has actually been made since the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) in eliminating the
danger inherent in weapons of mass destruction if they
should fall into the hands of non-State actors and
entities. We believe that the measures adopted in the
resolution will constitute a collective response to that
danger and protection from it. We strongly believe that
the best way to eliminate that peril is the total
elimination of weapons of mass destruction.

S/PV.5097

There are three subcommittees and guidelines to
facilitate the work of the Committee. They, together
with national reports, comprise the machinery for
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and show how
very much Member States are determined to comply
with their obligations. My delegation would like to
thank States that have submitted national reports under
operative paragraph 4 of the resolution. The Committee
should be able to ensure that those States that need
assistance can get it. Four experts have been appointed
to assist the Committee in studying the reports of the
Member States, in addition to their other duties. We

expect that two more experts will be appointed soon on
the basis of equitable geographic distribution and in
conformity with the guidelines that govern the
appointment of experts to Committees.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
There are no more speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

13
