United Nations

S/PV.6013

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6013th meeting
Friday, 7 November 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Weisleder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Costa Rica)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Belle
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations
assistance in support of its peace process (S/2008/670)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-59080 (E)

*0859080*

S/PV.6013

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request
of Nepal for United Nations assistance in
support of its peace process (S/2008/670)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Nepal in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Nepal and head of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Martin to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. Members of the Council have
before them the report of the Secretary-General on the
request of Nepal for United Nations assistance in
support of its peace process, document S/2008/670.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ian Martin, Special Representative of

2

the Secretary-General in Nepal and head of the United
Nations Mission in Nepal. I now give the floor to
Mr. Martin.
Mr. Martin: Last Friday and Saturday, SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon visited Nepal. He had hoped to
open this briefing personally, but the Council well
understands the urgent reasons for the travel that
prevents him from doing so.
In addressing members of the Constituent
Assembly, the election of which represents the central
achievement to date of the peace process and which
bears the crucial responsibility of drafting a federal
constitution for the new republic, the SecretaryGeneral offered congratulations on the historic
transformation the country has undergone. He said that
the Assembly was the most inclusive legislative body
in the country’s history and proof of remarkable
progress driven by the people of Nepal. He said that
the political transformation must go hand in hand with
social and economic transformation. Steady progress in
the peace process will ensure international support.
When I last briefed the Council, the political
parties were divided over the election of the first
President of the republic. The report before the Council
(S/2008/670) describes the process by which the
Constituent Assembly, which also acts as the
Legislature-Parliament, elected a President, a VicePresident and a Prime Minister and the long
negotiations that led to the formation of a coalition
Government, led by the Communist Party of Nepal
(Maoist) (CPN (M)) as the largest party and
comprising two others of the four largest parties, but
with the Nepali Congress remaining in opposition.
Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal “Prachanda”
describes the three priorities of the Government he
heads as: completing the peace process; ensuring the
drafting of the new constitution; and achieving rapid
economic progress. In each of those, it faces major
challenges. The mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Nepal (UNMIN), as extended by the Council for a
further six months in July (see resolution 1825 (2008)),
relates directly only to a key aspect of the first
challenge, that of completing the peace process, with
particular reference to the management of arms and
armies.
In briefing the Council on 18 July (see
S/PV.5938), I was frank in expressing concern about
how rapidly the new Government would be able to
08-59080

S/PV.6013

move forward in implementing the agreement reached
among political parties on 25 June regarding the
completion of the peace process. That, I said, would
depend greatly on the degree of multiparty cooperation
that survived the disagreements at that time over the
sharing of posts. I regret to say that that concern is
proving to be well founded, and the political actors are
not finding it easy to move forward together.
The foremost outstanding issue of the peace
process, in addition to the drafting of the new
constitution, is the transition from the current
temporary
arrangements
for
monitoring
the
management of arms and armies, which have now been
in existence for almost two years, to decisions
regarding the future of the Maoist army combatants.
Their integration and rehabilitation were to have been
completed within six months of the formation of the
new Government, more or less coinciding with the
additional six months for which a continuing presence
of UNMIN was requested. The key requirement for
resolving that issue is the effective functioning of the
special committee responsible for the supervision,
integration and rehabilitation of the former Maoist
combatants, prescribed by the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and enshrined in article 146 of the interim
constitution.
That committee was first established in mid-2007
by the Nepali Congress-led Government, but met only
once. In the 25 June agreement, the parties
recommitted themselves to proceeding by way of that
committee and further defined how it should go about
its task. They also agreed that it should not be confined
to the parties forming the coalition Government, but
should comprise major parties represented in the
Constituent Assembly, thus obviously including the
Nepali Congress.
The Secretary-General, UNMIN and concerned
Member States have all urged the early establishment
of the special committee. On 28 October, the
Government announced its establishment, which was
welcomed by the Secretary-General during his visit.
However, the Nepali Congress has so far refused to
name a representative to the committee, maintaining
that consultation regarding its establishment was
inadequate and objecting to the composition and terms
of reference announced by the Government.
Meanwhile, parties other than the four largest parties
are claiming representation. Negotiations are currently
taking place to try to resolve those issues.

08-59080

I trust that those negotiations will soon be
successful, but the task of the special committee, once
it begins to function, will not be an easy one. Widely
differing views have been expressed among parties,
and sometimes within them, regarding the extent to
which Maoist army combatants should or should not be
integrated into the State army, and in what manner.
Views inside the Maoist party and army, including
about whether to argue for integration on a group or
individual basis, are to be debated in a major national
gathering of their cadres in late November.
On the other hand, the Madhesi parties are
particularly concerned to see the implementation of the
commitment to increase Madhesi representation in the
Nepal Army. The CPN (M) is concerned not only about
the future of its own combatants, but also about
pursuing
the
parallel
commitment
in
the
Comprehensive
Peace
Agreement
to
the
democratization of the Nepal Army, including
determining its appropriate size, training the army in
the values of democracy and human rights, ensuring its
democratic structure and building its national and
inclusive character. Integration of Maoist combatants is
raising the issue of the exclusion of those responsible
for violations of human rights and humanitarian law.
That, in turn, will draw attention to the failure of the
State security forces to take effective action against
those within their ranks responsible for such violations,
which continues to be a major concern of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in Nepal.
As yet, the debate regarding those issues has been
little informed by consideration of international
experience, but the proposed terms of reference of the
special committee envisage that it would invite input
from
Government
security
agencies,
Maoist
combatants, UNMIN and other security experts, as
required, and would be supported by a technical
committee with the involvement of relevant experts.
The functioning of the special committee is also
essential to UNMIN’s objective of simplifying its
monitoring responsibilities and further reducing its
number of arms monitors, as the committee will
become responsible for the supervision of the Maoist
army while the nature of integration and rehabilitation
is being decided.
However, the discharge from the Maoist army
cantonments of some 4,000 personnel disqualified by

3

S/PV.6013

UNMIN’s verification, because they were under 18
years of age in May 2006 or recruited after that date, is
not dependent on the special committee and is long
overdue. Ever since verification was completed, early
this year, the United Nations has called repeatedly for
discharge without delay and has offered to assist with
the reintegration of those involved. In recent weeks,
senior Maoist army commanders have been holding
meetings at the cantonments to prepare the ground for
discharge, and the new Minister of Peace and
Reconstruction has engaged UNMIN and United
Nations agencies regarding his proposals for
supporting their orderly reintegration and his intention
to formally request United Nations assistance. During
his visit, the Secretary-General called on the
Government to move quickly on the discharge, and that
same call has been made, as regards minors, by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, who expects to visit
Nepal in early December.
I have dwelt on those matters because they are at
the core of UNMIN’s remaining responsibility and
because of the desire we share with the Council to
bring UNMIN’s mandate to completion as soon as
possible. The Secretary-General wishes to draw down
further and close the Mission, in a manner that does not
jeopardize the peace process, but ensures continuing
international support to consolidating peace in Nepal.
In meetings with the Secretary-General in late
September, during the General Assembly, and a week
ago in Kathmandu, Prime Minister “Prachanda”
expressed his view that the UNMIN presence at the
cantonments would remain necessary pending
integration and rehabilitation, and that UNMIN should
coordinate international advice and support to that
process. The realistic timetable for that process will be
for the special committee to consider once it begins
functioning, but even under the most optimistic
assumptions it cannot now be expected to end by
January, within the current mandate of UNMIN.
The Secretary-General asked that if a further
extension is to be requested by the Government, that
request should be made as soon as possible, so that he
could put it to the Council. We envisage that any
recommendation to the Council in response to such a
request would be for a substantially smaller presence.
But I am sure that members of the Council will agree
with the observation in the report of the SecretaryGeneral that experience in various countries has

4

demonstrated the dangers of failing to address
successfully the issue of former combatants and the
risks that that can pose to durable stability. That key
aspect of the completion of the peace process and the
need for cooperation among Nepal’s political parties
must be seen in the wider context of the
implementation of commitments.
Past reports of the Secretary-General and my
briefings have noted the weak implementation of peace
process commitments during the interim Government,
prior to the Constituent Assembly election. The
25 June agreement reiterated many of those
commitments, as have statements by ministers of the
new Government. But commissions provided for in the
agreements are yet to be formed, and commitments to
compensation for victims of the conflict, to
investigations into the fate of those who disappeared,
to the return of displaced persons and of property
seized during the conflict and to ensuring that the
youth groups of political parties remain within the law
need to move beyond rhetoric into practical measures
to put them into effect. The Madhesi parties also
demand the fulfilment of pledges made to them for
greater inclusion.
While fully respecting that the process has always
been and remains Nepali-driven, the United Nations,
through United Nations agencies as well as UNMIN,
has repeatedly offered its support in the
implementation of peace process commitments and is
continuing to do so. The United Nations Development
Programme is providing major assistance to the
process of constitution-making, and the $10 million
made available by the Secretary-General from the
Peacebuilding Fund is being programmed to support
key areas of peace support.
In his report, the Secretary-General notes
positively the commitment of the Nepali Congress to
cooperation in the drafting of the new constitution and
completion of the peace process, as well as the
commitments of the Maoist-led Government to
multiparty democracy and the protection and
promotion of human rights. Those too are
commitments which need to be fully reflected in
practice.
In his public remarks in Nepal, the SecretaryGeneral expressed his confidence that the parties could
minimize potential rifts through dialogue and
compromise. He called on all parties in the coalition

08-59080

S/PV.6013

Government to maintain cohesion, while continuing to
work with parties outside the Government in a spirit of
cooperation, and he hoped that the Nepali Congress
would continue participating in key decisions. He
stressed that the parties are accountable to the Nepali
people in helping to complete and consolidate peace.
Such cooperation is essential not only for addressing
the difficult issue of arms and armies and for
completing the peace process, and not only for
reaching sufficient consensus on a federal constitution,
but also for the economic development essential to
consolidating peace.
Nepal urgently needs effective local as well as
national governance. The new Government has
ambitious plans for better access to education, to health
care and to employment opportunities for young
people. It is appealing for increased levels of
international assistance to support those plans. The
United Nations country team is preparing to play its
part. Our aim is the earliest possible completion of
UNMIN’s mandate, but also the sustained and
intensified support of the United Nations system and
the international community to the peace, development
and change which the people of Nepal have demanded.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Martin for his briefing and for his update on the
situation on the ground and on the situation of the
United Nations Mission in Nepal.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): First, I would like to
express my sincere gratitude to you, Sir, and to the
other members of the Council for yet another
opportunity to discuss United Nations support for
Nepal’s indigenous peace process, which has made
miraculous achievements over a short span of time. I
would like to thank Mr. Ian Martin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal, for
his comprehensive presentation today. I would like to
take this opportunity to express our sincere
appreciation to Mr. Martin and his team in the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) for their excellent
work in executing the mandate of the Council to meet
Nepal’s request in certain aspects of the peace process.
We appreciate the report of the Secretary-General on
United Nations support of the peace process
(S/2008/670).

08-59080

On behalf of the Government of Nepal, I would
like to take this opportunity to express our sincere
gratitude to the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his recent visit to Nepal and his
continuous support for the peace process.
Nepal
has
witnessed
historic
political
transformation through the peace process. The signing
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, successful
elections to the Constituent Assembly, the declaration
of Nepal as a federal democratic republic and the
formation of the coalition Government under the
leadership of the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)
are changes of historic proportions which our peace
process has achieved quickly, smoothly, democratically
and peacefully.
Nepal’s peace process is unique in its
characteristics and is based on multiparty democracy,
inclusiveness,
accommodation,
dialogue
and
recognition of the people as the ultimate arbiter. Our
peace process is a truly original and creative
innovation of the Nepalese people and its political
leadership. One of the keys to its success lies in
national ownership of the entire political process. The
political leadership across the board has taken into
account the broader aspirations of the Nepalese people,
who have voiced their choice for peace and democracy.
The leadership has demonstrated a spirit of true
accommodation, dialogue and respect for the choice of
the people in arriving at all key decisions.
Yet another key to our success is the
inclusiveness of the political process. After the signing
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, several other
agreements were concluded with a view to bringing
into the national mainstream the most inclusive
possible participation by the representatives of the
people in all their ethnic and geographic diversity. I am
proud to say that Nepal’s Constituent Assembly is one
of the most inclusive assemblies that has ever been
elected to write a constitution anywhere in the world.
Nepal’s Constituent Assembly has the widest
representation of women, ethnic groups and indigenous
peoples, Madhesis, Dalits and people from rural areas,
who have traditionally remained marginalized.
We have also advanced this far by placing the
verdict of the people at the core of all decisions made
to date. That was the basis of the declaration of Nepal
as a federal democratic republic, the abolition of its
240-year-old monarchy and the formation of the

5

S/PV.6013

Government under the leadership of an erstwhile rebel
party, which has itself undergone a huge transformation
from an insurgent movement into a leading democratic
political force.
The current Government is committed to working
together with all political parties represented in the
Constituent Assembly in writing a new constitution of
the federal democratic republic within the stipulated
time frame of two years. As part of that process, the
Constituent Assembly is finalizing its rules of
procedure and is expected to start the drafting process
soon.
The Government is also committed to bringing
the peace process to a logical conclusion by resolving
all of the remaining issues in a spirit of dialogue and
accommodation and in accordance with the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. It has already
constituted the special committee to finalize issues of
the integration and rehabilitation of former rebel
combatants who are in cantonments monitored by the
United Nations Mission. The special committee is
expected to reach its decision on the issue soon.
Among other things, the United Nations Mission
in Nepal was mandated to monitor the cantonments and
assist in the peace process through arms management.
It is our view that the presence of UNMIN will not be
required after this process is completed. If the process
extends beyond the end of the current mandate on
23 January 2009, the Government, in consultation with
the special committee and the political parties, may
request an extension of the mandate of the Mission as
soon as such a decision is reached. In such a situation,
the presence of UNMIN, which has been significantly
downsized already, may be required for a maximum
period of another six months with further adjustments,
with a view to allowing it to came to an end by that
time.
In that regard, we have taken note of the report of
the Secretary-General regarding consolidation of
cantonments. The special committee, which is
mandated to look after the comprehensive issues of
arms management, is yet to begin its work formally
and is yet to take a decision in that regard. Such
consolidation or rearrangement would be likely to
unnecessarily complicate the process and exacerbate
the already poor infrastructure and facilities in the
cantonments. It could also unwittingly prolong the
process of integration and rehabilitation, which is key

6

to the logical conclusion of the peace process. Those
and other issues will be taken into consideration by the
special committee in adopting its decision on the
process of integration and rehabilitation. The
Government is committed to taking measures to
accelerate the implementation of the decisions of the
Special Committee so that UNMIN can complete its
tasks in accordance with the mandate of this Council.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to thank
each one of you individually and the Council
collectively for the continued support and
understanding of Nepal’s requests in relation to the
peace process.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Nepal for his statement. I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Costa Rica.
I thank Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing and the
Permanent Representative of Nepal for his statement.
My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN). We also welcome the positive news
on the progress in peacebuilding and the consolidation
of democracy in Nepal. In particular, we welcome the
commitment of the new authorities to promoting and
protecting human rights and to combating
discrimination in all its forms, as well as the progress
achieved to date in mine clearance and the destruction
of improvised explosive devices. We are also
encouraged by the statements by the Secretary-General
on the progress he observed on the ground during his
recent visit to the country.
Within this positive outlook, there are some
pending questions that are of concern to my delegation,
which I will proceed to outline now. We hope that the
recent establishment of the new Government will
enable substantial progress to be made in the process of
bringing to justice those individuals who committed
crimes during the armed conflict. My delegation has
reiterated in various forums that the building of a
lasting peace requires, as a necessity, the application of
justice based on law, which will make national
reconciliation possible. In this context, we support the
intention of the Government of Nepal to establish a
truth and reconciliation commission and another
commission to investigate the whereabouts of
disappeared persons. In general, we support all the

08-59080

S/PV.6013

actions that have been taken to strengthen the rule of
law.
We also urge the Nepalese Constituent Assembly
to do its very best to achieve agreements and move
forward in drafting the new constitution. In addition,
the relatively slow progress of the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of the
Maoist army is a matter of concern, particularly in
respect to the discharge of minors. We repeat the
appeal made by the Special Representative and urge
the immediate release of all minors who have not yet
been discharged. We also hope that the resources
provided by the Peacebuilding Fund and the World
Bank will make it possible to speed up the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. In this
context of pending issues in the areas of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, within which
UNMIN fulfils an important supporting role to the
Government, my delegation would be ready to
carefully consider a limited extension of the Mission’s
mandate, if a request were to be received from the
Government of Nepal and the Secretary-General. We

08-59080

must not be over-hasty in withdrawing the Mission, if
there remain important peacebuilding tasks for which
UNMIN support continues to be necessary. But neither
should we maintain a mission of a size that is greater
than that which is strictly necessary.
In closing, I thank the new Special
Representative, Mr. Martin, for his briefing and
congratulate the people of Nepal through their
Permanent Representative for their admirable efforts to
achieve peace and democracy in their country. As the
Permanent Representative himself said, a considerable
amount has been achieved in a relatively short time and
an historic transformation of great importance has
occurred.
I resume my function as President of the Security
Council. There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

7
