General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

66

2. Urges once again the States of South Asia and
such other neighbouring non-nuclear-weapon States as
may be interested to continue to make all possible efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South
Asia and to refrain, in the meantime, from any action
contrary to this objective;
3. Calls upon those nuclear-weapon States which
have not done so to respond positively to this proposal
and to extend the necessary co-operation in the efforts
to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render such
assistance as may be required to promote the efforts for
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
South Asia and to report on the subject to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia".

94th plenary meeting
12 December /980

35/149.

Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3479 (XXX) of 11 December
1975, 31/74 of 10 December 1976, 32/84 A of 12 December 1977, 33/66 B of 14 December 1978 and 34/79
of 11 December 1979 concerning the prohibition of new
types of weapons of mass destruction,
Bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 39 of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly,3° according to which qualitative and
quantitative disarmament measures are both important
for halting the arms race and efforts to that end must include negotiations on the limitation and cessation of the
qualitative improvement of armaments, especially weapons of mass destruction, and the development of new
means of warfare,
Recalling the decision contained in paragraph 77 of
the Final Document to the effect that, in order to help
prevent a qualitative arms race and so that scientific and
technological achievements might ultimately be used
solely for peaceful purposes, effective measures should
be taken to prevent the emergence of new types of weapons of mass destruction based on new scientific principles and achievements, and that efforts aiming at the
prohibition of such new types and new systems of
weapons of mass destruction should be appropriately
pursued,
Expressing once again its firm belief, in the light of the
decisions adopted at the tenth special session, in the importance of concluding an agreement or agreements to
prevent the use of scientific and technological progress
for the development of new types of weapons of mass
destruction and new systems of such weapons,
Noting that, in the course of its session held in 1980,
the Committee on Disarmament considered the item entitled "New types of weapons of mass destruction and
new systems of such weapons; radiological weapons",
Taking into consideration the part of the report of the
Committee on Disarmament relating to this question,3 7

I. Requests once again the Committee on Disarmament, in the light of its existing priorities, to continue
negotiations, with the assistance of qualified governmental experts, with a view to preparing a draft comprehensive agreement on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass
destruction and new systems of such weapons, and to
draft possible agreements on particular types of such
weapons;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to submit a report on the results achieved to the General Assembly for consideration at its thirty-sixth session;
3. Once again urges all States to refrain from any action which could adversely affect the talks aimed at
working out an agreement or agreements to prevent the
emergence of new types of weapons of mass destruction
and new systems of such weapons;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to
the consideration of this item by the General Assembly
at its thirty-fifth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Prohibition of the
development and manufacture of new types of weapons
of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons:
report of the Committee on Disarmament".

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

35 / 150.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a Zone of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a
Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832 (XXVI)
of 16 December 1971, and recalling also its resolutions
2992 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 3080 (XXVIII) of 6
December 1973, 3259 A (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,
3468 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/88 of 14 December 1976, 32/86 of 12 December 1977, S-10/2 of 30 June
1978, 33/68 of 14 December 1978 and 34/80 A and B of
11 December 1979, and other recent relevant resolutions,
Bearing in mind, in particular, its decision at the
thirty-fourth session in resolution 34/80 B to convene a
Conference on the Indian Ocean during 198 I at
Colombo,
Recalling further the report of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, Ji
Welcoming the addition of new members of the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean appointed pursuant to resolution 34/80 Band noting that the participation of these members has helped the work of the
Committee,
Reaffirming its conviction that concrete action for
the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration of
the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace would be a substantial contribution to the strengthening of international peace and security,
Considering that the continued danger posed by the
military presence of the great Powers in the Indian
Ocean area, conceived in the context of their confrontation, gives greater urgency to the need to take practical

36

Resolution S-10/2.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fijih Session.
Supplement No. 27 (A/35/27), sect. 111.L
31

"Ibid, Thirty-fourrh Session. Supplement No. 45 (A/34/45 and
Corr.I).

Ill.

67,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

steps towards the early achievement of the objectives of
the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
Considering also that all other foreign military
presence in the area whenever it is contrary to the objectives of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a
Zone of Peace and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations further gives greater
urgency to the need to take practical steps towards the
early achievement of the objectives of the Declaration,
Considering that the creation of a zone of peace in the
Indian Ocean requires the participation of and cooperation among the littoral and hinterland States. the
permanent members of the Security Council and major
maritime users, to ensure conditions of peace and
security based on the purposes and principles of the
Charter as well as the general principles of international
law,
Considering also that the creation of a zone of peace
requires co-operation among the regional States to ensure conditions of peace and security within the area, as
envisaged in the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a
Zone of Peace, and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the littoral and hinterland States,
Deeply concerned at recent ominous developments
resulting in further deterioration of peace and stability
in the region and their implications for international
peace and security,
I. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Indian Ocean 19 and the exchange of views in the
Ad Hoe Committee which. inter alia, indicate that:
(a) Following the expansion of its membership,
there has been a varied and useful exchange of views on
important issues regarding the implementation of the
Declaration as a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean, as
contained in General Assembly resolution 2832 (XXVI),
and on other related matters:
(b) Progress has been made towards harmonizing
differing approaches on these issues while a number of
fundamental issues remain to be resolved:
2. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee in pursuance of
the decision contained in resolution 34/80 B to convene
a Conference on the Indian Ocean during 198 I at
Colombo, and taking into consideration the exchange of
views thereon:
(a) To continue its efforts for the necessary harmonization of views on the issues related to the convening of the Conference to achieve the objectives of the
Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace as
contained in resolution 2832 (XXVI):
(b) To make every effort, in consideration of the
political and security climate in the Indian Ocean area,
particularly recent developments, as well as the progress made in the harmonization of views referred to in
subparagraph (a) above, to finalize, in accordance with
its normal methods of work, all preparations for the
Conference including the dates for its convening:
(c) To continue the preparatory work for the convening of the Conference and to hold two preparatory
sessions in 1981 totalling six weeks:
(d) To submit to the Conference a full report on its
preparatory work:

3. Requests the Conference on the Indian Ocean to
submit its report to the General Assemblv:

4. Renews the general mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee as defined in the relevant resolutions;• 0
5. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a full report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee, including the provision of summary records. 41

94 th plenary meeting
I 2 December 1980

35/151.

World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, 2930 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3183
(XXYIII) of 18 December 1973, 3260 (XXIX) of9 December 1974, 3469 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/.190
of 21 December I 976, 32 /89 of I 2 December 1977,
33/69 of 14 December 1978 and 34/81 of 11 December
1979.
Reiterating its conviction that all peoples of the world
have a vital interest in the success of disarmament negotiations and that all States should be in a position to
contribute to the adoption of measures for the achievement of this goal.
Stressing anew its conviction that a world disarmament conference, adequately prepared and convened at
an appropriate time, could provide the realization of
such an aim and that the co-operation of all nuclearweapon Powers would considerably facilitate its attainment,
Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on
the World Disarmament Conference,•!
Recalling that, in paragraph 122 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly:' it decided that, at the earliest appropriate
time. a world disarmament conference should be convened with universal participation and with adequate
preparation,
Recalling that, in its resolution 35/46 of 3 December
1980 on the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, the General Assembly considered it
pertinent also to recall that in paragraph 122 of the
Final Document it had stated that at the earliest appropriate time a world disarmament conference should be
convened with universal participation and with adequate preparation.
-----

"' By a communication dated 5 March 1981 (see A/35/800, para.I),
the President of the General Assembly informed the Secretary-General
that. on the recommendation of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian
Ocean, he had appointed THAILAND as a member of the Ad Hoe Committee. As a result, the Ad Hoe Committee is composed of the following Member States: At SIKAI J,\, BANG! ADESH, BULGARIA. CANADA.
CIIJN,\, Dl·M0CRAll( YI'~ll'N. l)JJB0LITI. EGYPT. ETHIOPIA. FRANCF.
(j l·RMA'.'J Dl·M0CRA"I It Rl PUB! IC, Gl,RMA'-Y. fLDERAL RHUBL.IC OF.
GR! I CL. INDIA. INDONFSIA. (RAN. IRAQ. [ l"Al.Y. ]APA!',;, K!oNYA. LIBERIA.
M.-\JJ,\(i,\SCAR. MAI.A\ SJ,\, MALDIVES. MAURITIUS, M0EAMBIQUL·.
NI l lll.Rl ANDS. NOR\\ A\. OM,\N. PAKISTAN, PANAMA. POLAND.
RoM,\NJ,\_ Sn Cl!Hl Is. SIN«APORF, S0\IAL.IA, SRI LANKA. SUDAN.
Tll,\JI AND, UNION OJ Sovwr SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM
()I (iRIAr BRIJ",\IN •\NI) NoRllli'RN IRl'LAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OI
I' \'-/.\NI\, l l'.'JJl l ll SI.\ !IS 01 AMl·Rll-\, Yl'Ml·N, YllGOSI AVIA

and /.,\\tHI 1
"See sect. VIII. resolulion J5;t0 B. para. 2 (j).
'' Ojjicial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.

Supplement No. 2/i (A J'i:2X)
"Ibid.. Thirty-fifth Session. Supplement 11.o; 29 (A/lS/29)_

' Resolution S- I 0 '
