THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

6 AUGUST

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

, , , . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

I

The situation in the Middle East:
(CI) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(b) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/ 15316) , , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , , , . . . . . . . , , , , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2390)

S/PV.2390

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI.. .) are normally published ina
quarterly Supplements of the Ojficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
oj’ the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

/

!

2390th MEETING
I-Ieid in New York on Friday,
President:

Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).

Pwscnt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Provisional

6 August 1982, at 1 a.m.

agenda (S/Agenda/2390)

I.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the iMiddle East:
(cl) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1.5162);
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt and France to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15316)

OS the agenda

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
((I) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(b) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15316)
I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [2374t/?,
2375th, 2377th, 2385th clnd 2389th mcetiags], I invite
the representatives
of Lebanon and Israel to take
places at the Council table: I invite the representative
of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take
a place at the Council table: I invite the representatives
of Cuba, Egypt, India and Pakistan to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
This meeting of the Security
Council has been convened in response to a request
made to me on Thursday evening by the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
3. Members of the Council have before them documents S/15345 and S/lS345/Add. I, which contain the
report submitted by the Secretary-General
in pursuance of resolution 517 (1982).
4. Members of the Council also have before them
document S/15347, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
5- . Members of the Council have received photocopies of a letter dated 5 August from the representative of Jordan to the President of the Council. This
letter will be circulated later today as a document of
the Council under the symbol S/15348.
6. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (i,ttrrprLlttrtio,1.~o,lz
Russitrn): Exactly two
months ago, Israel unleashed broad-scale aggression
against a sovereign Arab State, Lebanon. The victims
of that aggression are the tens of thousands of killed
and wounded,
Lebanese and Palestinians
alike.
Hundreds of thousands of persons remain without
shelter: towns and villages have been destroyed: the
Palestinian
refugee camps have been devastated.
Those are the results of the actions of the Israeli
military forces on Lebanese soil.
7. The Israeli forces are making one bloody attempt
after another to storm the besieged capital of Lebanon,
Beirut. Against those who are courageously defending
the city, the aggressor is using the entire gamut of the
most modern,
sophisticated
forms of weaponry,
including barbaric cluster bombs, fragmentation bombs
and phosphorus bombs.
8. Of course, the Israeli aggressors would have
been unable to do all that if they had not been sure
that they could rely on the economic, political and
military assistance of their overseas protector. That is
the main reason for the arrogance of the aggressor,
9. It is well known that, for all this time, Israel has
been provocatively
disregarding the will of the entire

international community,
as reflected in Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), which demand an
immediate cease-fire, an end to all military activities
within Lebanon and the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli military forces from Lebanon.

Council should and will have to take additional, more
severe measures in accordance with the Charter in
Jrder to put an end to Israel’s aggression in Lebanon,
to punish the aggressor and to place him totally outside
the boundaries of civilized society.

10. Moreover,
Israel has stubbornly
refused to
comply with even those minimum steps approved by
the Council, steps aimed at putting an end to the bloodshed in Beirut. This demonstrates the unlimited ambitions of the Tel Aviv Zionists, who are prepared to
pave the way to the implementation
of their age-old
idea of the establishment
of “Greater Israel” on the
ruins of an entire country, on the corpses of thousands
and thousands of persons.

f5. At this stage, however, one thing is of vital
importance.
We cannot allow the hands of Israeli
barbarians to make the name of Beirut one that will
join, in the pages of history, the sinister list of such
European cities as Warsaw, Lidice, Coventry and
Oradour, cities that were mercilessly destroyed by
Hitler’s Fascists during the Second World War, We
are certain that the draft resolution submitted by the
Soviet Union, containing as it does urgent measures
towards that end, will find support among the rnembers of the Council and among all people of good wilI
and clear conscience who do not wish to acquiesce in
the replacement of the laws of right and justice by the
laws of the jungle and brute force.

11. Fresh proof of the growing arrogance of the
aggressor has been furnished by the official reply given
by the Government of Israel [,TLJLJS/1.5345/Add.I J, in
which it states its refusal to carry out the demands
contained In Council resolutions 5 I6 (1982) and 5 17
(1982). This is a challenge which Israel hurls not only
at the fundamental
provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations but also at the elementary
rules of
human morality, which require respect for the lives
of innocent persons, as the highest value on earth.

16. Mr. NUSEISEH
(Jordan): I do not believe that
words can adequately express the profound feelings
we have at this hour because of the anguish and suffering the besieged people of Beirut have been experiencing for the past 6 or 7 weeks. It is natural that
we should meet at this early morning hour as a concrete expression of the very deep concern I am sure
every member of the Council feels at the extremely
grave situation that prevails in Beirut, one that is
reaching the most alarming, catastrophic and intalerable dimensions, one that is created by the deliberate
genocidal policy of Israeli invasion. No human being
worthy of the name would or could watch the enormous suffering of the Lebanese people and of their
Palestinian refugee guests and remain mute.

12. In these circumstances,
the Council cannot
and should not-nor,
indeed, is it entitled to-acquiesce in such arrogant, provocative and inhumane activity on the part of the Israeli rulers, who have finally
lost any feeling of conscience or reason.
!3. In view of what I have said, the Soviet delegation requested yesterday evening an urgent meeting
of the Council and is officially introducing the following
draft resolution:

17. After literally destroying all the main cities of
southern Lebanon, the Israelis have been bombarding
the city of Beirut by air, sea and land to the point
where it has already been largely razed. Hardly a
home, a hospital, an orphanage or a Government
building has been spared this indiscriminate
shelling,
which has cost countless lives and has brought indescribable suffering to the innocent civilian population, 12,000 of whom have today, following the carnage of last Sunday when Israel dropped 180,000
rockets, bombs and shells within a 22-hour period,
seized the opportunity of a short lull to take the path
of exodus in order to escape the inferno of a city
without water, medical supplies or any provisions at
all.

“Lkv~ply
indi~t?rrrlt at the refusal of Israel to
comply with the decisions of the Security Council
aimed at terminating
the bloodshed in Beirut,
” I. Strongly
cvtzdcmns
Israel for not implementing resolutions 516 (I 982) and 5 17 (1982);

“2. Lktncrtzds
these resolutions

that Israel immediately
fully:

implement

“3. D~c*i&.s that, in order to carry out the abovementioned decisions of the Security Council, all the
States Members of the ZJnited Nations should, as a
first step, refrain from supplying Israel with any
weapons and from providing it with any military
aid.” [S/15347.]

18. Quite apart from our sense of anguish and outrage, however, we are duty-bound to look into the
report of the Secretary-General
and its addendum,
which wc received today [S//5345 crlzd Add./]. l wish
to express to the Secretary-General our deep appreciation for the promptness with which he has submitted his report, issued this morning, as well as the
addendum he subsequently, submitted, after having
had to wait for two or three days until the Israeli Gov-

14. At this stage, therefore, this is the absolute
minimum necessary in order to wrest the weapons
from the hands of the crazed Israeli aggressors, If the
aggressor does not come to his senses, of course, and
particularly
if he becomes even more crazed, the
2

ernment decided to examine the matter-as though it
were a mere matter of routine-even
though that
Government is aware of the urgency of the question,
involving as it does the lives and survival of half a
million people.

24. Now, the Chairman of the Executive Committee
of the PLO, in a memorandum dated today addressed
to the President of the Security Council-and
I have
requested that it be circulated to the members of the
Council-states
the following:

19, What is most appalling is that in its reply, which
is contained in the addendum to the Secretary-General’s report, Israel rejects Council resolutions 516
( 1982) and 5 17 (l982), which call for nothing more than
a cease-fire and the deployment of United Nations
observers.

” ‘International
observers are supposed to
arrive, though none has arrived as yet. Their
arrival is very important, especially in view of the
continued Israeli military buildup. It is imperative
that they come as soon as possible. We are
awaiting your enswer tonight.’

20. The Israeli Government has based its rejection
on flimsy reasons which not even a child would find
credible.

“As you know, the PLO has already reaffirmed
its commitment
to the cease-fire, as was reported by
the Secretary-General
[ihid. 1.

2 I. We can compare the answers of the two other
parties to the request of the Council, adopted unanimously. The Government of Lebanon, whose country is the victim of aggression, replied as follows:

“We have also noted that observers have established the positions of the Israeli forces of invasion
[ihid., prr/.rr. 71. In this respect, we wish to recall
paragraph 4 of resolution 517 (1982). We trust that
the Security Council will take prompt action to
consider the response and the action taken by the
parties to the conflict.” [S/15348, c//l!zc.\-. ]

L,4 * 9 I am writing to assure you of the Lebanese
Government’s
readiness to co-operate fully in the
implementation
of resolution 517 (1982). This cooperation is made pursuant to our letters of 7 June
[S/15178, pwtr. 31 and 1 August [S//5333] and therefore without prejudice to Lebanon’s well-known
attitude regarding the validity of the Genera1 Armistice Agreement of 1949’ with Israel.” [S//534.5,
ptrnr . 4. ]
22, Similarly,
the reply of Chairman Arafat of the
Executive Committee of the PLO states the following:

25. One of the more ominous signs we find in the
Israeli Government’s
reply-apart
from its humiliating
attitude towards the Council and the whole United
Nations system: apart from its defiance of the obligations devolving upon every Member State to abide
by the mandatory decisions of the Council, in accordance with Articles 5 and 24 of the Charter-is
contained in paragraph 4, especially if one reads between
the lines:

“I received your letter addressed to me through
the head of the Israel-Lebanon
Mixed Armistice
Commission,
via our representative at the United
Nations, at 10.00 a.m., Beirut time, on 5 August
1982. 1 would like to affirm to you that the PLO
will continue to respect and remain committed to the
cease-fire.

“Following
the departure of the terrorist organizations”‘-as
they call them-.-operating
in Beirut
beyond the Lebanese borders, the arrangements
For the deployment of the Israel forces will be determined on the basis of the principle that all foreign
forces will leave the sovereign territory of Lebanon.” [SW S/15.745/Atld. I ]

“Moreover,
the future arrangements for the
departure of Palestinian armed forces from Beirut
will be determined in agreement with the Lebanese
Government
on the basis of the Jeddah declaration [SCJIJ S//5329]. A Palestinian-Lebanese
joint
committee
has been continuously
engaged in
meetings for several days to put into implementation the contents of this agreement.

26. In other words, instead bi talking about the
arrangements for the withdrawal of the Israeli forces
and what follows, they are talking about the “deployment of the Israel forces”, And we know what “demeans, because we know that Israel’s
ployment”
designs are to continue its aggression right up to the
northern frontiers of Lebanon and the Bekaa valley,
as I said in my statement two days ago. And here is
the confirmation
that Israel is not simply satisfied with
the withdrawal of other forces but will, in return fol
that withdrawal, deploy its forces.

“The Israeli aggression which took place yesterday and which led to the total isolation of the city
from the outside world, obstructed the Lebanese
side from contact with higher authorities, because
of the indiscriminate
shelling of all quarters and
districts of the besieged city.” [S//.5345, prrrtr. 5. I

27. We are meeting today because we are dutybound to meet in accordance with resolution
517
( 1982). which in paragraph 8 states:

23.
As a matter of fact, the telephone lines of the
Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, of the Presidential Palace
and of various quarters in Lebanon are no longer
functioning.

“Deci&s
to meet . . . if necessary, in order to
consider the report of the Secretary-General
and,
in case of failure to comply by any of the parties to
3

it with any military aid. I wish to make clear that that
would be just a small step which is not going to help
alleviate the immediate plight of the city of Beirut or
the catastrophe which might befall it at any moment.

the conflict, to consider adopting effective ways and
means in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations.”
We are meeting here as members of the Security
Council and, therefore, as an integral part of the United
Nations system and the Charter of the United Nations.

32. What we should envisage is sanctions, which
should be more effective and more lasting, diplomatically, politically,
militarily
and in all the other
ways outlined in the Charter. I believe that the invading
forces have sufficient arms to continue the commission of their crimes. How they get their supplies I do
not know. In my statement of 4 August I mentioned
that in 1973, after a mere few days of fighting, they
came begging to the United States, saying that “if the
United States did not come to the aid of Israel and
supply it with arms and ammunition, then Israel would
have no alternative but to surrender” [238&1? meelirlg,
~trlu. 141. And yet now they are showering Beirut-a
mere 10 square miles-with
180,000 rockets, shells
and bombs. That process is ongoing and relentless
-against
10 square miles.

28. Now, what should our attitude be when we find
a recalcitrant party refusing to recognize a unanimous
decision of the Council and even refusing to receive
the Secretary-General
to discuss the matter with him?
Are we going to accept this humiliation,
this insult,
lying down? And why this attitude? Why are Begin
and Sharon against the deployment
of 20, 30 or 50
United Nations observers? They are some of the best
people I know; they are people of integrity, who speak
the truth and nothing but the truth. Begin and Sharon
do not want those observers to be deployed because
they want to carry on with their barbaric aggression
and invasion of Lebanon. There is no other explanation for it. Therefore, they have torpedoed the essence
of the provisions of the Council resolution.

33. It is for that reason that 1 believe that we should
take more forceful action which will impel Israel to
recognize that the Security Council is the highest
executive organ of the community of nations and that
its will cannot be flouted with impunity.

29. Now, what should be our response‘? On 4 August we stated specifically that
b. * . I in case of failure to comply by any of the
parties to the conflict, to consider adopting effective ways and means in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations” [lcsoIlrtiorz 5/7 (lY82), pcrrci. 81,

34. I believe that there must be other draft resolutions, amendments to the present one, or whatever
members wish. I would assume that these would have
to be forwarded to our respective Governments.
35. The draft before the Council falls short of what
my delegation believes should be the response ta the
genocidal acts against Lebanon and Beirut. Perhaps
other delegations have different views, but in any
event we have to consult with our Governments, so
I would suggest that we meet later today-perhaps
at I I .3O a.m.-and
take action in accordance with OUI
duty as members of the Council.

That is what we decided upon two days ago. Are we
going to renege on our resolution to suit the aggressive whims of Mr. Begin and General Sharon? Are
they going to dictate to us? Are we going to forfeit
the Charter?
30. These are extremely serious problems because
they have a direct impact upon peace and security in
the world. A very, very serious precedent could
be set in relations among nations.

36. The PRESIDENT:
of Israel.

31. I wish to express my appreciation to the representative of the Soviet Union for h:lving called upon
us, at 10 o’clock yesterday evening, to meet, because
of the sense of urgency that we all share. I must confess that I have certain observations to make on the
draft resolution before the Council [S/15347]. My delegation does not believe that it goes far enough. When
members of the Council were discussing earlier drafts
of resolutions 514 (1982) and 517 (1982), we talked
about Chapter VII 0.f the Charter, namely, the imposition of sanctions, whereas in the present draft resolution, the Council, after condemning
Israel-with
which condemnation,
I believe, nobody has any
dispute-decides
that, in order to carry out the decisions of the Security Council aimed at terminating the
bloodshed in Beirut, all the States Members of the
United Nations should, as a first step, refrain from
supplying Israel with any weapons and from providing

I call on the representative

37. Mr. BLUM (Israel): One wonders why, if members of the Council wish to consult with their Governments and convene a Council meeting later today, this
meeting should have been convened in the first place.
Well, the answer is clear: the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics felt an irresistible
impulse to have his say tonight. It is possible, though,
that he suffers from insomnia, but that should be his
problem, not the problem of the Council, I do not
believe that he feels an irresistible impulse to make
obscene statements every night. Because that is
precisely what his statement was: an obscene and Perverse statement-so
much so that I asked myself
whether it was worth responding to at all, whethe]
I should really dignify it by responding to it.
38. I decided to do so for one simple reason: not for
the purpose of detaining members of the Council at
4

this hour, but in order to show the representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics that his bullying
tactics do not pay. We are used to them: we have been
exposed to them over the years. He should have
known better. He should have known by now that no
amount of bullying and intimidation
is going to achieve
any objective of his. But apparently it is difficult to get
rid of ingrained habits and of atavistic impulses, so
that statement had to be made.

to anyone. I have no personal quarrel with the representative of Israel. He is here to speak on the item
that is on the agenda. At the moment his speech is
insulting. I am not trying to prevent him from speaking.
He can say anything about the item on the agenda and
that is what he should do. If he makes personal references, please be good enough to call the representative of Israel to order, Mr. President.
47. The PRESIDENT:
I would ask those who speak
in the Council to address their remarks through me as
President, as is the normal practice.

39, Who was speaking here in the Council about
barbarism and atrocities and violations of international law? The representative of a country which, by
general consensus-yes,
by general consensus-is
the foremost violator of international
law in contemporary life. Mr. Ovinnikov, you represent a country which constitutes the gravest threat to internatiunal peace and security since 1945. There is no
secret ballot being taken in the Council, If it were,
14 members of the Council would identify your country as the worst offender against international peace.
Even Mr. Nowak, in a secret ballot, would vote with
the majority,
because Mr. Nowak comes from a
country-from
one of the many countries-which
you have enslaved-

48.

of Israel.

49. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I should like to inform the
representative
of Poland, through you, MI-. President, that we are at the United Nations and not in
Warsaw and that, consequently, freedom of speech is
still exercised here, as distinct from the situation in
Warsaw. I would be obliged, Mr. President, if you
would inform the representative of Poland that the
Council is not in the habit of muzzling speakers,
especially not those who have something to say about
the truth as it is perceived outside this building, as
distinct from the surrealistic truth in this building.

40.

‘The PRESIDENT:
I apologize to the represenof Israel. The representative of Poland has
asked to speak on a point of order, and I call on him.

SO. Let me return to where I left off when I was first
interrupted on a so-called point of order.

tative

St. The Soviet Union constitutes the gravest threat
to international
peace and security since 1945. The
Soviet Union has enslaved virtually all of its neighbours through the force of arms. The Soviet Union has
oppressed its own people and has deprived them of
their fundamental human rights. Soviet barbarism has
been exported to other countries-most
recently, to
Afghanistan. Significantly,
the representative
of the
Soviet Union has not responded to any of my queries
in this regard. Let me ask him here-since
he spoke
about barbarism: What happened to the population of
the valley of Panjshir, north of Kabul, in Afghanistan, the tens of thousands of people whom you
massacred in the villages of that valley? What happened to all those inhabitants of Afghanistan whom
you have subjected to bacteriological
and chemical
warfare, whom you regard as human guinea-pigs?
Who are you to speak about violations of international
law, violations of human rights, and barbarism’? From
where do you take the audacity and the temerity to
accuse others of barbarism and atrocities, you the
heroes of Kabul and of Warsaw and of Budapest and of
Prague and of East Berlin? What were your humanitarian tanks doing in all those cities?

41. Mr. NOWAK
(Poland): Mr. President, I should
like to request that you ask the representative of
Israel to speak on the matter before the Council and
to stop insulting members of the Council. The matte1
is the item which is on the agenda.
42.

I call on the representative

The PRESIDENT:
I note the point of order of
of Poland,

the representative

43. The wish of the Council is, I am sure, to allow
complete
freedom of speech in debates. At the same
time, I am sure it is also the wish of the Council that
we
should have proper respect for its members. At
this stage, I shall simply ask the representative of
Israel
to continue his statement, having noted the
point made by the representative of Poland.
44.

Mr. BLUM (Israel): It seems that the represenof Poland is somewhat confused. We are not
in Warsaw, we are at the United Nations, and freedom
of speech still exists here. We are not being muzzled
her-e as they are in Warsaw these days. These cheap
tactics
of interrupting
me will not interrupt the flow
of my argument, Mr. Nowak; so do not bother.
tative

52. We have been treated to displays of your vulgarity before, Mr. Ovinnikov. But you have descended
here tonight to new depths of vulgarity-even
by you1
own standards. You claim to speak on behalf of a
State of workers, We all know it is a sham-

45.
The PRESIDENT:
I request the representative
of Israel to yield for a moment while I call on the representative
of Poland on a point of order.
46.
Mr. NOWAK
(Poland): I should like once again
to request you, Mr. President, to remind the representative
of Israel that he is not here to speak directly

53. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of the
Soviet Union wishes to speak on a point of order,
5

I therefore interrupt
on him.

the representative

of Israel to call

workers in a free country in the world, published a
statement yesterday, on 5 August, on the question of
Lebanon. For the enlightenment
of Mr. Ovinnikov
-and of Mr. Nowak, if he cares to listen-1 should
like to read out that statement:

54. Mr. OVTNNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (int~~rpr’ctation
finm Rmsirrn):
I should
simply like to seek you opi;ion, Mr. President. Is the
representative of Israel speaking on the agenda item?

“For seven years the people of Lebanon have
been subjected to a reign of terror at the hands of
the PLO and Syria, which together occupied 60 per
cent of the country. Nearly 100,000 were killed,
another quarter of a million wounded, and 800,000
Christians and 500,000 Muslims made homeless,

55, The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of the
Soviet Union has asked my opinion. I believe it is the
tradition and practice of the Council to allow complete
freedom of speech to members of the Council and to
those whom it decides to invite to the Council table.
At the same time, I remind all those who speak in the
present debate of the item on our agenda, which is
the situation in the Middle East. I would also appeal
to members of the Council and those who are invited
to the Council table to try and show full regard for
the practices and norms of the Council, and to show
respect and a willingness to continue the debate, as
far as possible, on the agenda item,

“The country’s political
structure and institutions of authority were shattered. In Lebanon the
world could see what a PLO State would look like.
But little attention was paid to this unfolding tragedy. By contrast, when the Israeli forces moved
into Lebanon there was a global outcry against the
civilian casualties,
“The AFL-CIO deeply regrets the loss of civilian
lives in the present conflict. The PLO tactic of
deliberately locating its forces in residential areas
and storing its ammunition in schools, hospitals and
other public facilities has compounded the number
of civilian casualties. In effect, it is holding the
civilian population of west Beirut hostage.

56. Having said that, I repeat that it is the tradition
and practice of the Council to allow complete freedom
of speech to those who are invited to the Council table
and to avoid any kind of personal recrimination
across
the Council table as far as possible.
57. That is my opinion. I have not been asked for a
ruling on a point of order, but I ventured to remind
members of the Council of those views and hope that
they will support me if I draw the attention of all present here to them.
58. I call on the representative
of order.

“The Executive Council considers the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon entirely justified on security
grounds. The seizure of vast caches of PLO weapons and ammunition
in southern Lebanon is proof
of a PLO military buildup which posed a direct
threat to Israel’s security. To protect its securily,
Israel was justified not only in altering its stated
objective of removing the immediate threat but in
attacking its source, the command structure of the
PLO itself.

of Poland on a point

59. Mr. NOWAK
(Poland): I think if we take Article 3 I of the Charter into account we shall see that we
are definitely obliged to speak only on the question
th& has been brought before the Security Council.
This is not incompatible
with freedom of speech.
Anything can be said on the question itself.
60. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Israel.

“In the conflict between Israel, on the one hand
and the PLO and Syria, on the other, the AFL-CIO
is not neutral. We support Israel. The world should
demand that the PLO and Syria leave Lebanon no\\’
and allow the Lebanese to proceed with the task of
reconstruction and the creation of an independent
central Government. Upon the departure of those
forces, the Israeli forces must also withdraw, ils
they have committed themselves to do.

I again call on the represen-

61. Mr, BLUM (Israel): I am not surprised that the
representatives of the Soviet Union and Poland find
it so difficult to listen to these words. In their countries it is not customary to listen to the truth,

“We call upon the United States Government to
assist the Lebanese in this task in every Way POSsible and to make humanitarian aid available to the
Lebanese and the Palestinians.

62. As I said before, the representative of the Soviet
Union claims to speak on behalf of a State of workers.
We all know it is a sham, but the pretensions are still
there. I will therefore, through you, Mr. President,
invite him to listen to what free workers in a free
society have to say about recent events in Lebanon.

“In destroying the PLO military infrastructure,
Israel has not only created the possibility of a free
Lebanon; it has dealt a blow to international terrorism and set back Soviet influence in the Middle
East and thus advanced the interests of the Western
democracies. The weakening of the PLO and of
Soviet influence may set the stage for fruitful dis-

63. The Executive Council of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
Organizations (AFL-C!Q),
the largest organization of free
6

cussion with moderate Arab forces aimed at a solution of the Palestinian problem.

70. If it is their purpose to bring down upon Beirut
what was brought down upon Deir Yassin, the Israelis
are mistaken, because we are determined to defend
our survival.

“The United States, through diplomatic and
other means, should work towards the creation of
conditions for a negotiated settlement of this issue.
Towards this end, the AFL-CIO urges the United
States Government to continue withholding recognition from the PLO and to refrain from any
actions which would encourage the PLO to believe
that it can snatch a political victory from military
defeat. The PLO should be denied recognition of
legitimacy, not only because it is dedicated to the
destruction of Israel but because it is a terrorist
organization. To reward it with recognition is to
encourage terrorism as a political tactic around the
world.”

71. The reply of the representative of Israel as set
forth by the Secretary-General in the addendum to
his report [see S//5345/ddd.I] makes us wonder.
When we read paragraph 3 of that reply, we wonder
who is sending the reply. It mentions the demand of
the Lebanese Government and the explicit and urgent
demands of the President of the United States that
what they call the “terrorist organizations” leave
Beirut and Lebanon as speedily as possible and says
that the presence of observers in Beirut would signal
to those “terrorist organizations” that they are under
no obligation to leave Beirut and Lebanon, I do not
think that Israel can speak for the President of the
United States. All of us heard the President of the
United States demanding that Israel put an end to its
aggression in Lebanon and withdraw. I thought that in
this chamber and at this table the President and Government of the United States were represented. The
Lebanese Government is also represented here.
They do not need anyone to speak on their behalf.

64. I hope Mr. Ovinnikov has listened to the views
of free workers in a free country. And if he has, he
will have realized why he and his country are so upset
about recent developments in Lebanon. It is because
their stooge, the terrorist PLO, has been dealt a severe
blow. And all these attempts, culminating in latenight meetings of the Council, are designed for only
one purpose-to save whatever can be saved for the
PLO.

72. With regard to the free workers and free movements and free labour and so on, I would just like to
put on record here some information I have received,
namely, that the Labour Party of the Netherlands
has severed relations with the Labour Party of Israel
because of the latter’s support of the aggression
against the sovereignty and people of Lebanon.

As I have already had occasion to tell the Counyesterday, we are grateful to the representative of
the Soviet Union for having displayed so manifestly
the true face of the PLO, not only as a linchpin of
international terrorism but also as a blind stooge of the
Soviet Union in the Middle East-of the Soviet Union,
which has been the major destabilizing factor in the
entire region for the past 25 years.
65,
cil

73. The PRESIDENT: It was my understanding,
from informal consultations before this meeting began,
that the Council was in general agreement to adjourn
the meeting until mid-morning, that is to say, midmorning today, Friday, 6 August. I had intended to
suggest the hour of I I a.m. I note that the representative of Jordan suggested 11.30 a.m. I would ask him
whether he prefers 1I .30, or would there be agreement
to meet at I I a.m.?

66. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
We seem to have forgotten what we were discussing.
It was my understanding that this meeting was convened to deal with Israel’s rejection of a unanimous
decision of the Council. The question is, how does
the Council intend to deal with such a situation?
67.

74. Mr, NUSETBEH (Jordan): I would certainly go
along with the consensus of my colleagues. I suggested
I I .30 a.m., but if I I a.m. is the preference of other
members, I would of course go along with that.

68. Shelling has been resumed. More people will be
killed in cold blood. The question before the Council.
therefore, is-1 ask again-how to deal with that issue?
Where does the responsibility lie and how do the
members of the Council carry out their duty of fulfilling
the tasks, functions and responsibilities of the
Cotlncil? That is the issue that we thought we were to
discuss. Somehow, however, the discussion has been
diverted-or,
rather, hijacked.

75. The PRESIDENT: Before adjourning the present
meeting, I should again like to thank the Conference
Services and others who responded and have worked
with us late into the night.

All I can say is that the Council has forgotten
that from July 1981 to May 1982the people of Galilee
did enjoy peace and the cease-fire was observed
-ore one side at least. Yet, according to the report
of the Secretary-General, Israel is the one that on
hrlndreds of occasions violated that cease-fire.

NOTE

The mcctirfff

I’OS~Jrrt 2.55 u.tn.

69.

7

HOW

TO OBTAIN

Llnited Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained t’rom bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
bookstore
or write to: llnited Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.

your

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

L.es publications
des Nations Unies sont en vcnte dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde enticr. Inl’ormez-vous
aupres de votre librairc nu adressez-vous B : Nations Unies, Section
dcs ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de lx Naciones Unidas et&n en venta en lib&as
y caSas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librcro o dirijasc a: Nacioncs Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations.

New York

00300

88~609894une

1989~2.050
