THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
st

MEETING: 1.5SEPTEMBER 1977
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/203 1) . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . ,

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent RepresentativeQf Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387) . . . , , . , . . , . , , . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.203 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .> are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

203 1 ST MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,

15 September

President: Mr. Riidiger von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).

1977, at 11.30 a.m.

We are especially pleased because we are familiar with your
distinguished personal qualities as a negotiator, which
guarantee complete success in your new post.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela,

3. Permit me also to thank the delegations which have
been kind enough to convey their compliments to the
representative of France for the way in which he carried
out the functions of President of the Council during
August.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/203 1)

4. Before dealing with the question under discussion, I
should like to pay a tribute to the memory of President
Makarios, who died on 3 August last. I wish to honour his
gifts as a statesman and a great patriot, qualities which over
the last 20 years have brought him to the forefront of
international life.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United .Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)

5. Two weeks ago the Security Council held its first
meeting [2026th meeting/ in response to the request of the
Cypriot delegation and now it is on the point of taking a
decision on a draft resolution. One might be tempted, in
view of the amount of time that has passed since the
beginning of our debate, to express regret at the protracted
nature of negotiations which only now have allowed us to
arrive at a text. For our part, we would have liked to see
the Council taking an earlier decision. We do feel, however,
that it was wise to seek an appropriate response to the
request of the Government of Cyprus, a response which
could also enjoy the broadest possible support among
members of the Council, The difficulties which we have
encountered and overcome in attempting to achieve this
objective, far from diminishing the value of the text on
which we are to take a decision, in fact, in our eyes, lend it
greater authority.

The meeting was called to order at Il..55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2026th meeting, I invite the representatives of
Cyprus, Greece and Turkey to participate, without the right
to vote, in the Council’s discussion under the terms of
Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, Christophides
ICYPrus), Mr. Papoulias (Greece) and Mr. Tiirkmen
(Turkey) took places at the Council table.

6. Having listened to the statements made on 31 August
[ibid.] and 9 September [203Oth meeting/ by the parties
concerned and also the statement made in this very
chamber on 1 September [2028th meeting] by the
Secretary-General, my delegation believes that the various
developments which have taken place in Varosha, the new
town of Famagusta, fully justify our meeting.

2. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, permit me first to offer you thr congratulations of my delegation upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. ‘We are particularly happy to see
this important post occupied for the first time by a
representative of the Federal Republic of Germany, a
neighbour with which for many years now we have
maintained links of very close co-operation and which is
one of our principal partners in the European Community.

7. Although the actual events in question Only amOUnt to
apparently minor measures taken on a modest scale, we do
feel that they are the kind of actions which could have
dangerous consequences. Such measures, in fact, within a
context of great tension, are liable to give rise to misunderstandings. They arouse legitimate apprehensions. Further,
since they are benign in appearance and because they do
not in themselves bear any collective significance, they
could be followed by other measures which, taken together
1

Archbishop Makarios, Presidentof Cyprus. The late President Makarios made positive contributions to the struggle
againstimperialismand colonialism,to the attainment and
safeguardingof the independenceand sovereignty of the
Republic of Cyprus and to the developmentof friendly
relationsand co-operation betweenChina and Cyprus. In
honouring his memory, we believe that the people of
Cyprus will win continued victories along their road of
advance.

with the first set of measures, might significantly change
the state of affairs. It is up to those responsible to
understand and realize the global effect of the events. It is
for them, too, to prevent or limit these initiatives which,
although they may be local, are none the less fraught with
danger. If they do not do this, they will be shirking their
responsibility, as indeed the Council would be shirking its
responsibility were it to disregard the risk that at any
moment a chain reaction might be provoked which might
cause the situation to deteriorate further and to get out of
hand to the point where the parties could no longer control
it, and this at a time when the process of intercommunal
negotiations, to which my country has always given its full
support and to which it remains firmly attached, is passing
through a delicate phase.

13. The Chinesedelegationhasrepeatedly expoundedthe
consistentprincipled position of the ChineseGovernment
on the question of Cyprus both at General Assembly
sessions
and at Security Council meetings.On the basisof
this position, we voted in favour of a number of relevant
Assemblyand Council resolutions.

8. It seems to us necessary, in the circumstances, for the
Council, which has repeatedly in the past called upon the
interested parties to demonstrate the greatest moderation
and to refrain from any unilateral action liable to jeopardize negotiations between the representatives of the two
communities, to reiterate that appeal. It also seems to us
indispensable that the Council should call upon the parties
to take no initiative that might alter the climate required
for the success of these negotiations. My delegationis
convinced that, in the present circumstances,everything
possible must be done to preserve the basesand the
framework for the negotiations to which the partieshave
agreed.We therefore feel that it is the CounciI’s duty to
make its contribution to a reduction of tension, It is the
duty‘of MemberStates to act Likewise.I note in this respect
the statement that “there is no ‘mass colonization’ or
resettlementof [Varosha] in progress”/2026th meeting,
para. 68/. A more complete assurancewould be welcome
and would, I am sure, greatly contribute to an atmosphere
of calm.
9. It must be made absolutely clear and unanimously
recognized that any development liable to lead to a
transformation of the conditions for the negotiations
cannot be unilaterally brought about without jeopardizing
not only the success
and the very continuation of the talks
eventhe implementationof the resolutionsof our Organization.

1.5. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr. President, J
begin by offering you our congratulations on your assumptionof the presidencyof the Security Council for this
month. We areparticularly pleased
that this meetingshould
be taking placeunder your chairmanship
in view of the very
close relations between our two countries as fellowmembersof the European community.I shouldalsolike to
offer our tllanks to your distinguished
predecessor,
Ambassador Leprette of France, for the skilful manner in which
he handled our affairs during the month of August and
indeedpresidedover the beginningof this debate.

10. We have always stressedthat the prospects for a
settlement necessarilydepended upon negotiation based
upon the fundamental and legitimate rights of the two
communitieswithin the framework of the maintenanceof
the independence,sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the island.That is why we call upon the Council to spareno
effort to ensure the resumption at an early date of
meaningfulnegotiations. For all thesereasons,my delegation will vote in favour of the text which is to be submitted
to us.
I: /

16. Before turning to the subjectof the present debate, I
shouid like to offer our most sincerecondolencesto the
delegationand people of Cyprus for the tragic death last
month of Archbishop Makarios.
17. We have listened carefully to the contributions made
during this debateand particularly to the statementsof the
parties directly concerned. We have alsofollowed closely,
and indeed taken part in, the intensiveconsultationswhich
have taken placeover the pasttwo and a half weeksto try
and reach a result in this debatewhich could be supported
by the whole of the Council.

11. The PRESTDENT: I thank the representative of
France for the kind words he addressedto me and for the
friendly remarkshe madeabout the closerelationsbetween
our two countries,
12. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (translation from Chinese):
First of all, in the name of the Chinesedelegation,1 wish to
expressdeep condolenceson the recent untimely death of
,

14. The Chinesedelegationhasalwaysheld firmIy that the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Cyprus shouldbe respected.Wesincerelyhope that the two
Cypriot communitiesand the partiesconcerned,bearingin
mind the over-all interests of opposingimperialism and
hegemonism,will take a positive attitude and continue to
work for an early reasonablesettlement of the Cyprus
questionthrough patient negotiationson an equal footing
and in a spirit of mutual understanding and mutual
accommodation.It is also our earnesthope that all the
parties concerned will heighten their vigilance, exercise
restraint, gradually narrow and eliminate, rather than
aggravate and widen, their differences, and thus guard
against super-Power meddling and, in particular, avoid
giving openingsfor exploitation by that super-Powerwhich
is bent on sowingdiscord and fishing in muddied waters.
This is not only in the fundamentalinterestsof the two
Cypriot communitiesand the partiesconcernedbut is alsoa
commondesireof the peopleof all countrieswho are really
concernedabout the destiny of the peopleof Cyprus.

18. Governing our approach to this debate has beenthe
conviction that the most urgent requirementat the present
2

time is to get the negotiations going again through a
resumption of the intercommunal talks and therefore of the
need to ensure that any action taken by the Council should
help and not hinder this process. We believed that this
could best be done by a resolution which, while taking
account of the proper concerns of the Cyprus delegation,
was fair and balanced and took account of the legitimate
concerns and apprehensions of both sides. 1 must say,
however, that my delegation has a great deal of sympathy
with the remarks made by the Foreign Minister of Cyprus
in the debate last Friday /203&h meeting/ in which he
complained about the amount of time that it was taking for
the Council to reach a decision. But we are pleased that the
time spent has not been in vain in that it has enabled us to
reach a decision which we believe does meet the concerns 1
have just mentioned and which will, I understand, be
supported by the great majority of the members of the
Council. The draft resolutioni before us is inevitably a
compromise. It does not entirely meet the wishes of the
partics nor is it perhaps what any individual member of the
Council would have ideally wanted. Nevertheless we do
believe that, in the present circumstances, it represents a
reasonable outcome to our present debate.
19. Looking now to the future, there can I think be no
doubt about the urgency of reaching a settlement in Cyprus
and of the reality that such progress as has been made so far
is sadly limited. The longer the problem remains unresolved
the greater the danger that the rift between the parties will
widen, that positions will harden further and that the
present situation, already an explosive one, could become
even worst. We believe therefore that the important thing
now is to bring home to the parties once again the urgent
need for early and substantial progress.
20. Like many others who have already spoken in this
debate, I should like to reiterate again the very great
importance we attach to the intercommunal talks as the
only forum which offers a real prospect for progress. In
saying this I would in no way wish to underrate the value of
the deliberations which we undertake here at the United
Nations nor to downgrade the important influence that the
Security Council or the General Assembly can bring to
bear. But, at the end of the day, it is only through direct
talks between the parties themselves that a settlement can
be reached. We have therefore been pleased to note the
support that has been voiced during this debate, by all the
parties concerned, for the continuation of the intercommunal talks. We were encouraged by the meetings which
took place at Nicosia earlier this year between Archbishop
Makarios and Mr. Denktaq, which led in turn to the
resumption of the talks at Vienna in March. It was also
encouraging that at that latter meeting, in spite of the very
wide gulf which was evident between the positions of the
parties, some progress was made and that that meeting was
then followed by further meetings at Nicosia under the
auspices of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative,
Mr. Perez de Cuellar. We are, however, disappointed that,
following Mr. Perez de CuBlIar’s return to Cyprus in early
1 Subsequently circulated as document S/12394.

July, the talks have not yet been resumed in spite of a
number of efforts on his part. In the view of my
Government, it is of great importance that the talks should
be resumed as soon as possible and that the two sides
should be prepared to come to them with comprehensive
and concrete proposals.
21, In this conncxion, I should also like to say how much
we appreciate the efforts made so far by the SecretaryGeneral and by his Special Representative in assistingthe
progress of the negotiations. We hope that they will be
ready to continue theseefforts and maketheir good offices
available in any way which could help the negotiating
process.
22. Turning now to the particular subject of the present
debate, my delegation has pointed out on frequent occasionsin the past that if the talks are to make progressthis
can be done only in an atmosphereundisturbedby actions
or statements which could prejudice the chancesof
reaching a settlement. This meansin particular that there
should be no unilateral moves to alter the existing status
quo in the island. I shouldalsolike to recall paragraph3 of
resolution 410 (1977), adopted lessthan three monthsago,
which urged the partiesto act with restraint and to refrain
from any action likely to affect adverselythe prospectsfor
negotiation. In view of this, my delegationhasbeenpleased
to note the assurances
given to the Council in this debate
that recc!H moves in New Famagustado not constitute
colonisation or resettlement. We believe that theseassurancesare extremely important becauseif there had beenor
were to be any devclopmcnt of that kind it would
inevitably lead to seriousconsequences.
Such a move could
hardly fail to undermine the climate of confidence necessary if the talks are to make progress.It would thus do
serious damage to the prospects of reaching an eventual
settlement.
23. To sum up, we believe that the urgent neednow is to
get the talks restarted, under the auspicesof the United
Nations, and with the assistance, as needed, of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative.We urge
both sidesto contribute all that tltey can to makingthis
possibleand in particular to come forward with comprehensivc and concrete proposalsfor resolvingtheir differences.
Meanwhile we call once more upon the parties to act with
restraint and to refrain from any unilateral action that may
a?fect adversely the prospectsfor successin the talks. The
resettlement of Varosha would, in our view, be a serious
impediment to the negotiating process,and one which this
Council could hardly ignore. The main requirementnow is
to get the talks going again in a meaningful way. Only if
this is done will there be any real prospect of reachinga
solution to this problem-one which has remained unresolvedalready for far too long.
24. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representativeof the
United Kingdom for the kind words he addressed
to me, as
well as for his friendly remarks about the closerelations
between our two countries.
The meeting roseat 12.20 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

I,es publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
dbpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
auprPs de votre libraire’ ou adressez-vous
A : Nations U&s.
Section des ventcs, New York ou GenBve.

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACLONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
astin
buidoras
en to&s partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
IJnidas. Seccidn de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librcrias
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: .Naciones

New York

lo other

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

7%70001-October

1978-2,200
