S/2016/780

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 September 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union on issues of peace and security in Africa,
including the work of the United Nations Office to the
African Union
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement by the President of
the Security Council of 16 December 2014 (S/PRST/2014/27), by means of which
the Security Council requested me to submit to it an annual report on ways to
strengthen the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including the work of the United Nations
Office to the African Union (UNOAU). Outlined herein are the collaborative efforts
of the United Nations and the African Union to address threats to peace and security
in Africa, and the key role played by UNOAU, established in 2010, in strengthening
relations between the two organizations.
2.
The Security Council, the General Assembly and various organs of the African
Union have repeatedly called for stronger strategic engagement between the United
Nations, the African Union and the regional economic communities/regional
mechanisms for conflict prevention, management and resolution in Africa, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In my report
entitled “The future of United Nations peace operations: implementation of the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations”
(A/70/357-S/2015/682), I noted the significant progress made in institutionalizing
United Nations cooperation with regional organizations, including the African
Union. I also recognized that the peace and security responsibilities shouldered by
the African Union and the regional economic communities/regional mechanisms in
Africa had increased in recent years. I am committed to strengthening arrangements
to facilitate coordinated action and effective delivery by the African Union for our
collective benefit.

II. Challenges to peace and security in Africa
3.
Since 2001, there has been a reduction in protracted intra-State conflicts on the
continent. Collaboration between the United Nations, the African Union, the regional
economic communities/regional mechanisms and other partners has contributed to
16-14557 (E)

150916

*1614557*

S/2016/780

efforts to address issues of peace and constitutional order in politically polarized
situations, such as in Madagascar and Guinea-Bissau. Countries emerging from
crises or violent conflict, such as Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, are developing more
inclusive political institutions. Peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts have yielded
results in Sierra Leone, paving the way for progress towards sustainable
development. In addition, the African Union has adopted a normative framework on
unconstitutional changes of government and has suspended the participation at its
meetings of Governments established through military coups.
4.
Nevertheless, numerous challenges to the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict in Africa remain. Transnational networks continue to smuggle
weapons, people and illicit drugs across the continent and beyond. Addressing the
immediate causes of conflict through preventive diplomacy and mediation will not
yield sustainable peace in the absence of long-term sustained measures to tackle
structural issues, such as weak governance and political, social and economic
marginalization and exclusion. In some instances, the existence of borders which are
not fully delineated and demarcated can be sources of conflict, especially when such
zones are, or simply are thought to be, rich in resources. Moreover, modern conflicts
involve a nebulous array of non-State actors, rapid means of communication, ease
of access to weapons and finance, and the spread of violent extremism, which
together challenge conventional approaches to conflict management.
5.
The spread of violent extremism and terrorism in Africa, and the humanitarian
and human rights crises that they provoke, pose a serious threat to the continent.
The emergence and spread of such groups as Al -Shabaab in Somalia, Boko Haram
in the Lake Chad basin countries, and the Lord’s Resistance Army, first in Uganda
and later in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic, present new threats to peace and security in Africa that require
timely and decisive responses from the African Union and the wider international
community. In 2007, the African Union deployed the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) to restore stability in the country; it also established the
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord ’s Resistance Army;
and more recently, it has supported the Lake Chad Basin Commission in the
establishment of a multinational joint task force to combat Boko Haram. UNOAU
has played and continues to play an instrumental role in supporting those and other
African Union initiatives to address those threats.
6.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Guinea also poses challenges
to the maintenance of peace and security. While concerted international efforts with
regard to maritime security have significantly degraded the capability of
transnational criminal groups to interrupt maritime traffic, take hostages for ransom
and loot cargo in the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean off the coast
of Somalia, incidents of piracy and violent criminal activities in the Gulf of Guinea
remain a concern, and the root causes of piracy are yet to be fully addressed.
7.
Election-related disputes also continue to pose a threat, potentially reversing
gains made towards democratization. The erosion of public confidence in electoral
management bodies, delays in holding elections, unconstitutional attempts at
extending term limits and sophisticated manipulation of electoral processes create
resentment and sow the seeds of discord as well as violence and other forms of
human rights violations. Recent developments in Burkina Faso, Burundi and the
Congo are illustrations of such threats to peace and security.

2/18

16-14557

S/2016/780

III. From growing cooperation to a strategic partnership
8.
During the past decade, a number of frameworks and mechanisms have been
established to strengthen United Nations-African Union cooperation. In 2006, the
Addis Ababa Declaration entitled “Enhancing United Nations -African Union
cooperation: framework for the ten-year capacity-building programme for the
African Union” (A/61/630, annex) was issued. Through the programme, the United
Nations pledged its support to strengthen the African Union Commission, focusing
on conflict prevention, mediation, good offices, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The programme comes to an end in 2016. To build upon the achievements of the
programme and taking into account the challenges encountered, the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the African Union, at its twenty-seventh ordinary
session, in June 2015, endorsed a successor programme, the “Framework for a
Renewed United Nations-African Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and
Development Agenda 2017-2027”.
9.
In 2007, the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union began holding annual joint consultative meetings. In their first joint
communiqué (S/2007/421, annex II), the two bodies committed themselves to
developing a stronger and more structured relationship and underlined the
importance of support for the operationalization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture and its pillars. In 2007 also, the General Assembly adopted resolution
61/296, in which it requested the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to
strengthen the capacity of the Secretariat to meet the special needs of Africa. The
commitment to strengthen cooperation and establish a more effective relationship at
the strategic level was repeatedly expressed throughout the rest of the decade in a
series of resolutions and statements by the Security Council 1 and the General
Assembly. 2
10. The establishment of UNOAU in 2010 was a significant step forward in
advancing that partnership. For the initial three to four years, the Office supported
capacity-building of the African Union Commission for the planning and
management of peace support operations, having recognized the need to support
rapid and coordinated deployment to the Sudan, Somalia and, subsequently, Mali
and the Central African Republic. The planning and deployment of African Union
peace support operations were typically coordinated with the United Nations
through UNOAU; some of those operations later became United Nations
peacekeeping operations. UNOAU provided technical support to enhance the
capacity of the African Union to deploy election observation missions and promote
gender awareness.
11. UNOAU supported the engagement of my special representatives, envoys a nd
mediators with their African Union counterparts, including at African Union
summits and meetings of the Peace and Security Council. The Office has worked
closely with the African Union High-level Implementation Panel on the Sudan and
South Sudan. It has also facilitated coordination between the African Union and my
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, as well as my Special Representatives on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, on Children and Armed Conflict and for Libya. Over
time, further efforts were made to strengthen coordination, including annual “desk __________________
1
2

16-14557

S/PRST/2007/7, resolution 1809 (2008), S/PRST/2009/3 and S/PRST/2009/26.
Resolution 63/310, adopted in 2009.

3/18

S/2016/780

to-desk” meetings between the United Nations and the African Union, bringing
together working-level staff. At the strategic level, the Joint Task Force on Peace
and Security, which brings together every six months the Under-Secretaries-General
for Political Affairs, Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support with the African
Union Commissioners for Peace and Security and for Political Affairs, was
established in 2010 to provide guidance and coherence to t he partnership at the
highest levels and to identify areas for concerted joint action. UNOAU plays a
coordinating role in those United Nations-African Union engagements.
12. The increase in the number of African Union peace support operations
generated requests from Member States to enhance the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. In its resolution 2033 (2012), the Security
Council called upon the Secretary-General to maintain close consultations with the
African Union and regional economic communities on peace and security challenges
in Africa, and pledged support for further interaction between the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission to exchange information and, as appropriate, coordinate
in the preparation of recommendations, including through joint assessments. In
resolution 2167 (2014), the Council expressed its determination to take effective
steps to further enhance the relationship between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the African Union. The General Assembly,
in 2013, in its resolution 67/302, requested the United Nations system to intensify
its assistance to the African Union, as appropriate, in strengthening the African
Peace and Security Architecture, and emphasized the need to improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of cooperation between the two organizations.
13. My special representatives and envoys, including my Special Representative to
the African Union, Haile Menkerios, have regularly addressed the Peace and
Security Council on issues on the agenda of the Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council. In 2015 alone, the United Nations provided 40 such briefings and
participated in a further 30 open sessions. Similarly, African Union commissioners
and envoys have briefed the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies on a range of
issues and the two bodies have increasingly exchanged views and engaged in
discussions, including on the occasion of the tenth annual joint consultative meeting
of the two bodies, in May 2016, when Somalia and Burundi were on the agenda.
14. The African Union is also strengthening its voice in the decision -making
process of the Security Council and continues to work towards greater cohesion and
harmonization of the positions of African member States. In December 2013, the
African Union Commission convened a high-level meeting in an effort to improve
coordination between the three African members of the Security Council, the Peace
and Security Council and other African Union policy organs. The participants in the
meeting, which has subsequently become an annual event, recommended the
establishment of an African “A3” caucus within the Security Council to develop
common positions and advocate African Union positions, measures to enhance t he
relationship between the Peace and Security Council and A3, greater alignment of
the Peace and Security Council and Security Council agendas, and steps to
strengthen the Permanent Observer Mission of the African Union to the United
Nations in New York.
15. After joint responses to certain crisis situations delivered positive results, both
organizations expressed the need to move beyond ad hoc and reactive cooperation to
a more strategic partnership built on an intensive, continuing and comprehensive

4/18

16-14557

S/2016/780

engagement to generate common approaches to shared challenges. In that context,
in 2014, UNOAU developed, jointly with the Peace and Security Department of the
African Union Commission, a joint framework for an enhanced partnership in peace
and security. The framework called for joint or well-coordinated initiatives in
conflict prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping to leverage the political capital
and capabilities of each organization across the conflict cycle, and recognized the
need for continuous exchange of information on the structural and proximate causes
of conflict and early warning signs, to facilitate aligned responses in conflict
prevention, mediation, peacekeeping/peace support operations and post -conflict
development. Discussions are under way to develop a more overarching framework,
to be signed by the African Union Commission and the Secretariat.
16. Guided by its fiftieth anniversary solemn declaration in 2013, the African
Union adopted, in 2015, Agenda 2063, its flagship framework for an inte grated,
prosperous and peaceful Africa. The Agenda sets eight aspirational goals to be
attained in the coming five decades. Agenda 2063 and the Partnership on Africa ’s
Integration and Development Agenda constitute a solid platform for continued
United Nations-African Union cooperation and recognize that a prosperous Africa
will be possible only when Africa is peaceful and stable. The African Union has also
unveiled a road map for the period 2016-2020 for the African Peace and Security
Architecture, which outlines measures for the achievement of the goal of silencing
the guns to end all wars in Africa by 2020.
17. To mobilize international support for Agenda 2063 and its first 10 -year
implementation plan, to raise global awareness about the challenges and
opportunities for fostering peace and security in Africa and to galvanize political,
technical and financial support for the implementation of the African Peace and
Security Architecture road map for 2016-2020, the Office of the Special Adviser on
Africa has regularly organized, in partnership with the African Union, high -level
panels and expert group meetings. The events have addressed emerging and critical
peace and security issues in Africa and have sought to develop specific and
actionable policy responses and recommendations. The Office has also supported
the African Union in the formulation of common African positions and has worked
towards ensuring complementarity and coherence between those positions and
global policies and priorities.
18. Cooperation has also increased in the context of tackling new types of threats
to international peace and security, such as the outbreak of Ebola virus disease in
West Africa. UNOAU supported the planning, deployment and management of the
African Union response to the outbreak in West Africa, including the mobilization
of medical personnel and the liquidation of the African Union Support to the Ebola
Outbreak in West Africa mission, and also contributed, through the deployment of
technical personnel, to the broader effort provided by the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response.
19. In 2015, in its report (A/70/95-S/2015/446) the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations called for deepening United Nations -African Union partnership
and proposed that the United Nations should take the decisive step of investing in
and committing itself to the success of the African Union as a partner in addressing
shared concerns. It also espoused the principles of early engagemen t, ongoing
consultation, common understanding of conflicts, joint planning and an integrated
approach throughout the conflict cycle. The Panel recognized that there was a need

16-14557

5/18

S/2016/780

for predictable financing for African Union peace support operations, but also
highlighted the centrality of politics in preventing, managing and resolving conflict.
It further emphasized the need for a partnership to be grounded on a clear division
of labour based on respective comparative advantage, transparency, accountability
and respect for international norms and standards.

IV. Strengthened partnership in conflict prevention
and peacemaking
20. In line with the growing institutional collaboration, UNOAU, since 2014, has
strengthened its capacity to facilitate regular horizon-scanning activities with the
African Union Commission, the sharing of analysis, the development of common
messages and, where possible, the harmonization of preventive diplomatic action
and mediation efforts. UNOAU has also facilitated regular comm unication between
Headquarters and field missions in Africa, and the African Union Commission on
strategic questions, in order to advance common positions.
21. In my report on cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations on mediation (A/70/328), I detailed various models of
cooperation and stressed the importance of coherence, coordination and
complementarity in mediation engagements and the importance of genuine
partnerships between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
including the African Union. By sharing experience and technical advice, UNOAU
and the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat have supported the African
Union in planning and developing the mediation support capability and structures
of the Commission. In addition, senior African Union mediators participated in
March and May 2015 in the United Nations high-level seminars on gender and
inclusive mediation processes and, in August 2015, the Department coordinated the
organization of a training course on conflict analysis for staff of UNOAU, the
African Union, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the executive secretariat of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
22. There have also been some notable successes in collaboration on country specific situations. For example, following the attempt in October 2014 by the
President, Blaise Compaoré, to amend the Constitution in Burkina Faso to allow
him to run for another term, the United Nations, through my Special Representative
for West Africa, and the African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) cooperated closely to resolve the ensuing crisis. They
worked jointly to support the political transition in the country, including through
the establishment of the International Follow-up and Support Group for the
Transition in Burkina Faso. On 16 September 2015, the transition process was
disrupted by a coup d’état led by the elite military presidential guard. Following the
popular mobilization of activists across the country, supported by the regular armed
forces, coupled with intense pressure from the international community, in
particular from the United Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS, the leaders of
the coup d’état were compelled to relinquish power and the country’s transitional
institutions were reinstated. The joint approach adopted by the United Nations, the
African Union and ECOWAS, facilitated by UNOAU and the then United Nations
Office for West Africa, contributed to the successful completion of the transition in

6/18

16-14557

S/2016/780

Burkina Faso, vividly illustrating the advantages of having a shared understanding,
close collaboration and partnership in prevention.
23. The United Nations continues to work closely with the African Union, the East
African Community and other partners to resolve the crisis in Burundi peacefully. In
addition to the efforts led by my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, the
United Nations Electoral Observer Mission in Burundi, my Special Representative
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, my Special
Representative to the African Union engaged with the leaders of Burundi and with
other leaders in the region, in coordination with the African Union Commission
Chairperson’s Special Representative to the Great Lakes Region and Head of the
African Union Liaison Office in Burundi to help to de -escalate rising tensions and
mounting violence in Burundi. Following the deterioration of the situation in the
country in late 2015, the international community intensified diplomatic efforts in
search of a negotiated political process. UNOAU, supported by specialized
technical expertise from Headquarters, provided operational support to the African
Union for the development of contingency plans to address political and security
concerns, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2248 (2015). At the
request of the Security Council, I also deployed a team to Burundi to support the
efforts of my Special Adviser, Jamal Benomar. Meanwhile, the Peace and Security
Council authorized the deployment of the African Prevention and Protection
Mission in Burundi, which was rejected by the Government. At its twenty-sixth
ordinary session, held in January 2016, the Assembly of the African Union decided
to hold off the deployment of the Mission and to dispatch a high -level delegation to
engage with the authorities. In January 2016, a Security Council delegation visited
the country to call upon all relevant stakeholders to pursue an inclusive and
transparent dialogue and prevent an escalation of violence. In February, I visited the
country and reiterated the strong commitment of the United Nations to peace,
stability and development in Burundi and the broader region. Regional efforts to
support an inclusive political dialogue are continuing, pursuant to Council resolutions
2279 (2016) and 2303 (2016).
24. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Office of the
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region work closely with the African Union
Commission and the African Union facilitator to support efforts to resolve the
political and electoral impasse in the country and to encourage all Congolese
stakeholders to join in a political dialogue process and pave the way to peaceful and
credible presidential and legislative elections. The Secretariat and the Mission are
also providing dedicated political, electoral and communications expertise to the
facilitator’s team.
25. In Mali, the High Representative of the African Union and my Special
Representative are working closely together towards advancing the implementation
of the peace agreement and encouraging its signatory parties to commit themselves
to undertaking key political and security reform, respecting the ceasefire and
enhancing the inclusiveness of the peace process. In addition, the United Nations is
cooperating with the African Union towards adjusting the underlying factors of
insecurity and instability in the Sahel region through the coordinated
implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. Furthermore ,
the United Nations is participating in the action taken within the framework of the
Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of security cooperation and the

16-14557

7/18

S/2016/780

operationalization of the African Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo Saharan region. In July 2016, the United Nations participated, along with other
multilateral and bilateral partners, in an African Union-led technical assessment
mission to Mali to help to develop regional options for tackling terrorism and
transnational organized crime in the Sahelo-Saharan region.
26. Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union in the Libyan
crisis has grown following the events that led to the overthrow of the former Libyan
leader, Muammar Gaddafi, in 2011. The relationship gained new momentum with
the appointment on 31 January 2016 of the African Union High Representative for
Libya, Jakaya Kikwete, a former President of the United Republic of Tanzania. My
Special Representative for Libya is working and coordinating closely with him,
including through the International Contact Group for Libya. There is recognition
by international partners of a need for greater cooperation on the political process
and on security, and for greater coordination of support to Libya in efforts to combat
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
27. In Madagascar, the United Nations and the African Union have closely
followed developments over the past two years. Progress towards national
reconciliation has been limited. Tensions between the President and the National
Assembly culminated in an attempt by some members of the Assembly to impeach
the President in June 2015. In January 2016, Lakhdar Brahimi, a member of the
African Union Panel of the Wise, visited the country to encourage dialogue in the
wake of the impeachment crisis and to mobilize the support of the international
community. I also visited the country, in May 2016. UNOAU engagement resulted
in sharing of information on the situation, coordination of visits and alignment of
messaging between the two organizations. UNOAU also participated in the need s
assessment and design of African Union assistance in the area of security sector
reform, complementing the assistance provided by the Peacebuilding Fund aimed at
supporting security sector reform, good governance and assistance to the
development of southern Madagascar.
28. UNOAU also supported joint United Nations and African Union engagement
in the Comoros, where tension rose in late 2015 over the eligibility of a former
President, Ahmed Abdallah Mohamed Sambi, to run in the presidential elections in
2016. In a joint statement, the United Nations and the African Union called for
respect for the principle of alternation of the presidency among candidates from the
islands of the Comoros, in line with the Constitution. A message from the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission was conveyed to Mr. Sambi by the
Envoy of the Chairperson, who was dispatched to the Comoros in November 2015.
When tensions arose following both the first and second rounds of the elections, in
February and April 2016, the African Union and the United Nations issued aligned
statements in which they called for calm, the resolution of grievances through
appropriate legal channels and respect for the decisions of the Constitutional Court.
In April 2016, I dispatched my Special Representative to the African Union to the
Comoros to consult stakeholders and support the continuing work of the United
Nations country team. He called for the exercise of restraint and for the electoral
institutions to function free from political influence. Following the visit, UNOAU
engaged with the African Union on the deployment of an electoral observer mission
for the partial rerun of elections called for by the Constitutional Court. The presence
of the observers and of United Nations experts contributed to a smooth rerun and
built up the confidence of the population in the electoral process.

8/18

16-14557

S/2016/780

29. UNOAU also supported the work of the Office of the Special Envoy for the
Sudan and South Sudan. Pursuant to the partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union in that context, the Office, in coordination with the United
Nations-African Union Joint Special Representative for Darfur, worked closely with
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2046 (2012). The partnership and cooperation between
the United Nations and the Panel is premised on the comparative advantage brought
by a panel comprising, initially, three former African Heads of State with
considerable influence on key stakeholders in both countries, supported by decisions
of the Peace and Security Council and the Security Council.
30. In the Sudan, the 2012 framework for African Union and United Nations
facilitation of the Darfur peace process continues to provide the basis for joint
efforts to revitalize the peace process and to increase its inclusiveness in a broad
national process. In accordance with that guiding principle, since the beginning of
2016, the United Nations-African Union Joint Special Representative for Darfur,
UNOAU and the Office of the Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan have
supported the African Union High-level Implementation Panel through renewed
consultations with the Sudanese parties, urging them to enter into negotiations and
take measures to build confidence among themselves, including by ceasing
hostilities in Darfur and the Two Areas of Blue Nile and South Kordofan States.
Those efforts culminated in the signing, in March 2016 by the Government of the
Sudan and in August 2016 by opposition groups, of the Roadmap Agreement
proposed by the Panel, representing a valuable step towards ending the war and
addressing the multifaceted challenges facing the Sudan. The Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and I welcomed the signing of the Agreement and ur ged
all Sudanese parties to continue to work towards an agreement on cessation of
hostilities, humanitarian access to conflict-affected areas and an inclusive national
dialogue. The parties have as yet failed to reach agreement on a cessation of
hostilities in Darfur and the Two Areas. I have strongly urged them to resume
negotiations, abide by the Roadmap Agreement and refrain from any attempt to
escalate the conflict in Darfur and the Two Areas.
31. In the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya,
Mali, Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and the Sudan, for example, violent conflict
and insecurity have forcibly displaced populations, both within and across borders,
with dire consequences for women and children. To help to develop str ategies to
prevent and address the root causes of forced migration within the context of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, UNOAU has been
engaging with the African Union and the regional economic communities/regional
mechanisms. Furthermore, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, the
International Organization for Migration, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and others partnered with the African Union
Commission to convene a high-level expert group meeting in Durban, South Africa,
on 23 and 24 November 2015 on the theme “Conflict-induced migration in Africa:
maximizing new opportunities to address its peace, security and inclusive
development dimensions”. The participants called for greater coope ration and a
more integrated approach to tackling the root causes of forced displacement.

16-14557

9/18

S/2016/780

V. Enhanced cooperation in peacekeeping
32. Significant progress is also evident in the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union on peace operations. This includes strengthened
cooperation on current operations and the development of long -term institutional
capacity of the African Union to plan, deploy and manage its operations.
Collaboration is continuing to assess options for ensuring more predictable and
sustainable financing for African Union peace support operations undertaken with
the consent of the Security Council. Efforts are also under way to establish an
effective framework and mechanisms to integrate human rights and protecti on
concerns into the conduct of African Union peace support operations and to prevent
and address international violations of international human rights and humanitarian
law in such contexts.
33. UNOAU continued to work closely with the African Union to support AMISOM
efforts to create the security conditions necessary for the political process in
Somalia, in particular the 2016 elections. In March 2016, the United Nations African Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security established a joint working
group to provide recommendations on enhancing the effectiveness of AMISOM
operations and address the issue of short-term and long-term funding shortfalls.
The joint working group, comprising representatives of Headquarters, UNOAU,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia, the African Union Commission and AMISOM, met in April 2016
and agreed on recommendations to enhance AMISOM effectiveness. Those
recommendations were further discussed by the Military Coordination Committee at
its meeting held on 9 May 2016, at which a decision was made to review the
AMISOM concept of operations.
34. In resolution 2167 (2014), the Security Council welcomed developments
regarding cooperation between the United Nations, the African Union and the
European Union, including the contribution of the European Union to the
enhancement of African Union capacities, and encouraged regional and subregional
organizations to strengthen and increase cooperation among them, including efforts
to enhance their respective capacities in the maintenance of international peace and
security. The United Nations, the African Union and the European Union are
continuing to cooperate, with the support of UNOAU, on the development of a
policy and guidelines on United Nations police in peacekeeping operations and
special political missions. Continuing efforts between the United Nations and the
African Union in that regard will maximize unity of effort.
35. United Nations-African Union cooperation on human rights is evolving.
Support is increasingly being provided by UNOAU and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to strengthen the
operational capacity of military, police and civilian peacekeepers, emphasizing the
centrality of human rights in peacekeeping operations. UNOAU continues to work
with OHCHR to strengthen human rights mechanisms in African Union peace and
security operations generally, and in Somalia specifically, with enhanced training,
planning, selection and screening measures, and is monitoring the establishment of
the Civilian Casualty Tracking Analysis and Response Cell in AMISOM. Support
has also been provided by UNOAU and OHCHR for the roll-out of the African
Union aide-memoire on the protection of civilians. In October 2014, a workshop
took stock of the integration of human rights in African Union peace support

10/18

16-14557

S/2016/780

operations and, in June 2015, OHCHR and UNOAU organized a joint workshop for
UNOAU and African Union civilian staff and military planners on the h uman rights
due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security
forces.
36. The United Nations, through UNOAU, works closely with the African Union
and the regional economic communities/regional mechanisms towards the
operationalization of the African Standby Force to enhance the capacity of the
African Union to respond to violent conflicts on the continent, in line with the five year workplan and the African Peace and Security Architecture road map for 2016 2020. UNOAU has provided extensive support to the Amani Africa II Field Training
Exercise, one of the main instruments for evaluating the operational readiness of the
Force, including its ability to respond rapidly to grave circumstances, such as
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. Four of the five regional
standby forces have declared their full operational capability.
37. United Nations-African Union cooperation in countering terrorism and violent
extremism is growing, underpinned by joint assessment missions and the
development of subregional counter-terrorism strategies, and by joint pursuit of the
harmonization and application of international and regional legal frameworks on
counter-terrorism, especially with the support of the Counter -Terrorism
Implementation Task Force Office and its United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
within the Department of Political Affairs. The United Nations has also improved
coordination with other regional security efforts, including support to the
Nouakchott Process and to the African Police Cooperation Organization, which
coordinates peace support operations aspects of African policing, including
preventing and addressing serious organized crime, corruption and terrorism. At the
United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit, held on 2 and 3 June 2016 at
Headquarters, chiefs of police from 30 African Member States discussed, among
other things, the complementarity between international (United Nations) policing
and national efforts in addressing the impact of transnational threats; and rei nforced
strategic partnerships.
38. The United Nations-African Union partnership in Darfur is unprecedented.
This model provides opportunities in terms of optimizing the respective political
leverages of the United Nations and the African Union in support of the mediation
led by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel in accordance with the
Peace and Security Council communiqué of 12 September 2014, and of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in the implementation of its
mandate in a highly challenging operating environment. The experience has provided
both organizations with important lessons for the future of peace operations.
39. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2167 (2014), the United Nations
conducted a lessons learned exercise with the African Union and the regional
economic communities/regional mechanisms on the transitions from African Union
to United Nations peace operations in Mali and the Central African Republic, to
identify challenges and good practices and provide recommendations for future
transitions. The exercise was conducted by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the Secretariat, in cooperation with UNOAU and in consultation with
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mis sion in Mali, the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic, the Economic Community of Central African States, ECOWAS

16-14557

11/18

S/2016/780

and other relevant parties. The exercise underscored the importance of developing
effective partnerships between the African Union and the United Nations in
peacekeeping. I presented the results of the exercise in a letter to the Security Council
in 2015 (S/2015/3), recommending the development of a joint benchmarking paper
identifying the conditions that African Union missions need to meet before a
transition takes place, a transition toolbox providing timelines that guide future
transitional processes, and a lessons learned exercise on strength ening African
Union peace support operations. While the African Union and the United Nations
continue work to implement the first two recommendations, the lessons learned
exercise has taken the form of a United Nations-African Union joint review of
support and financing options for African Union peace operations and is expected to
complement efforts to strengthen the African Union Peace Fund.

VI. Enhanced partnership in peacebuilding and the rule of law
40. The adoption on 27 April 2016 of General Assembly resolution 70/262 and
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture supported United Nations -African Union cooperation to
work towards sustaining peace. On 28 July 2016, through a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2016/12), the Security Council further stressed the importance of partnership
and cooperation between the United Nations and the Africa n Union and encouraged
the Secretary-General, through UNOAU and the Peacebuilding Support Office, to
begin holding regular exchanges, joint initiatives and information-sharing with the
African Union Commission. On 12 May 2016, the United Nations partnered with
the African Union in organizing a high-level meeting in New York on the theme
“Sustaining peace: mechanisms, partnerships and the future of peacebuilding in
Africa” to sustain the political momentum for peacebuilding in Africa and discuss
ways to implement the outcome of the 2015 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. The outcome document of the meeting contained
recommendations for strengthening peacebuilding partnerships between the United
Nations and the African Union, the regional economic communities/regional
mechanisms for conflict prevention, management and resolution and the African
Development Bank, and a call was made for adequate and predictable financing for
peacebuilding, including for African tools and instruments to sust ain peace. In
addition, the African Solidarity Initiative is also a mechanism through which the
African Union and the United Nations can more closely cooperate to mobilize
support from within the continent for activities related to the African Union
post-conflict reconstruction and development policy.
41. Six African countries are on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission. In
April 2016, UNOAU worked closely with the Commission for the allocation of an
initial Peacebuilding Fund grant of more than $2.2 million to the African Union to
finance the activities of 32 human rights observers in Burundi for seven months.
This first direct Fund grant to a regional organization illustrates the growing
collaboration between the United Nations and the African Union, and provides the
possibility of replication as the partnership with regional organizations on peace and
security takes on added significance and grows in scale. UNOAU continues to work
with the African Union towards the full deployment of its authorized 1 00 human
rights observers and 100 military experts in Burundi, as part of international efforts
to support the restoration of stability in the country. The Fund is also providing

12/18

16-14557

S/2016/780

OHCHR with $300,000 for training the observers and military experts and for j oint
monitoring with the African Union of human rights violations in the country.
42. Following initial capacity-building programmes with the African Union, four
of the five rule of law and security institutions programmes (security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, mine action and police) have made
the transition from the capacity-building phase to full partnership, whereby the
African Union now has the capacity and knowledge to contribute on those cross cutting issues in a manner that complements the contributions of United Nations and
other actors. The added value of the African Union in these processes is its ability to
develop consensus on continental policies, such as the 2013 policy framework on
security sector reform; to foster regional and national ownership, as well as
cooperation between the subregional organizations; and to utilize its support in
transitional situations to build political support on these cross -cutting issues.
43. As at 2016, African Union programmes relating to the rule of law and security
institutions have been broadly harmonized with regard to both structure and timelines .
Four of the programmes now have three-year programme documents (2016-2018).
44. The United Nations and the African Union are planning an exchange of letters
to provide strategic policy direction for collaboration with regard to cooperation
concerning rule of law and security institutions. The United Nations is also
exploring the option of signing a memorandum of understanding with th e African
Union on mine action services. The exchange of letters and programmatic
agreements are aimed at solidifying inter-organizational cooperation and facilitate
collaboration at the policy and programmatic levels. To ensure a coordinated
approach and promote synergy, UNOAU is actively engaging with the African
Union to strengthen the rule of law capacities of the African Union. Direct
collaboration is also under way through United Nations cooperation programmes on
counter-terrorism, small arms and light weapons, and child protection.
45. Achievements to be highlighted in the joint programmes include the
deployment, for the first time, of security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration officers to African Union peace support oper ations
and political missions, the establishment of standing bodies to coordinate the work
of the African Union with regional economic communities/regional mechanisms and
the validation of numerous operational guidance notes and policy documents. In
addition, a joint United Nations-African Union-European Union-Southern African
Development Community mission to Madagascar in October 2014 initiated the first
comprehensive national security sector reform process, which continues to be
supported by the four organizations. With regard to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, joint activities contributed to building a common approach in
situations relating to the Lord’s Resistance Army, the Central African Republic,
Somalia, the Sudan and South Sudan. With regard to mine action, the African Union
has facilitated cooperation between the Mine Action Service of the United Nations
and national border commissions to demine border areas through the African Union
Border Programme. The Service provided technical guidance and support to
facilitate the implementation of the African Union Mine Action and Explosive
Remnants of War Strategic Framework for 2014-2017. The Service also supported
the African Union in the development of its safety handbook on landmines,
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive devices.

16-14557

13/18

S/2016/780

VII. Financing of African Union peace support operations
46. The African Union Chairperson and I have long advocated sustained,
predictable and flexible funding mechanisms to support African Union p eace
support operations authorized by the Security Council. With the exception of
AMISOM, which is partly supported by United Nations assessed contributions
through the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, African Union peace
operations have to date been funded almost exclusively by voluntary bilateral
support and the African Peace Facility established by the European Union at the
request of the African Union. The challenges faced by the African Union in funding
its own peace support operations have made it difficult for it to ensure the
successful implementation of mandates. In the cases of Mali and the Central African
Republic, the timing of the transition from the African Union to the United Nations
was partially a result of this lack of sustainable and predictable funding.
47. Recognizing the need to mobilize more resources from within the continent, in
2015, at its 24th ordinary session, the Assembly of the African Union agreed that the
African Union should contribute up to 25 per cent of the cost o f its peace and
security efforts, including peace support operations, by 2020. This commitment is
expected to enhance African ownership and agenda-setting of peace initiatives taken
by the African Union.
48. In September 2015, the Peace and Security Council reiterated its commitment
to raising up to 25 per cent of the continent’s contribution to the cost of African
Union peace and security interventions, and welcomed arrangements proposed by
the Chairperson of the Commission for cases involving United Natio ns assessed
contributions. Those proposed modalities include African Union commitment to
strengthen funding and support capabilities, financial oversight, human rights and
accountability mechanisms and capabilities, and capacities to plan, deploy and
manage peace operations. In my report entitled “The future of United Nations peace
operations: implementation of the recommendations of the High -level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations” (A/70/357-S/2015/682), I welcomed the commitment of
the African Union to self-reliance and urged Member States to consider how to
respond to the initiative.
49. On 21 January 2016, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
appointed a former President of the African Development Bank, Donald Kaberuka,
as High Representative for the African Union Peace Fund, tasked with exploring
options to better operationalize the Fund and encourage sustainable funding,
including from Africa.
50. Mr. Kaberuka’s recommendations on financing the African Union were
unanimously adopted at the twenty-seventh ordinary session of the Assembly of the
African Union, held in Kigali in July 2016. Significantly, African leaders agreed to
implement the recommendations beginning in 2017, including instituting a 0.2 per
cent levy on eligible imports into the continent to finance the African Union. The
African Union expects to allocate $325 million to the Peace Fund in 2017, rising to
$400 million in 2020, from the total amount raised from the import levy. The
contributions will constitute the 25 per cent contribution to peace support operations
deployed by African leaders.
51. Concurrently, the African Union and the United Nations initiated, early in
2016, a joint review of available mechanisms to finance and sup port African Union

14/18

16-14557

S/2016/780

peace operations authorized by the Security Council. The findings of the review are
expected to assist stakeholders in determining how African Union peace operations
can be most effectively supported in the future.

VIII. Role of the regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms
52. The regional economic communities/regional mechanisms for conflict
prevention, management and resolution in Africa are an integral part of the African
Peace and Security Architecture. They have a good understanding of regional
conflicts by virtue of their proximity and are often the first responders when conflict
erupts. Given this crucial role, UNOAU continues to advocate and work with the
African Union to improve coordination with the communities/ mechanisms, as well
as consultation and common messaging and action, where feasible, to address
threats and challenges to peace and security. In an effort to further coordinate
United Nations interaction with the African Union and promote coherence with th e
communities/mechanisms through United Nations presences in the regions,
UNOAU convened a meeting of all United Nations regional presences in Africa in
November 2015 to promote coordination and collaboration, the exchange of
information, a common understanding of threats to peace and security, and joint
action. Enhanced tripartite understanding and coordination between the United
Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS were evident in the common approach to
the crisis in Burkina Faso in 2014 and 2015.
53. The international contact group model provides a platform for further
sustained efforts to achieve more unified international intervention on issues of
peace and security. In the Central African Republic and Burkina Faso, international
contact groups facilitated improved tripartite leadership, collaboration and
coordination on some of the most difficult challenges to peace. The model, which
comprises a broad range of stakeholders and partners, has the additional advantage
of limiting opportunities for spoilers to manipulate the varied interests at play in
conflict situations, providing a platform for the harmonization of positions through
engagement and discussions around common goals.
54. In the Central African Republic, the decision by the African Union to m aintain
a political presence, the African Union Mission for the Central African Republic
and Central Africa, following the transfer of authority from the African -led
International Support Mission in the Central African Republic to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
with the Economic Community of Central African States also setting up a political
presence in the country, required enhanced cooperation in support of the political
process and the transition. Following the election of Faustin Archange Touadera as
President and the end of the transition, new mechanisms are being considered to
strengthen cooperation with the host authorities, including through a framework of
mutual accountability. Regular United Nations briefings to the Peace and Security
Council on the political process were informed by, among other things, coordinated
initiatives of the three organizations at the local level. In Burundi, my Special
Adviser, the East African Community-led facilitation and the African Union,
through its Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region, continue to closely
coordinate the efforts of the international community to resolve the political crisis

16-14557

15/18

S/2016/780

through an inclusive and credible political dialogue. In South Sudan, my Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan provided extensive support to the mediation
process led by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. This resulted in
the signing of the peace agreement in August 2015 and the establishment of the
Transitional Government of National Unity in April 2016. In Burkina Faso in 2014,
ECOWAS, the African Union, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel and UNOAU worked together to prevent a complete breakdown of stability
following the popular uprising. Through an international contact group and,
subsequently, the International Follow-Up and Support Group for the Transition in
Burkina Faso, the international community supported Burkina Faso through a
successful transition and the peaceful transfer of power.

IX. Strengthening the United Nations Office to the African Union
55. Since the establishment of UNOAU in 2010, the United Nations -African
Union partnership on peace and security has grown in scale and complexity, as
outlined herein. The relationship has evolved from a series of ad hoc interactions
and capacity-building initiatives to a more structured and sustained political and
strategic partnership, which recognizes that no one organization alone can tackle the
challenges presented by emerging and continuing conflicts in Africa. The Office has
assumed a critical role in nurturing and promoting this strategic partnership to
facilitate effective, timely and synchronized United Nations-African Union approaches
to conflict prevention and management. UNOAU has also streamlined engagement
between the two organizations on peace and security, leading to coordinated and
consistent United Nations support to the African Union with regard to both short term operational requirements and long-term institutional capacity-building.
56. UNOAU underwent a strategic review in 2013 and a civilian staffing review in
2015, both conducted jointly by the Department of Political Affairs, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support of the Secretariat,
in consultation with the African Union Commission and Member States. The
strategic review recommended that both the management and the political components
of the Office be strengthened to enable UNOAU to more effectively engage, support
and backstop efforts, both at United Nations Headquarters and more broadly, to
enhance conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacemaking capacities. Both
reviews recommended a restructuring of UNOAU. The restructuring would respond
to the evolving and increasingly complex peace and security threats in Africa, which
are placing greater demands on the African Union and the United Nations, as well as
on the partnership between the two organizations. It recognizes the importance of
continuous engagement, in particular at the senior, decision -making levels, with the
African Union Commission, members of the Peace and Security Council, and
partners. UNOAU therefore requires both a sufficient complement of staff and staff
of appropriate seniority to meet effectively the growing demands of its mandate.
57. The General Assembly considered the proposed restructuring of UNOAU in
June 2016 and requested me to resubmit proposals following a review of UNOAU,
for consideration during the main part of its seventy-first session. Given the
continuing and rapid evolution of the United Nations partnership with th e African
Union from an ad hoc partnership to a strategic partnership, I plan to conduct an
assessment of United Nations-African Union cooperation, including the structure
and resource capacity of UNOAU to meet the growing demands of the partnership.

16/18

16-14557

S/2016/780

X. Observations and recommendations
58. As I observed in my report on the implementation of the recommendations
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations ( A/70/357-S/2015/682),
I approach the end of my tenure as Secretary-General with profound concern over
the many challenges facing the United Nations. The scale and complexity of conflict
today, and the suffering that such conflict creates, threaten the international order.
There is an urgent need for new and stronger ways to address international peace
and security challenges. Stronger partnerships with regional organizations, in
particular with the African Union, can enable us to respond early, swiftly, coherently
and decisively to prevent and manage conflict.
59. I welcome the progress made in improving consultation and coordination
between the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union. The annual consultations between the two bodies, the most recent of which
was held in New York in May, are opportune and need to be continued. I believe,
however, there is scope for further progress, in particular with regard to better
coordinating the decisions of both bodies. In this respect, effective follow -up to the
relevant provisions of the joint communiqués issued at the end of the annual
meeting will go a long way towards enhancing the effectiveness of the two bodies’
combined efforts. This includes joint field visits and consultations between the
President of the Security Council and the Chairperson of the Peace and Security
Council.
60. Security Council decisions on transitions from African Union to United
Nations peacekeeping operations will continue to be addressed on a case -by-case
basis, guided by clearly defined goals and co mparative advantages between the two
organizations. There is, however, a need to more clearly articulate and define a
common set of guiding benchmarks for the transition to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. This is particularly pertinent in the conte xt of discussions
about sustainability of funding for African Union peace support operations, and the
work of the High Representative for the African Union Peace Fund.
61. The commitment of African leaders to financing the African Union, including
its peace support operations, is commendable. It is imperative that Member States
seize the momentum and agree on how best to respond to the efforts of self -reliance.
My forthcoming joint review with the African Union on the available mechanisms
to finance and support African Union peace operations authorized by the Security
Council should provide a basis for determining how African Union peace operations
can be most effectively supported in the future.
62. In the report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(A/70/95-S/2015/446) and my report on the implementation of its recommendations,
emphasis is laid on the primacy of political solutions to conflict situations. In that
regard, there is recognition that joint early analysis, information-sharing and
common understanding between the United Nations and the African Union have led
to early action that averted or prevented conflicts from escalating, as exemplified in
Burkina Faso, Burundi, the Comoros and Madagascar. It is imperative that such
efforts be better supported and provided with the necessary resources, in order to
enable special envoys and facilitators to perform their good offices functions with
greater effectiveness. In addition, if the objectives o f the African Union initiative on

16-14557

17/18

S/2016/780

silencing the guns by 2020 are to be achieved, greater United Nations support and
coordination with the African Union is needed.
63. The role of UNOAU in strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is crucial. Strengthening our partnership with the
African Union and with the regional economic communities/regional mechanisms
will remain a priority for the United Nations in the foreseeable future. Strengthening
the partnership requires intensifying day-to-day engagement to share views and
analysis, seek common understanding of the issues and develop proposals for joint
or coordinated action to address them. It involves reaching out to the whole of the
United Nations and the African Union, to ensure that both organizations draw on all
relevant contributions and, as much as possible, ensure coherence.
64. The capacity of UNOAU to perform its responsibilities and engage effectively
with the African Union, regional economic communities/regional me chanisms and
bilateral partners is critical as the demands on the partnership have grown
exponentially over the past few years. Strengthening its capacity would help to
ensure enhanced ability for effective partnership with the African Union and the
regional economic communities/regional mechanisms, at the appropriate level of
seniority, to address the continent’s peace and security challenges.
65. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the African Union and its
member States and the regional economic communities/regional mechanisms for
their continued cooperation with the United Nations in efforts to address challenges
to peace and security in Africa. I also wish to express my appreciation to my Special
Representative to the African Union, as well as the staff of UNOAU and all United
Nations entities working with the African Union for their efforts to advance peace
and security in the region.

18/18

16-14557
