A/63/PV.97

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

97

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 23 July 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 57 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/63/L.61/Rev.1)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that the Assembly held the high-level plenary
meeting on the theme “Africa’s development needs:
state of implementation of various commitments,
challenges and the way forward” under agenda item 57
at the 3rd and 4th plenary meetings, on 22 September
2008. Also, a joint debate was held on agenda item 57,
entitled “New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international support”,
and its sub-items (a) and (b), and on agenda item 43,
entitled “2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa”, at the
26th, 27th and 29th plenary meetings, on 15 and
20 October 2008, respectively.
The Assembly today has before it a draft
resolution that has been issued as document
A/63/L.61/Rev.1. I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China to introduce the draft
resolution.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the delegation of the Sudan, I have the honour to

address the General Assembly today on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China to introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.61/Rev.1 under agenda item 57, entitled “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support”.
The draft resolution is primarily based on the
recommendations contained in the report (A/63/212) of
the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa.
The draft resolution recognizes that development,
peace, security and human rights are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing in terms of commitment and
implementation. It stresses that the responsibility for
peace and security in Africa, including the capacity to
address the root causes of conflict and to resolve
conflicts in a peaceful manner, lies primarily with
African countries, while recognizing the need for
support from the international community and the
United Nations. It also emphasizes the vital role played
by African States and subregional organizations in
peacemaking and peacebuilding, including through the
Panel of the Wise, as well as mechanisms for early
warning and peaceful dispute settlement and regional
initiatives such as those relating to settlement and
reconciliation — all in an effort to develop a
comprehensive regional approach to addressing
conflicts and disputes in Africa.
We hope that the draft resolution now before the
Assembly will be adopted by consensus. We joined the
list of sponsors at the urging of many other Member

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-41971 (E)

*0941971*

A/63/PV.97

States, and we encourage other States that have not yet
done so to follow suit.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take action on draft resolution
A/63/L.61/Rev.1, entitled “Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa”.
(spoke in English)
I should like to announce that, since the
submission of the draft resolution, Portugal and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
have joined the list of sponsors.
(spoke in Spanish)
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.61/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/63/L.61/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 63/304).
I shall now call on the representative of Sweden,
who wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I would like to make a
short statement on behalf of the European Union.
The European Union (EU) actively supports the
African Union and the African agenda for peace and
development. We are fully and unambiguously
committed to standing by the African continent, as
demonstrated by the adoption of the Joint EU-Africa
Strategy in Lisbon in December 2007. Today, the
implementation of the Strategy is being actively
pursued in all areas.
The search for peace on the African continent is
one of the European Union’s priorities. Within the
framework of the African Peace Facility, the European
Union has committed an additional €300 million for
the period 2008-2010. Furthermore, the European
Union currently has four missions deployed on the
African continent as part of the European Security and
Defence Policy. In addition, the European Union is
Africa’s principal development partner.
The European Union welcomes today’s adoption
of resolution 63/304 on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the

2

promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. Rwanda and Srebrenica
demonstrated that both Africa and Europe have an
interest in the concept of the responsibility to protect.
We look forward to the debate on the implementation
of that concept, which is to follow. We also look
forward to working with Africa on how to strengthen
our capacity in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 57 and
agenda item 57 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 44 and 107 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/677)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members will
recall that the Secretary-General introduced his report
on the responsibility to protect (A/63/677) at the
Assembly’s 96th plenary meeting, on 21 July 2009.
(spoke in English)
The 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution
60/1) charged the General Assembly with the task of
further considering the issue of the responsibility to
protect and examining its implications. As one of
today’s panellists, Mr. Gareth Evans, himself stated in
his recent book on the subject, the concept of the
responsibility to protect has the potential to evolve
further into a full-fledged rule of customary
international law. Whether to argue that such a norm
already exists is, ultimately, up to this body to decide.
I need not remind anyone present in this forum
that, in terms of the United Nations Charter, it is the
General Assembly that develops international law.
This morning, the General Assembly met in an
informal session to discuss — and engage some of the
world’s most prominent theorists and academicians in
an interactive dialogue on — the responsibility to
protect. We are indebted to them for honouring the
United Nations with their presence and insights.

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

The discussion was rich and passionate, as is
fitting, given that we are examining the fundamental
moral and political obligations that Member States and
the international community have to our fellow human
beings during times of extreme need. I would
encourage all those who were unable to participate in
the proceedings to refer to the statements of the
panellists, which will be available on the website of the
presidency and on the United Nations webcast.
As I stated in my opening remarks this morning,
the world has remained silent and stood still way too
often in the face of gross violations of the most basic
sentiments of humanity. This paralysis has resulted in
such shameful situations as the Holocaust, the Khmer
Rouge killing fields, the massacres in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia, to name just a few.
As was made clear this morning, one cannot treat
these events in isolation from the antecedent historical
actions that precipitated them. After so much suffering,
there is finally broad agreement that the international
community can no longer remain silent in the face of
genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. This represents great progress. Yet
there are current situations, such as in Gaza, that are in
urgent need of adequate and objective characterization,
as well as of the international community’s
responsibility to aid in their solution.
I would ask whether it was the absence of
responsibility to protect that led to non-intervention in
Gaza as recently as this year, or was it rather the
absence of reform of the Security Council, whose veto
power remains unchecked and its membership
unreformed? Need I remind anyone here that we
already have a genocide Convention and various
conventions concerning international humanitarian law,
whose implementation remains erratic?
So why do many of us hesitate to embrace this
doctrine and its aspirations? Certainly, it is not out of
indifference to the plight of many who suffer and may
yet suffer at the hands of their own Governments. The
problem for many nations, I believe, is that our system
of collective security is not yet sufficiently evolved to
allow the doctrine of responsibility to protect (R2P) to
operate in the way its proponents intend, in view of the
prevailing lack of trust in developing countries when it
comes to the use of force for humanitarian reasons.
Unfortunately, the Secretary-General’s report
(A/63/677) argues, as we heard again and again this

09-41971

morning, for a continuum from strengthening States’
capacity to assure human rights, in the sense of
preventing R2P crimes, and diplomatic preventive
measures to economic sanctions and the use of force.
This may tend to discredit the concept of responsibility
to protect, just as the earlier concept of humanitarian
intervention was discredited and, indeed — as
described by Mr. Gareth Evans this morning — buried.
The report of the International Commission on
Intervention and State Sovereignty stated that the use
of coercion and force could be hedged by the use of
such criteria as just cause. Just cause is a reversion to
the pre-United Nations Charter doctrine of the just war.
Given that the General Assembly has not yet managed
to agree on definitions of terrorism or aggression, it
seems unlikely that it will be able to agree any time
soon on definitions of just cause and right intentions.
Member States clearly hold, as I do, strong views
on this issue. I believe that this morning’s discussion
made it clear that the most effective and just form of
avoiding large-scale human suffering is certainly not
by resorting to the use of military force. After this
morning’s discussion, the question remains: Has the
time for a full-fledged R2P norm arrived, or, as most of
the panellists this morning felt, do we first need to
create a more just and equal world order, including in
the economic and social sense, as well as a Security
Council that does not create a differential system of
international law geared towards the strong protecting,
or not protecting, whomever they wish?
I wish the Assembly all a productive and
enlightening debate.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Montenegro; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves with
this statement.
Almost 10 years ago, in this very Hall, Kofi
Annan made a plea to the international community to
try to find a new consensus, to forge unity on how to
respond to mass atrocities in situations such as those in
Rwanda and Srebrenica — in essence, to find a way to
counter gross and systematic violations of human

3

A/63/PV.97

rights that affect every precept of our common
humanity.
At the World Summit in 2005, the international
community forged such unity by agreeing upon the
responsibility to protect. We collectively recognized
the responsibility of each individual State to protect its
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. We collectively
recognized the responsibility of the international
community, through the United Nations, to help protect
populations from such crimes.
This year, the Secretary-General delivered his
first report (A/63/677) on how to implement that
responsibility. The European Union warmly welcomes
that important report and this debate, in which our
focus should be on
operationalization
and
implementation. The Secretary-General’s report brings
the concept down to the level of practical implications
and forms a platform on which to build concrete
measures.
From the outset, the Secretary-General is very
clear on the fact that, unless Member States decide
otherwise, the responsibility to protect only applies to
four specified crimes and violations: genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
The European Union welcomes the Secretary-General’s
approach in keeping the scope of the principle narrow
and the range of possible responses deep.
The report describes the three pillars that together
constitute the implementation of the concept: the
primary responsibility of States to protect their
populations, the vital role of assistance from the
international community to help States to shoulder
their responsibilities, and the response and
responsibility of the international community when a
State is manifestly failing to meet its responsibilities.
As to the first pillar, the basic principle of State
sovereignty is and should remain undisputed. It should
also be recognized that State sovereignty implies not
only rights, but also responsibilities and obligations
under international law, including the protection of
human rights as an essential element of responsible
sovereignty. Those obligations of States are firmly
embedded in international treaty-based and customary
law. One such responsibility is that of each State to
protect the populations within its own borders. That
comes first. The responsibility to protect necessarily
encompasses the responsibility to prevent.

4

Turning to the second pillar, the assistance that
should be made available by the international
community is not only the humanitarian aid that is
crucial once individuals and groups are already
affected, but also, in that context and very importantly,
the assistance available to help prevent manifest threats
from developing and build the capacities of States to
act before threats deteriorate into crises. That effort
and support necessitate a longer-term perspective.
Not only the knowledge of risks, but also the
capacity to act on those risks, are necessary. The link
between timely information and the application of
instruments that can limit those risks is underlined in
the Secretary-General’s report. The European Union
believes that this is an area where more could be done,
especially as regards the instruments for early warning,
conflict prevention and crisis management. We look
forward to the Secretary-General’s proposal on
strengthening the United Nations early warning
capacity, as suggested in the report. In addition, local
mediation and conflict resolution capacities are also
essential elements in that process.
The third pillar reminds us that if a situation of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing or crimes
against humanity occurs or threatens to occur, and if a
State is manifestly failing to protect its populations, the
international community has a responsibility to help
protect those populations and thereby also to help
maintain international peace and security. It must be
absolutely clear that this should, first and foremost, be
discharged through diplomatic, humanitarian and other
measures, such as support to capacity-building and
other development activities. But if such measures
would or are proving to be inadequate, enforcement
measures in accordance with the United Nations
Charter, through the Security Council or approved by
the Security Council, should be possible, if needed.
The three pillars are parallel, not consecutive, and
the concrete proposals set out in the report underline
that as they focus on the first and second pillars. The
European Union welcomes and supports the steps to
implement the responsibility to protect set out in the
report, and particularly the Secretary-General’s
emphasis on the responsibility of States themselves,
and the importance of early prevention and of helping
States build their capacity to shoulder their own
responsibilities.

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

Mr. Cujba (Moldova), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The European Union also welcomes the way
those steps are presented, without losing sight of the
individual victims and the human costs of delay or
recoil from the international community. We believe
that the European Union and other regional
organizations have important contributions to make
here. Regional organizations have a multitude of
relevant instruments. Capacity-building in areas of
conflict prevention, development and human rights,
good governance, the rule of law and judicial and
security sector reform are perhaps the most obvious
examples.
Moreover, we all have to be ready to assist. The
principle has to be integrated into our overall
normative framework. Not long ago, the United
Nations and the African Union were able to support
Kenya in preventing a frightening crisis from turning
into the worst possible nightmare. That is an example
to follow. The European Union is ready to contribute as
a regional organization and global actor and to the
United Nations in the efforts ahead.
Before I conclude, let me come back to what this
debate is really about. It is about how to put an end to
the most serious crimes that have plagued and still
plague humankind. It is about finding the means and
the will to stop what has been correctly labelled the
recurring nightmare of mass atrocities. Our common
history, including the recent past on our own continent,
Europe, shows us that this is a principle of concern to
all and demands our concerted efforts.
As characterized by the Secretary-General, the
report at hand is the critical first step towards turning
the authoritative and enduring words of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) into doctrine,
policy and, most importantly, deeds. It is therefore
important that the debate on the responsibility to
protect here at the United Nations continue. The EU
also looks forward to further and more detailed reports
by the Secretary-General on the implementation by the
Organization and Member States of our common
responsibility. It is our duty to further operationalize
that responsibility in order to create a world order in
which inactivity in the face of mass atrocities becomes
a thing of the past.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): It gives me pleasure to
speak today on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement

09-41971

(NAM) on the issue of the responsibility to protect
(R2P). The Movement would like at the outset to
convey its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
presentation of his report in document A/63/677,
entitled “Implementing the responsibility to protect”
(see A/63/PV.96), before the General Assembly on
21 July.
The establishment of the United Nations more
than 60 years ago generated hopes for the restoration of
human dignity and the prevention of the repetition of
mass atrocities of the past that took a toll on the lives
of millions of innocent people due to the lack of
collective will and inaction. Unfortunately, modern and
recent history is rife with incidents in which the
international community was incapable of living up to
its responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, let alone heeding the desperate calls of
civilian populations around the world, who fell victim
to the heinous crime of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.
The general membership reached the common
understanding in 2005, at the level of heads of State
and Government, that each individual State had the
responsibility to protect its populations. They stressed
the need for the General Assembly to continue
consideration of the responsibility to protect
populations from those four crimes and their
implications, bearing in mind the principles of the
Charter and international law.
In that context, NAM welcomes the initiative of
the President of the General Assembly to hold this
general debate as an opportunity to continue the
discussions on how to implement the will of the
world’s leaders and to ensure that where there is a will,
there is a way to deter the reoccurrence of such heinous
crimes.
Many elements of the Secretary-General’s report
have received support, based on historical national or
regional experiences, as well as on the conviction that
no country or region is immune to such risks.
Meanwhile, mixed feelings and thoughts on
implementing R2P persist. There are concerns about
the possible abuse of R2P by expanding its application
to situations that fall beyond the four areas defined in
the 2005 World Summit Outcome, and by misusing it
to legitimize unilateral coercive measures or
intervention in the internal affairs of States. There are
also pertinent questions about the role to be played by

5

A/63/PV.97

each of the principal organs of the United Nations
within their respective institutional mandates and
responsibilities in that regard.
Those issues will have to be thoroughly
addressed in any discussion on implementing the
responsibility to protect. We should work to reconcile
and address all the divergent concerns and viewpoints
through an honest, comprehensive, all-inclusive and
transparent dialogue. The General Assembly is indeed
the right venue for such a dialogue.
Last week, at their fifteenth summit, held in
Sharm el-Sheikh, the heads of State and Government of
the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirmed that the
Movement will remain guided in its endeavours by its
founding principles, and reiterated their commitment to
achieving international cooperation based on solidarity
among peoples and Governments in solving
international problems of a political, economic, social,
cultural or humanitarian character.
They also reiterated the role of the General
Assembly in the maintenance of international peace
and security and expressed grave concern at instances
wherein the Security Council fails to address cases
involving genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes. They further emphasized that in such instances
where the Security Council has not fulfilled its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the General Assembly should take
appropriate measures in accordance with the Charter to
address the issue.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome provides a
clear mandate and guidelines for the General
Assembly. The Secretary-General’s report offers some
initial ideas on how to go about it and constitutes an
important input for the General Assembly to continue
consideration of R2P and its implications.
In order to build consensus on the way forward,
there must be clarity on what needs to be done based
on our agreement that each individual State has the
responsibility to protect its population. Capacitybuilding is key in this regard in order to allow States to
shoulder their responsibility and to allow the
international community, under the umbrella of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, to support
their efforts, as necessary and appropriate, and to assist
those States which are under stress before crises and
conflicts break out.

6

The Secretary-General has rightly noted in his
report and presentation that the African Union is a
pioneer in implementing the responsibility to protect
due to its particular historical experience. The
conditions for implementation are clearly stipulated
under Article 4 (h) and (j) of the Constitutive Act of the
African Union, namely, in order to restore peace and
security upon the request of the State and only pursuant
to a decision of the Assembly of the Union. To date,
the African Union has dispatched two operations, both
upon the decision of its Assembly. Other regions may
have developed or are in the process of developing
similar or different perspectives. It would therefore be
important to study the lessons learned and explore
possible measures to enhance cooperation between the
United Nations and regional arrangements.
Finally, as the heads of State and Government of
the Non-Aligned Movement affirmed in Sharm
el-Sheikh, the Movement will remain seized of and
active in further deliberations of the General Assembly
on the responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, bearing in mind the principles of the
United Nations Charter and international law, including
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States, non-interference in their internal affairs and
respect for fundamental human rights.
The Non-Aligned countries, therefore, will
participate actively in the deliberations on this issue
with a view to reaching consensus on the
implementation of the contents of paragraphs 138, 139
and 140 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome.
Lord Malloch-Brown (United Kingdom): I
would like to align the United Kingdom with the
statement delivered by the Swedish Permanent
Representative on behalf of the European Union. I am
particularly pleased to be delivering the United
Kingdom’s statement at this debate on implementing
the responsibility to protect (R2P).
The endorsement of R2P by the largest-ever
assembly of world leaders was for me personally, as
well as for all of us in the United Nations family, one
of the most important elements of the World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1). As an achievement, it was
nothing short of groundbreaking and one of which we
should be rightly proud. And we should give thanks to
our African colleagues for showing us the way with
their own commitment to the principle of

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

non-indifference, as enshrined in the African Union
Constitutive Act.
The term “never again” resonates with us all. Our
shared memories of Rwanda and Srebrenica ensure that
it is a commitment that every United Nations Member
State can and must support. The question has always
been how to put this into practice. The responsibility to
protect is a concept which allows us to do just that.
And now, four years after we agreed the principle, the
United Kingdom welcomes this debate on how to take
forward implementation within the United Nations.
The Secretary-General has provided us with
recommendations — a framework, if you like — for
action, and I congratulate him and the team that
prepared his report (A/63/677). But we must play our
parts and seize this opportunity to continue
consideration of how to make real progress on
operationalization.
The United Kingdom finds the report wellbalanced and true to the 2005 agreement. It is clear
about what responsibility to protect is and also, in the
face of many misconceptions, what it is not. More
importantly, the report is also practical. The threepillared approach of State responsibility, assistance and
response aids conceptual clarity, as does the emphasis
on the need for an early and flexible response. Every
situation is different, and we must guard against an
overly prescriptive and, I would say, overly simplistic
checklist approach to action.
Responsibility to protect activity encompasses a
wide range of possible actions designed to help States
protect their populations — all, as the SecretaryGeneral makes clear, in accordance with the United
Nations Charter. Collective action should be
determined by an assessment of the situation on the
ground and of the best tools suited to address that.
In this context, I should take a moment to
highlight the importance of two issues, the first being
the key role to be played by regional organizations. If
we are to implement R2P effectively, it is right that
they should take or share the lead in reacting to crisis
situations in their regions. Secondly, there is value to
be found in improving and better coordinating our
early warning efforts and our use of and receptivity to
information. A more cohesive United Nations approach
to this can only enhance our collective prevention
efforts.

09-41971

The
Secretary-General’s
explanation
of
responsibility to protect as a “narrow but deep” concept
is also helpful in terms of implementation. While the
concept applies to the four crimes only, there are many
ways and means by which States can put it into
practice. In the United Kingdom’s view, R2P should be
a governing principle of all Member States’ work
across the conflict spectrum, as well as on human
rights and development. Building good governance, the
rule of law and effective judicial and security sectors
all goes towards building a preventive environment in
which responsibility to protect crimes would be less
likely to take place.
I will conclude by saying a little about what I
think we should be trying to achieve here, and that is
an R2P culture — a culture of prevention that is as
much about responsible sovereignty as it is
international assistance; a culture that in the long term
will help us to prevent mass atrocities and reduce
conflict and the cost of conflict; a culture that will help
us to build an international system which is better
equipped and more effective at preventing and
responding to conflict; and a culture which fosters our
ability to reach consensus on timely and decisive
action.
I do not think that anyone here would disagree
with those goals, and I very much hope that none
would seek to delay implementation through
procedural or administrative means. This is too
important to us all. We made a commitment in 2005 to
practical action. We must now live up to that.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me first express
my delegation’s deep appreciation to the President for
convening this meeting on the responsibility to protect.
We also appreciate the informal thematic dialogue held
earlier this morning on the issue. Likewise, Indonesia
wishes to express its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on implementing the
responsibility to protect (A/63/677). My delegation
associates itself with the statement delivered earlier by
the Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
At the World Summit in 2005, the question of
responsibility to protect was brought into the
mainstream of international discourse, and, most
significantly, world leaders were able to reach
consensus on the issue. Hence, there is hardly any need
to reinvent the wheel. As asserted by the Secretary-

7

A/63/PV.97

General in his report, the task ahead is not to
reinterpret or renegotiate the conclusions of the World
Summit; rather, it is to find ways of implementing its
decisions.
It is against this background that my delegation
appreciates and acknowledges the significance of the
aforesaid report of the Secretary-General. It will
facilitate General Assembly’s deliberations aimed at
operationalizing the implementation of the 2005 World
Summit mandate on the responsibility to protect.
We are not in disagreement with the three pillars
of the responsibility to protect: the primary
responsibility of every State to protect its population
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity; the responsibility of the
international community to assist States in fulfilling
their national obligations, including capacity-building;
and the commitment to take timely and decisive action,
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, in
those situations where a State is manifestly failing in
its responsibility to protect. In our view, within — and
specifically within — the framework of the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, these three pillars are solid enough
to withstand any and every assault.
Indonesia believes that the framework which was
agreed by the World Summit in 2005 imposes on each
State the responsibility to protect its citizens. This
responsibility must be emphasized along with the
responsibility of the international community to assist
States that require capacity-building assistance. The
horrors of the twentieth century inform the final pillar,
namely, that timely and decisive action within the
Charter is an option on the table should a State be
manifestly failing in its obligation to protect. It is
worth emphasizing, however, that pillar three also
encompasses a wide range of non-coercive and
non-violent responses under Chapters VI and VIII of
the Charter.
We believe that prevention is key. In this regard,
responsibility to protect is also about efforts to
strengthen the capacity of Member States to meet the
minimum criteria of good governance and application
of the rule of law. This perspective will in turn assist
Member States in providing better protection for their
populations. Hence, at this juncture, the discussion of
the responsibility to protect in the General Assembly

8

should include a comprehensive and clear strategy
aimed at strengthening capacity-building programmes.
The report of the Secretary-General has identified
a number of possibilities which are deserving of
careful consideration. We welcome in particular the
acknowledgement of the innovative steps taken by
some regional or subregional organizations in
promoting capacity-building. The potential value of
region-to-region learning processes cannot be
underestimated.
We share the view that clear ways must be
defined concerning partnerships between States and the
international community. Without doubt, the subject of
international assistance and capacity-building, which is
referred to in the report under pillar two, will greatly
influence whether the strategy for implementing the
responsibility to protect will succeed or fail.
A focus on prevention also necessarily entails the
strengthening of the United Nations early warning
capacity, not least by working closely with its regional
and subregional partners, as well as by heightening,
consistent with their mandates, responsibility to protect
perspectives within existing and relevant United
Nations departments, programmes and agencies.
We are cognizant, however, that the challenge
extends beyond better information. In this regard,
Indonesia looks forward to the Secretary-General’s
proposals on strengthening the United Nations early
warning system, to be submitted later this year.
The report suggests that the General Assembly
might consider the possibility of conducting a periodic
review of what Member States have done to implement
the responsibility to protect. We feel that this issue
needs a clear and practical modality before a
discussion on it takes place in order to ensure the true
added value of such an exercise.
Finally, while emphasizing the 2005 consensus on
the responsibility to protect, it is important not to
underestimate the magnitude of the challenge ahead in
operationalizing the concept. In striving for such an
outcome, we must ensure that the hard-gained 2005
consensus is preserved, nurtured and, indeed, built
upon. The present report of the Secretary-General is
invaluable in this regard. My delegation stands ready to
engage constructively in discussing the various
important issues raised therein.

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to say that my delegation fully
endorses the statement made earlier by the Permanent
Representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union.
In 2005, the heads of State and Government,
meeting at the World Summit, wanted to ensure that
never again would we witness mass atrocities in the
world — crimes of intolerable scope and cruelty that
were all too widespread in the twentieth century. For
that purpose, they defined by common agreement and
by consensus the principle of the responsibility to
protect which brings us here today. This principle is in
line with other thinking and legal frameworks.
By virtue of both its preventive dimension and its
operational aspect, which can, if necessary, result in a
collective action under Chapter VII, it is a key element
in the fight against mass atrocities on a par with
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and the international criminal justice.
Let me recall that its emergence was made
possible by the conceptual leap made in the 1990s with
the birth of the right of humanitarian intervention for
the benefit of victims, as formulated by France and
Bernard Kouchner, and which was ratified by several
resolutions of the General Assembly. The Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, whose sixtieth anniversary we have just
celebrated, also paved the way for the responsibility to
protect.
The responsibility to protect is not a geographic
concept to be implemented exclusively by developed
nations. It was developed, I would recall, as a result of
the thinking of prominent figures from every continent.
Evidence of that fact is that Article 4 of the
Constitutive Act of the African Union (AU) established
in 2004 the principle of the right of the Union to
intervene in a member State pursuant to a decision of
the Assembly in respect of grave circumstances,
namely, war crimes, genocide and crimes against
humanity.
In fact, States, the international community and
the United Nations system have contributed to the
implementation of the responsibility to protect for
many years. Whether in Kenya in 2008 or in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in 2001, the
international community has demonstrated that it is
possible to avoid the worst by mobilizing all

09-41971

stakeholders. Twice in 2006, the Security Council
reaffirmed the provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the 2005 Summit Outcome, in its resolution 1674
(2006) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and in resolution 1706 (2006) on the crisis in Darfur.
Resolution 1674 (2006) on the protection of civilians
also made it possible to integrate the issues of human
rights and international humanitarian law in a dozen
peacekeeping operations, thereby making it possible to
avoid mass atrocities.
The responsibility to protect therefore already
largely exists. Heads of State and Government
recognized it as a universal principle nearly four years
ago. It is increasingly becoming an expectation among
populations throughout the world, as well as among
members of the international community in general.
We are therefore meeting not to discuss the definition
of the concept, but rather to debate the means to
strengthen its implementation and its respect, as the
Secretary-General calls on us to do in his report
(A/63/677).
France welcomes the report presented to us two
days ago by the Secretary-General. We believe it is
accurate and pragmatic. The report proposes an
approach that is both targeted and in-depth, strictly
confining the responsibility to protect to four crimes
enumerated by the 2005 Final Document, namely,
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. France will also remain vigilant to
ensure that natural disasters, when combined with
deliberate inaction on the part of a Government that
refuses to provide assistance to its population in
distress or to ask the international community for aid,
do not lead to human tragedies in which the
international community can only look on helplessly.
France welcomes the important role that the
report assigns to preventive action, which is a key
component of the responsibility to protect by virtue of
the definition it establishes for national sovereignty,
under which a State has lasting obligations towards its
people.
State respect for human rights law, international
humanitarian law and refugee law is the first step
towards responsible sovereignty and preventing the
four crimes I have mentioned. As the SecretaryGeneral has done in his report, we call on States to
fully adhere to the permanent international instruments
pertaining to those rights and to collaborate with the

9

A/63/PV.97

institutions associated with them, in particular the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Human Rights Council and its
special procedures.
The fight against impunity is also one of the
preventive tools capable of preventing mass crimes.
France encourages all States that have not yet done so
to become party to the Rome Statute on the
International Criminal Court and to put in place
national legal mechanisms to ensure that no grave
crime goes unpunished.
The international community has a role to play in
strengthening the capacity of States to help them to
exercise responsible sovereignty in order to protect
their people. The report of the Secretary-General lists a
whole range of international and regional mechanisms,
which are often linked to the institutions I have already
mentioned. We encourage the United Nations system to
work in partnership with States in that regard, as well
as to integrate the philosophy of the responsibility to
protect into its programmes. We look forward to the
recommendations that the Secretary-General will
provide us with regard to strengthening early warning
mechanisms at the United Nations.
Likewise development aid, by promoting
democratic governance and respect for the rule of law,
plays a major role in implementing the responsibility to
protect.
France shares the viewpoint highlighted in the
report with respect to the balance between the three
pillars. The responsibility to protect is not limited to
the response to be given to a crisis situation; quite the
opposite, its success depends upon our ability to
strengthen the prevention of mass crimes. However, the
responsibility to protect would not be complete without
the third pillar, which gives it its full meaning — that
is, the international community’s reaction when one of
the four crimes is being or is about to be committed.
As the report points out, the international
community’s reaction can take many forms. It is not
limited solely to action by the Security Council, even
though that, as determined by the Charter of the United
Nations, is essential. Nor is it limited solely to actions
taken under Chapter VII. It also includes the whole
host of measures for peaceful settlement of disputes
provided for in Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations.

10

The Secretary-General’s report clearly shows that
the responsibility to protect is a broad concept, whose
key element is prevention, and that it is everybody’s
business. First and foremost, it is the responsibility of
States, which are reminded to implement national and
international mechanisms to prevent, by respecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the
emergence of situations that could lead to the four
crimes. And that responsibility is also the business of
all regional organizations, which have an essential role
to play, as well as every international organization
working, directly or indirectly, to preserve peaceful
conditions. Finally, it is the business of the United
Nations and its various bodies, beginning with the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the funds and
programmes.
France calls on nations, the international
community and the United Nations as a whole to meet
this challenge so that the world will never again
witness such heinous crimes as genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. France
will be fully involved in that daily effort, whether
through bilateral action with its partners, through its
development policy or as a member State of the
regional and international organizations to which we
belong.
Mr. Davide (Philippines): At the outset, my
delegation commends the President for organizing
these activities relating to the subject of the
responsibility to protect (R2P), which are ending with
this open debate on the report (A/63/677) of the
Secretary-General on implementing the responsibility
to protect. My delegation would also like to commend
and congratulate the Secretary-General for his report,
which is undoubtedly comprehensive and enlightening
and has been prepared with the utmost care and
prudence.
The report’s discussion of its mandate, the
context and the definition of its approach, the
identification of the three pillars of R2P and its
recommended prescriptions for the way forward would
have warranted an earlier discussion or debate thereon
by the General Assembly for it to enable itself to
formulate effective measures to further invigorate and
give fuller meaning to R2P. As it is, nearly three and a
half years had already gone by since September 2005,
when the biggest gathering in history of heads of State
and Government convened at the 2005 Summit and
approved the concept of R2P by enshrining it in

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

paragraphs 138 and 139 of the Summit’s Outcome
Document. We are lucky that it has not been forgotten
at all. The report of the Secretary-General could yet be
the best document to provide us a healthy environment
to nurture and cultivate the R2P principle towards its
early maturity.
The political foundation of R2P in paragraphs
138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome is
firmly anchored in existing international practice. The
concepts in those two paragraphs do not create new
binding norms, but build on current international
standards condemning genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity and confirming
their classification as international crimes. In fact,
paragraph 138 is just a restatement of the positive
binding obligation of States to protect their populations
from the four crimes enumerated therein. As to
paragraph 139, the term “collective action” is clearly
meant to be applied or used strictly in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, bearing in mind
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States, non-interference in their internal affairs and
respect for fundamental human rights.
More important, of course, is that the adoption by
our leaders at the highest level of paragraphs 138 and
139 demonstrated a strong political commitment that
accomplished a breakthrough by providing a new
framework for understanding and applying existing
legal obligations concerning those four international
crimes. Our leaders, haunted, tormented and tortured
by the memory of the past in relation to genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity — which, sadly and painfully, are still being
committed today in some parts of our planet — and
resolved to put an end to those crimes, left nothing
vague with regard to the scope or intent of R2P. It
should be limited to those four crimes and applied only
to them. Any attempt to enlarge its coverage even
before R2P is effectively implemented will only delay,
if not derail, such implementation; or worse yet,
diminish its value or devalue its original intent and
scope.
Indeed, the call of the hour is to translate into
concrete action and deed the voice, and implement the
will, of our leaders as expressed in R2P. The SecretaryGeneral’s report provides the road map for our
deliberations on how the General Assembly should
proceed in operationalizing the concept of the
responsibility to protect.

09-41971

The successful implementation of any initiative
in the United Nations depends on support from the
Member States. That support is engendered through
frank and transparent discussions and dialogue
conducted with the utmost good faith. Today’s plenary
debate is the ideal venue to begin those discussions and
dialogue to develop a clear understanding on how R2P
can be implemented, as well as to be enlightened on its
implications for the work of the United Nations.
For the time being, my delegation would like to
make the following points in relation to the report of
the Secretary-General.
First, let me begin with pillar one, on the
protection and responsibilities of the State. We fully
concur with the statement that
“The responsibility to protect, first and
foremost, is a matter of State responsibility,
because prevention begins at home and the
protection of populations is a defining attribute of
sovereignty and statehood in the twenty-first
century.” (A/63/677, para. 14)
In the Philippines that responsibility is mandated
by the Constitution itself. Section 4 of article II thereof
provides that “The prime duty of the Government is to
serve and protect the people”. That is so because, as
also solemnly enshrined in section 1 of the same
article, “Sovereignty resides in the people and all
Government authority emanates from them”. The best
guarantees that a State can provide to protect its
citizens are its adherence to democratic principles,
ideals and practices; the protection and promotion of
fundamental human rights and of the dignity and worth
of every human person; the observance of the rule of
law; an independent judiciary; good governance; and,
for United Nations Member States, unconditional
fidelity to the United Nations Charter and observance
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Second, as to pillar two, on international
assistance and capacity-building, and pillar three, on
timely and decisive response, the General Assembly
and the Security Council, as well as the SecretaryGeneral, should have an active and substantive role in
their implementation. It must be underscored that the
General Assembly approved paragraphs 138 and 139 in
2005. Its overall role on the issue, specifically as
regards oversight over its implementation, must be
promoted and strengthened with abiding vigour and

11

A/63/PV.97

vitality. It should never be diminished or diluted. The
latter may only make R2P all sound and fury.
Third, the concept of R2P should be universal,
that is, applied equally and fairly to all States, although
the manner of implementation would be on a case-tocase basis. Doing otherwise would raise the issue of
selectivity and would bring up valid and legitimate
questions about the criteria used for the priority given
to situations requiring action.
Fourth, the time frame and mandate of any action
to be taken under pillars two and three should be
clearly defined without any trace of ambiguity. Openended or ambiguous mandates are indications of
indecisiveness, or even weakness, and should not be
tolerated, for it could cause not only confusion but
dismal failure.
Fifth, the United Nations resources to be used for
R2P should not affect other activities undertaken in the
context of other legal mandates, such as development
assistance. It may be recalled that there is still an
imbalance in the programme budget for items relating
to the three intertwined and indivisible pillars of the
United Nations — the promotion of peace and security,
development and human rights. R2P may further skew
the balance against development.

My delegation looks forward to a meeting of
minds among us that will lead to a fair, reasonable,
responsible, responsive, effective and expeditious
operationalization of R2P. In doing so, let us bear in
mind the words of Sir Edmund Burke, which I find
very relevant to our discussions today: “All that is
necessary for the triumph of evil is that good men do
nothing”.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank the
President for convening this debate, which is both
timely and appropriate. The implementation of the
responsibility to protect (R2P) as spelled out in the
2005 Summit Outcome Document requires serious and
careful consultations among all Member States. The
General Assembly is the proper venue for that process,
as the chief deliberative, policymaking and
representative organ of the United Nations. I would
also like to thank him for the conceptual note prepared
for this occasion.

Sixth, international assistance and capacitybuilding should focus on maximizing the contributions
from regional and subregional organizations. In
particular, the United Nations should look into building
up the civilian capacities of regional and subregional
organizations to prevent the commission of crimes
covered by R2P. The Organization should also look
into the potential value of region-to-region learning
processes and their adaptation to local conditions and
cultures.

My delegation is also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral and to his Special Adviser Edward Luck for
the report (A/63/677) before us, which we welcome. It
constitutes a balanced and thought-provoking effort to
assist Member States in their search for the best way to
render operational the concepts enunciated in
paragraphs 138 and 139 of the Outcome Document. My
delegation’s participation in this important exercise is
based on a few premises. The first one is that this is not
a discussion between those who cherish the dignity of
human life and those who do not. By definition, all
Member States subscribe to the core values enshrined
in the Charter and are bound to act accordingly. The
obvious fact that the observance of those values varies
from country to country neither authorizes nor
recommends Manichean views, which will lead us
nowhere.

Seventh, there should be more focused
discussions on the implementation and modalities for
pillar three, on timely and decisive response, which is
the most controversial pillar. Deliberations should lead
to more clarity with respect the use of force in
enforcing R2P. It is imperative that policies, principles
and rules be laid out in cases where coercive force may
be applied in extreme situations. Dialogue and peaceful
persuasion — measures taken under Chapters VI and
VIII of the United Nations Charter — should take
precedence over coercive responses.

Secondly, the political boundaries of the
responsibility to protect were clearly set by our heads
of State and Government in 2005, and we are not
mandated to alter them in one way or another. As
indicated by the report of the Secretary-General,
attempts to expand the responsibility to protect to
cover other calamities, such as HIV/AIDS, climate
change or the response to natural disasters, “would
undermine the 2005 consensus and stretch the concept
beyond recognition or operational utility”. (A/63/677,
para. 10 (b))

12

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

Thirdly, ignoring legitimate concerns expressed
by many Member States is not going to take us
forward. If we want to succeed — and I believe that we
all do — we must address those concerns effectively by
ensuring that the implementation of the responsibility
to protect is fully consistent with the Charter. That
means, inter alia, recognizing that a State’s
responsibility to protect does not qualify State
sovereignty. Paragraph 138 is clear in that such
responsibility is taken up by States individually. On the
other hand, the attribute of sovereignty does not
exempt the State from its obligation to protect its
population. On the contrary, it is from that very
attribute that such obligation derives.
As we embark upon this collective effort to
appropriately implement the agreement reached in
2005, we would also benefit from a clear
understanding of the nature of the responsibility to
protect. In Brazil’s view, it is not a principle proper,
much less a novel legal prescription. Rather, it is a
powerful political call for all States to abide by legal
obligations already set forth in the Charter, in relevant
human rights conventions and in international
humanitarian law and other instruments. Just as
important, it is a reminder to the international
community that it already has the instruments needed
to act, namely, those mentioned in paragraph 139 of the
Outcome Document.
The implications of such an understanding of the
responsibility to protect are far from academic:
perpetrators of the four crimes referred to in the
document cannot argue in their defence that the
responsibility to protect is still to be implemented, nor
can the international community justify inaction with a
lack of legal instruments. The tragedy in Rwanda, for
example, took place neither because authorities were
unaware of their legal obligation to protect their
populations nor because the international community
did not have the means to stop them. That is a sad
truth, but we must be true to ourselves if we are serious
about the responsibility to protect.
The Secretary-General’s report presents the
content of paragraphs 138 and 139 of the Outcome
Document in three different pillars. That image may be
useful as a means to indicate the basic elements of the
notion of the responsibility to protect. However, there
is a political subordination and a chronological
sequence among them. The responsibility to protect a
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing

09-41971

and crimes against humanity is first and foremost an
obligation of the State. Only if and when a State
manifestly fails to fulfil such obligation may the
international community take collective action in
accordance with the Charter. In other words, the third
pillar is subsidiary to the first one and a truly
exceptional course of action, a measure of last resort.
With regard to the second pillar, it is
complementary to the first one. That is a means to
assist the efforts of the State to fulfil an obligation that
is primarily its own.
Among the two pillars directly related to the
international community, the one regarding assistance
and capacity-building must certainly concentrate our
attention and energy. Brazil attaches particular
importance to the aspect of prevention, as we have
already stated in several other forums such as the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
The first step towards a durable solution to
humanitarian crises is to identify their root causes,
which usually include underdevelopment, poverty,
social exclusion and discrimination. Therefore, in
addressing the responsibility to protect, we should deal
first and foremost with cooperation for development
and try to devise ways to reduce the disparities of all
sorts that exist within nations, and among nations and
regions.
In that regard, the role of the United Nations is
indispensable. It must be given the financial and
human resources needed to help States facing material
and institutional difficulties to ensure the protection of
their populations. For its part, the United Nations
system must make the best use possible of such
resources in a way that increases the long-term
capacity of States to protect their own people.
International assistance and capacity-building
should be conceived as a positive support system, as
necessary and appropriate. Considerations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General as to whether the
assistance measures in a given case would be “of little
use and the international community would be better
advised to begin assembling the capacity and will for a
‘timely and decisive’ response, as stipulated under
paragraph 139” (ibid., para. 29) seems to reveal a
punitive intention when it comes to the implementation
of the responsibility to protect. That perception must be
avoided.

13

A/63/PV.97

Brazil advocates the concept of non-indifference
as a way of emphasizing the responsibility of the
international community when faced with humanitarian
disasters and crises, including those resulting from
hunger, poverty and epidemics. These are humanitarian
catastrophes that can be prevented or mitigated through
political will and short-, medium- and long-term
cooperation. That requires that developed States fulfil
their development-related obligations, as agreed in
Monterrey and in the Doha review conferences.
Non-indifference also calls for enhanced South-South
cooperation and innovative financing mechanisms that
complement traditional sources of financing for
development. Brazil seeks to implement that approach
in its South-South activities.
In conclusion, I wish to express my delegation’s
willingness to actively participate in the consultations
we are now initiating. If guided by a shared sense of
objectivity and inclusiveness, in conformity with the
Charter, such a process should succeed.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like to associate myself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Egypt,
who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Secondly, I would like to thank and commend the
Secretariat for the document entitled “Implementing
the responsibility to protect”, which has been issued
under the symbol A/63/677. I do not say it as a mere
courtesy. The document is extremely well crafted, not
only from the perspective that matters most, namely,
substance, but also in its structure and drafting. We
also appreciate the President’s own concept note,
which was circulated on 17 July. We also thank him for
having organized this morning’s interesting panel on
the issue before us.
Our delegation is among those that believe that
paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document were one of the singular
achievements of that meeting. The evolution of the
doctrine on humanitarian law over the past 20 years
made viable the unanimous acceptance of the
responsibility to protect in 2005. We understand that it
is not a matter of binding humanitarian law, but rather
an important framework on the way that the
international community is to deal with the four
categories of crime that those paragraphs address.
As an example, I should like to refer to my own
country, which, like others in Latin America, long

14

supported military dictatorships. It is debatable
whether the indescribable crimes committed in some
cases rise to the category of genocide or crimes against
humanity. However, the point is that, after the long
authoritarian night, Governments emerged in our
region, including of course my own, that were prepared
to assume their own responsibility for protecting and
promoting the human rights of their respective
populations.
Some of the so-called truth commissions that
were established with the emergence of democracy
issued reports aptly entitled “Never Again”. That
included one of the reports issued in my own country
of Guatemala. We believe that the time has arrived for
the international community as a whole to say “never
again” to genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. Too many flagrant cases
occurred during the past 60 years of the twentieth
century, and we are still facing situations that could be
qualified under one of those four categories in the first
decade of the twenty-first century. In other words, we
have made progress in conceptual and doctrinaire
terms, but there is still some way to go to fulfil the
aspiration that such abuses will never again be
committed. In that regard, the Secretary-General’s
report is not only well crafted, but exceptionally
timely.
Indeed, as indicated in paragraph 67, the report
can help us to turn the words of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome into doctrine, policy and, most
importantly, deeds. That is to say that, as also
suggested elsewhere in the report, it is important to be
able to count not only on a conceptual framework but
also on an instrument that allows us to move from
rhetoric to action. We believe that the document and
the proposals contained therein in the three categories
explored — the three pillars — make a significant
contribution to our ability to move forward.
It is now necessary to recognize that, at an
abstract or intellectual level, all Member States accept
the concept of the responsibility to protect (R2P).
However, with regard to its potential implementation,
the concept still arouses certain apprehensions, as is
made clear in the concept paper prepared by the
President of the General Assembly. Among those, four
stand out.
First, some still have difficulty reconciling the
status of sovereign independent States with

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

commitments that could be interpreted as being of a
supranational nature. That is so despite the conceptual
breakthroughs achieved with regard to the issue itself,
including, among others, the independent International
Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty
convened by the Government of Canada in the year
2000, which perceived the responsibility to protect as
an act of shared sovereignty.
Secondly, for countries like mine that greatly
value the principle of non-intervention in the internal
affairs of sovereign States, there is a lingering
suspicion that the responsibility to protect can, in
specific moments or situations, be invoked as a pretext
for improper intervention.
Thirdly, there are divergences with regard to the
character of the crimes that the responsibility to protect
is designed to address. Not everyone sees things the
same way when we try to define the concepts of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. Although those have been the object
of international codification, the latter has not been
uniform and there are even variances with regard to
what is established by customary international law.
Fourthly, there is some overlap in the
implementation of R2P and the role of the Security
Council, with its known shortcomings, which, whether
we like it or not, links the discussion of the
responsibility to protect to the most controversial item
of our current agenda, namely, the reform of the
Security Council.
We believe that one of the greatest merits of the
Secretary-General’s report is that it moves in the
direction of dissipating those apprehensions, especially
with respect to reconciling the inescapable obligation
of each State to protect its own population with the
shared responsibility of the community of nations to
assure that each State is in a position to meet that basic
commitment. The document usefully bases the concept
on three separate but interconnected pillars. Also useful
is the report’s focus on the fact that the third pillar
should be conceived in such a way that responses to
specific situations be reasoned, calibrated and timely.
Although the document does not state so explicitly, it is
clear that the use of force must be considered as a
recourse of last resort, and only on the basis of a
Security Council resolution.
Nevertheless, further clarification may perhaps be
necessary to mitigate apprehensions relating to the risk

09-41971

that some actors, individually or collectively, may
abuse the responsibility to protect to further aims that
are incompatible with the noble objectives of that
doctrine. That should be done in such a manner so as
not to limit the third pillar to such an extent so as to
render it meaningless. Indeed, it is precisely for that
reason that we must continue to refine the conceptual
framework in order to codify it in such a way as to
facilitate its practical application, but not to neutralize
or limit it to such a degree as to render it inoperative.
Lastly, we have heard some colleagues express
doubts as to whether our discussion of today requires
any outcome. My delegation firmly believes that it
does, first, because paragraph 139 contains a precise
instruction that the General Assembly should continue
to consider the matter and, secondly, because the
concept requires further development. Our delegation
thinks that the Secretary-General’s report contains
sufficient material to enable the General Assembly to
complement paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document with a resolution that
serves as the equivalent of a set of rules for the
practical application of the responsibility to protect.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
For example, among the many areas requiring
further development is the issue of helping the United
Nations to establish an early warning system. Under no
circumstances would that entail revising the contents of
those paragraphs, as we agree fully with the SecretaryGeneral that they require no modification whatever,
much less an effort to weaken them. What may perhaps
be needed is to codify the manner of applying the
concept through the length and breadth of the three
pillars that the Outcome Document itself identifies, but
whose content and scope are developed in the
Secretary-General’s report, while at the same time
dissipating the apprehensions that still exist on the
matter. We are prepared to fully participate in the
consideration of a draft resolution of that nature, which
should also be perceived as part of a gradual but
progressive process of development.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First
of all, my delegation wishes to commend the President
of the General Assembly and his effort to organize this
important event, including this morning’s very
productive and interactive exchange of opinions with
distinguished panellists with regard to the very

15

A/63/PV.97

comprehensive report (A/63/677) of the SecretaryGeneral on the responsibility to protect (R2P). I would
also like to add that my delegation endorses the
statement delivered by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.
Today and in times to come, the importance of
the responsibility to protect, especially in the light of
ensuring the safety of people within a country’s
borders, is an issue to which the United Nations and
the international community must pay exceptional
attention. As the world’s leaders outlined in the 2005
World Summit Outcome, the United Nations is
responsible for undertaking appropriate measures and
collective action in accordance with the Charter,
including under Chapter VII, to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.
The notion of sovereignty implies the
responsibility of a State to protect its own population
and to respect human rights. If a State is unable to do
so, the international community ought to take a stand
and undertake adequate measures to put an end to such
activities. Neither a State nor the international
community, and especially the United Nations, as the
highest institutional forum for multilateral diplomacy,
has the right to turn a blind eye on any practice that
could lead to grave violations of international
humanitarian law.
The responsibility of Member States to respond
collectively does not always have to be a choice
between observing passively or using military force.
Some States need the assistance of the international
community to build up their capacity to protect.
However, a prerequisite for that is the readiness of
their political leaders to genuinely accept assistance. In
that regard, the assistance of regional and subregional
organizations and neighbouring countries has a pivotal
role to play. Regional organizations should have
relevant instruments to support capacity-building in the
areas of conflict prevention, the rule of law, security
sector reform, development and human rights and the
protection of refugees and internally displaced persons.
However, when it is evident that diplomatic
efforts have failed and that States or non-State actors
are committing or are about to commit crimes related
to the responsibility to protect, collective international
military assistance, as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, may be the surest way to support

16

States in meeting their obligations relating to the
responsibility to protect.
As the report points out, the worst human
tragedies of the past have not been exclusively rooted
in geography or economic factors. No State or region is
immune to them. Today as in the past, no international
organization has the full capacity to either prevent
conflict or to protect populations from their
consequences.
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the utmost
importance to the establishment of a United Nations
early warning capability, as was recognized at the 2005
Summit. However, that raises the question of the
establishment of a mechanism that could effectively
lead from early warning to concrete action by the
international community and the United Nations. State
sovereignty cannot be a definite obstacle when
confronting the greatest crimes known to humankind.
My delegation has no intention of blaming and
shaming the international community for what it did
not do or what it did belatedly with regard to the
conflicts that emerged during the process of the
dissolution of the former Yugoslavia. However, I would
like to recall that there were clear warning signs.
Political leaders from multi-ethnic societies calling for
the establishment of States based on a single ethnic
group that denied equal rights to other ethnic groups
was just such a sign. Media favouring certain leaders
who were true extremists was another. The emergence
of armed groups was not just a warning sign; it was the
last
call
before
disaster
was
precipitated.
Unfortunately, what happened afterward is well known.
In that regard, we would like to remind the
Assembly of what was stated in the judgement of the
International Court of Justice in its ruling on
26 February 2007:
“the acts committed at Srebrenica … were
committed with the specific intent to destroy in
part the group of the Muslims of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as such; and accordingly that these
were acts of genocide, committed … in and
around Srebrenica from about 13 July 1995.”
(International Court of Justice, decision of
26 February 2007 Concerning the Application of
the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, para. 297)

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

A few days ago, we commemorated 14 years
since the Srebrenica tragedy, which took place in the
heart of Europe. Today we have an international
institution and mechanisms that represent the legacy of
an unfortunate time in our history, namely, the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia. An important aspect of prevention is the
sending of the strong message that perpetrators of
crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity will be brought to justice and
prosecuted.
Becoming a party to international human rights
instruments, in particular, the Rome Statute which
established the International Criminal Court, and
adherence to international humanitarian law and
refugee law should be factors of stability for every
single State. The political leaders of States parties to
the Rome Statute have to be aware that their actions or
wrongdoing with respect to human rights or provisions
of international humanitarian law are subject to
scrutiny. That aspect should not be underestimated, nor
should it be misused. In that regard, international
standards have to be incorporated into national
legislation and carefully guarded. Domestic law in that
case would be the first line of defence in upholding
human rights and humanitarian law.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and balanced report (A/63/677). We
appreciate the opportunity to comment on this
important issue today. Since the Holocaust, the world
has often said “never again”, but we all have much
more to do to give those words real meaning and
strength. The type of horrors that marred the twentieth
century need not be part of the landscape of world
politics. The United States is determined to work with
the international community to prevent and respond to
such atrocities.
Four years ago, at the World Summit, States
Members of the United Nations unanimously agreed
that sovereignty comes with responsibility and that
States have a particular obligation to protect their
populations from such atrocities as genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
The responsibility to protect follows a path laid out by
the African Union’s Constitutive Act, in which our
African colleagues pledged non-indifference in the face
of mass crimes.

09-41971

The responsibility to protect complements
principles of international humanitarian and human
rights law to which we have all committed. It reflects
our collective recognition of past failures to save the
innocent from the worst forms of atrocity and abuse.
That is important progress, and the United States
supports it.
The Secretary-General reminds us that the great
crimes of the past century were not confined to any
particular part of the world. They occurred in the North
and in the South, in poor countries and in affluent ones.
Sometimes they were linked to ongoing conflicts;
sometimes they were not. We still know too little about
the paths that lead to mass atrocity, but in the
twenty-first century we cannot wait for such crimes to
occur. We must look for ways to prevent them.
The Secretary-General’s report provides an
important framework for translating the commitments
we made in 2005 into action. It elaborates three pillars
that underscore the policies and instruments that we
must mobilize, and it highlights the need for stronger
conflict management, sufficient resources and better
coordination of international efforts.
We must do more to respond effectively to early
warning signs. The United States strongly supports
effective United Nations human rights machinery,
including more credible action from the Human Rights
Council and timely information on unfolding and
potential calamities from the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the network of
independent United Nations rapporteurs and experts.
The United Nations mediation standby teams can also
play an important role, but these teams must be
strengthened.
The potential for mass atrocities is greatest amid
war and civil strife, so we must redouble our efforts to
prevent or swiftly respond to outbreaks of violence.
That means more effective peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, including intensified efforts to address
sexual and gender-based violence.
Today we have a better understanding of the ways
that poverty, environmental pressures, poor governance
and State weakness raise the risk of civil conflict, but
the tools at our disposal to address those challenges
must be sharper, stronger and deployed more
consistently. Where prevention fails and a State is
manifestly failing to meet its obligations, we also need
to be prepared to consider a wider range of collective

17

A/63/PV.97

measures. Only rarely and in extremis would these
include the use of force.

to protect reinforces it by turning it into responsible
sovereignty.

We must work together towards attaining peace,
justice, accountability and dignity for all. The United
States stands prepared to work with all partners — the
United Nations, regional organizations that play such a
vital role in peace and security, non-governmental
organizations and others — towards these ends.
Ultimately, the greatest obstacle to swift action in the
face of sudden atrocity is the lack of political will.
Together, let us work to summon the courage of our
convictions and the will to act.

Thirdly, if a State lacks the means to assume its
responsibility on its own, the international community
can and must offer assistance. That effort of solidarity
is at the very heart of the very principles of the United
Nations. Such solidarity is more necessary than ever,
especially given the financial and other crises that we
must face together. This is also about the responsibility
of the international community. International support is
essential, including regional and subregional support.
In numerous instances, it must make it possible to
build States that are genuinely responsible for their
own citizens. As emphasized by the Secretary-General
in his report, we should help to ensure that national
capacities take root, rather than merely supporting
them temporarily and artificially.

Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): It will
soon be four years since our heads of State and
Government unanimously and irrevocably enshrined
the principle of the responsibility to protect. In so
doing, we offered a promise of hope to humanity — the
promise of a future in which the words genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity
would be confined to history books. In order to reach
this better future, our heads of State and Government
promised to fully assume their responsibilities. And
they promised to work constructively and in solidarity
and to offer each other a helping hand. Today, I would
like to reflect on each of these promises.
All the victims of such crimes, be they in
Cambodia, in Rwanda or in ex-Yugoslavia, remind us
that no region or culture is safe from the horror
engendered by hatred and violence. The promise of
hope that was made at the highest level raised the
expectations of the populations that suffered from these
crimes — expectations to which we must respond. The
credibility of our Organization is at stake.
Secondly, responding to this promise is the aim of
today’s debate. The answer lies in the implementation
of what our leaders decided in 2005. By adopting
paragraphs 138 and 139 of the World Summit Outcome
Document (resolution 60/1), we all pledged to fully
assume our responsibility both at the national level and
collectively.
As underlined by the Secretary-General in his
report (A/63/677), the implementation of the
responsibility to protect requires first and foremost
national action. The responsibility of States is
paramount. There lies the importance of the first pillar
and of the concept of sovereignty as responsibility.
Rather than weakening sovereignty, the responsibility

18

Regrettably, a State is sometimes not prepared to
protect its own population against the worst crimes. In
such circumstances, we cannot forfeit our collective
responsibility. On the contrary, we must demonstrate
our solidarity with civilian populations. If a State is not
prepared to assume its responsibilities, the
international community must act, using all the means
at its disposal, including, as a last resort, coercive
measures pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations. The collective exercise of the responsibility to
protect is one of the promises we made to victims in
2005, on which we cannot renege. That leads me to my
fourth and last point — implementation.
Implementation — and not the just the principle
of the responsibility to protect — is at the heart of
today’s debate. Belgium seeks in no way to revisit on
the unanimous agreement of 2005. As the SecretaryGeneral rightly stated during the presentation of his
report, “it is high time to turn the promise of the
responsibility to protect into practice” (A/63/PV.96).
Belgium joins other delegations in thanking the
Secretary-General for his commitment and for the
excellent report before us today. Few of the activities
proposed in his report are new. They are manifest in
the full respect of the Charter, whether in the areas of
mediation, conflict prevention, peacekeeping or
peacebuilding. Whether they relate to the first, the
second or the third pillar, they are all part of our daily
work. Other proposals, such as that to develop our
early warning capacity — and, therefore, our
prevention capacity — merit speedy elaboration. More

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

than ever, we must undertake that task with
determination and conviction. We promised it to the
victims of odious crimes.
That is the message that Belgium wishes to
convey on the occasion of this debate to complement
the statement made by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union, to which we fully
subscribe.
Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, let me join previous speakers in expressing my
deep appreciation for the convening of this plenary
meeting on the issue of the responsibility to protect
(R2P).
At the September 2005 World Summit, world
leaders humbly acknowledged the historic and
collective failures of the international community to
save human lives, as evidenced by Rwanda’s genocide,
the massacres in the former Yugoslavia and the ethnic
cleansing in Kosovo. They made a solemn promise that
they would seek to prevent such atrocities in the future.
Furthermore, they affirmed the collective responsibility
to protect people threatened by mass atrocities and
crimes against humanity.
With the concerted embrace of the historic notion
of the responsibility to protect, a lengthy debate over
whether to act had ended. Instead, discussions turned
to how the principle would be implemented. However,
since the 2005 agreement, some concerns and
arguments on the concept of R2P have arisen, largely
due to misperceptions or overly broad interpretations
of the concept.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report (A/63/677) and the General
Assembly’s debate on implementing R2P, which
provides a valuable opportunity to ensure a common
understanding of R2P and to reach consensus on the
overall direction of its implementation, turning promise
into reality. The Republic of Korea fully supports the
Secretary-General’s clarification of R2P as described in
his report, including the following, among others.
First, primary responsibility lies with individual
Governments, while the international community bears
secondary responsibility. After all, R2P is a call for
States to address serious human rights issues and to
protect their populations from atrocities. Responsible
sovereignty should be upheld.

09-41971

Secondly, R2P is an ally of sovereignty, not an
adversary. R2P helps States to meet their core
protection responsibilities and facilitates success in the
field. In that sense, the substance of R2P has nothing to
do with so-called humanitarian intervention. R2P is
distinctly different from humanitarian intervention,
since it is based on collective action in accordance with
the United Nations Charter, not on unilateral action.
Thirdly, R2P has a narrow scope, applying only
to four specified crimes and violations. Based on that
understanding, the Secretary-General detailed a
three-pillar approach to turn the principle of R2P into
an implementable and operational tool by suggesting a
wide range of options under each respective pillar.
Pillar one is self-evident. As the report states, the
protection of populations is a defining attribute of
sovereignty. The policies and measures suggested in
the report are all effective tools for authorities to
implement R2P.
The Republic of Korea attaches great importance
to pillar two, which is the commitment of the
international community to assist States. As the
Secretary-General’s report points out, if the political
leadership in a given State is determined to commit
R2P crimes, assistance would be of little use. However,
if the leadership is willing to implement its R2P
responsibilities but lacks the capacity to do so,
international assistance can play a critical role.
Among the recommendations and illustrative
examples of activities to assist States, we take special
note of the role of regional and subregional
mechanisms. In fact, the African Union (AU) pioneered
the R2P principle by stating in its 2000 Constitutive
Act that it would not be indifferent in the face of
failure by AU members to protect their populations
from genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Building the capacities of regional
organizations to assist States and to deal with tense
situations within their respective regions would be a
sound investment.
While encouraging Member States to consider
proposals for building capacity, such as standing or
standby rapid response mechanisms, as well as to ask
for assistance when under pressure, my delegation
stresses the need to mainstream the goals of R2P into
the broad activities of the United Nations system. In
the areas of human rights, humanitarian affairs,
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding,
governance
and

19

A/63/PV.97

development, there should be a common strategy to
assist States in implementing R2P.
Let me now turn to pillar three — timely and
decisive measures. The most ideal situation would be
for all States to be determined and capable of fully
implementing their obligations under R2P, with
efficient assistance from the international community
wherever needed. However, when a State is manifestly
failing, the international community has a collective
responsibility to prevent atrocities and to save lives,
while responding to imminent threats, as clearly stated
by the World Summit Outcome.
The Republic of Korea understands that the
collective obligation is not to intervene, but rather to
take whatever timely and decisive actions the
international community deems appropriate to respond
to immediate threats, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. In the same vein, it should be
noted that many of the actions suggested as illustrative
examples in the Secretary-General’s report, including
mediation, are not coercive. In fact, the report suggests
a broad range of tools available, including pacific
measures under Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the
Charter. With respect to coercive measures to be taken
in extreme cases, we believe that R2P should be
implemented in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the United Nations Charter. There is no
implication of any changes to the respective roles of
the General Assembly and the Security Council.
The primary role of the Security Council in
authorizing coercive measures as a last resort reminds
us of the privilege and duty of the five permanent
members, which must be matched with their special
responsibility. In that context, we support the
recommendation in the Secretary-General’s report for
the five permanent numbers to refrain from employing
the veto, or the threat of veto, in situations of manifest
failure to meet R2P obligations.
While noting the need to continue to consider
principles, rules and doctrines that should guide the
application of coercive force relating to R2P, we would
like to express our full agreement with the SecretaryGeneral’s contention that capacity, will and
imagination are most significant, and that success lies
in an early and flexible response tailored to the specific
needs of each situation and focused on saving lives.
Looking forward, one urgent task that we should
undertake is to buttress the United Nations early

20

warning capacity. There is no doubt that early warning
and assessment through the United Nations is a
necessary component for successful preventive and
protective action. In fact, the establishment of an early
warning capability is what leaders agreed upon in
2005. As suggested by the Secretary-General,
bolstering the Office of the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide would be a fruitful primary
step.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea would like
to express its unwavering commitment to R2P. The sole
purpose of R2P is to save populations from the most
heinous crimes by placing emphasis on the primary
responsibility of States and the complementary and
collective
responsibility
of
the
international
community. It is our sincere hope that the General
Assembly will take concrete steps at its sixty-third
session to put that norm into operation, to redress
never-again collective failures and to save human lives.
The Secretary-General’s recommendation for the
General Assembly — in particular continuing the
deliberative role of the General Assembly, conducting
periodic reviews of implementation by Member States,
and submitting reports of the Secretary-General on
implementation steps — will be a solid basis for the
possible outcome of the current session of the General
Assembly. We must collectively take that critical leap
forward to make the future more secure for vulnerable
populations around the world while striving to avoid
the costly error of stumbling backwards to past
blunders.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
the President for convening this historic debate on the
Secretary-General’s report (A/63/677) on how to
operationalize and implement the responsibility to
protect (R2P). This is not a debate about the nowdiscredited notion of humanitarian intervention.
Rather, it is a discussion about protection — the
protection of all our peoples against mass-atrocity
crimes.
In 2005, as we know, all the world’s leaders
declared with one voice that the international
community
should
never
again
countenance
indifference in the face of mass-atrocity crimes. All our
leaders also agreed the means through which the
international community would prevent and address
those crimes, setting out in paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) an agreed

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

understanding of the responsibility to protect. As the
Secretary-General said to us the other day while
introducing his report, this is a universal and
irrevocable commitment. Our task now is not to
reinterpret, reconceptualize or renegotiate that
agreement. Our task is, simply and difficultly, to
implement it. That is why Australia welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report. The report reminds us of
what was agreed by all our leaders in 2005 and
provides us with some considered and important ideas
on how to translate that principle into practice.
We strongly support the Secretary-General’s
articulation of R2P as resting on three pillars, the size,
strength and viability of which are equal. We also
strongly
support
the
Secretary-General’s
characterization of R2P as being narrow but deep. It is
narrow in the sense that it is focused on the prevention
of four crimes — genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. It is not a
panacea for all humanitarian tragedies or for all human
rights violations. It is deep in that it needs to employ
the wide array of prevention and protection instruments
available to all Member States, the United Nations
system and regional and subregional organizations,
which are vital in this process, to assist States in
meeting their primary responsibility to protect their
populations.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
diversity of tools in the R2P toolkit, including
diplomacy,
targeted
development
assistance
programmes,
United
Nations
peacekeeping,
international justice mechanisms, sanctions and, only
of course as an instrument of last resort, the use of
force. Which tool to use in any particular situation will
clearly depend on the precise circumstances. The
essential operating principle, however, must be that we
do respond. Indifference, inaction and delay are not
options.
Australia looks forward to working with the
Secretary-General and with all Member States in the
further development of the full range of tools for
operationalizing R2P. Like many countries, we
ourselves have already been active in assisting States
to fulfil their responsibility, so we are not trespassing
into virgin territory. Through our development
assistance programme, we focus on assisting States to
increase their capabilities for conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and respect for the rule of law. As the
Secretary-General notes, it is those kinds of

09-41971

programmes, and many others, which reduce the
likelihood that those societies will travel the path to
crimes that relate to the responsibility to protect.
In Timor-Leste, to take one example, we are
strengthening civil society institutions and promoting
human rights to help with reconciliation and
peacebuilding after a period of difficult conflict.
Consistent with the call in the Secretary-General’s
report, we are also developing a deployable civilian
capacity to enable us to more effectively respond to
emergencies in our region.
R2P is the expression of our irrevocable
collective commitment to ensure that never again are
we confronted with the horrors of another Rwanda,
Srebrenica, Cambodia or the Holocaust. We know them
all. We know too much of the list.
As we know, no region of the world is immune to
mass-atrocity crimes. We must continue our efforts to
overcome the gaps in will, imagination and capacity to
implement this vital principle and to ensure that we
prevent future atrocities and never again fail our own
peoples.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome
this opportunity to discuss the responsibility to protect
(R2P) and the excellent report of the Secretary-General
(A/63/677). We would like to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General and his Special Adviser,
Edward Luck, for their commitment to and outstanding
work on this topic.
We believe that the three-pillar approach set out
in the report is helpful for the purposes of illustrating
the different dimensions of the concept, and we also
subscribe to the notion that all three are integral parts
of that concept. The agreement on R2P was one of the
most important achievements of the 2005 World
Summit, one of the largest gatherings in the history of
this Organization, and we embrace this occasion to
reaffirm the concept, as provided for by paragraphs
138 and 139 of the Outcome Document (resolution
60/1), to promote its understanding and to
operationalize it.
The concept of R2P is based on the notion of
sovereignty as responsibility. The principle of
sovereign equality of Member States, as enshrined in
the United Nations Charter, is of essential importance
to our membership in this Organization. Indeed, we
consider the Charter to be the key guarantor of our

21

A/63/PV.97

national sovereignty. We also understand that
sovereignty comes with responsibilities, both vis-à-vis
the other Members of the United Nations and certainly
vis-à-vis our own population. This is the foundation of
the concept of R2P. Sovereignty and responsibility go
hand in hand.
First and foremost, R2P is a matter of national
responsibility. In this context, it is worth pointing out
that, of course, States have obligations vis-à-vis their
own populations that go far beyond the very small area
covered by R2P. In particular, they have a legal
obligation to promote and protect the human rights of
all individuals effectively under their jurisdiction, both
under customary international law, particularly as
reflected in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and under relevant treaty law.
States are also obliged to observe international
humanitarian law as a matter of both customary and
treaty law. Furthermore, States already have a legal
obligation to prevent genocide under the 1948
genocide Convention. These legal obligations precede
the concept of R2P and can be neither amplified nor
undermined by this debate. At the same time, their
fulfilment is certainly an indispensable element of the
implementation of R2P in practice.
The report rightly places a strong emphasis on the
national level and the responsibility of States
themselves. It also underlines that the only effective
protection from the crimes covered in the R2P concept
is their prevention. The novel dimension of this
concept is the strengthened role of the international
community in ensuring its application. The failures of
the past, in particular those in Rwanda and Srebrenica,
are the very source of the R2P debate.
This international dimension relates to both the
second and third pillars outlined in the report. The
second pillar contains a strong preventive dimension,
in the concept of assisting States in fulfilling their
responsibility to protect their populations and in its
focus on capacity-building. Lastly, the third pillar deals
with situations where a State manifestly fails in its
responsibility, due to unwillingness rather than
inability.
The Outcome Document and the SecretaryGeneral’s report make two things abundantly clear in
this respect. First, peaceful means, in accordance with
Chapters VI and VIII of the United Nations Charter,
are to be given precedence over other forms of

22

collective action. Secondly, if other types of action are
to be considered, they have to be undertaken in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter and thus
authorized by the Security Council, as the ultimate
arbiter of all matters relating to international peace and
security. This third pillar therefore clearly excludes
from the application of R2P any form of unilateral
action taken in contravention of the Charter. It was
against this background that the High-Level Panel, in
preparing its report to the Secretary-General in
preparation for the 2005 World Summit, suggested an
agreement that there be no use of the veto in cases
involving the responsibility to protect. The group of
five small nations, of which we are a proud member,
has consistently adopted this measure as part of our
proposals on the working methods of the Security
Council since 2006.
Extensive debates have taken place on R2P since
the 2005 Summit. In considering the way forward, we
have to pause and remind ourselves what the R2P
concept is — and what it is not — and where the added
value lies. Given that the concept was agreed on at the
summit level, it is unquestionably a political
commitment of the highest order and must be treated as
such.
The Secretary-General has assisted us greatly by
submitting a report that follows the letter and spirit of
the Outcome Document very faithfully and points to
concrete measures we should take in our
intergovernmental work on R2P. It is now up to us, the
Member States, to act and to apply the concept in
practice, in strict conformity with the language of the
Outcome Document. This shift of focus should also be
reflected in our consideration of a possible outcome of
this debate. More than anything, we must now look for
concrete ways to apply the concept in practice and to
consider institutional questions, such as the interplay
between the work of the Special Adviser on R2P and
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the delegations
of Denmark and my own country, Costa Rica. We
would like to begin by thanking the President for
convening this meeting and expressing our
appreciation of the discussion that took place this
morning.
Costa Rica and Denmark welcome the report of
the Secretary-General (A/63/677). We reaffirm our

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

strong support for the flexible three-pillar strategy, as
well as for the recommendations on each of the pillars
and the way forward. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that all three pillars are equally important, and
that the responsibility to protect is a narrow but deep
concept that calls for the application of a broad range
of existing approaches and instruments.
We likewise reiterate our commitment to the
agreement enshrined in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1), which has also been
reaffirmed by several Security Council resolutions,
such as 1674 (2006), 1706 (2006) and 1755 (2007).
The commitment to preventing mass atrocities
has also been developed at the regional level. For the
African Union, a pioneer in the development of that
concept, the responsibility to protect is based on the
principle of non-indifference to mass crimes against
humanity. That is the unavoidable duty that all States
and the international community must abide by.
This debate is an opportunity to progress in the
task of operationalizing the concept of the
responsibility to protect and to affirm our commitment
to responsible sovereignty. That concept undoubtedly
represents a paradigm shift and an evolution of the
notion of sovereignty, and reaffirms that respect for the
life and dignity of the human being is the basis of
human rights and a timeless and irrevocable value. The
responsibility to protect must be a fundamental
guarantee for the safety of persons beyond the security
of States, especially in the light of possible abuse by
Governments that threaten the life and integrity of its
citizens.
The responsibility to protect is not limitless. The
legitimacy of that concept is clearly restricted to the
four criteria outlined in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (A/60/1). It entails the consistent application
of and adherence to the rules and principles of
international law on which it is based. Costa Rica and
Denmark believe that abuse, double standards,
selectivity, arbitrariness and improper use for political
ends must be avoided.
The strengthening of the first pillar on the
enduring responsibility of the State to protect its
populations requires steps at the national level, such as
the strengthening of democratic institutions, the rule of
law, access to independent justice, security sector
reform, freedom of expression, dialogue, social
cohesion and political participation, among others.

09-41971

As the Secretary-General’s report highlights, it is
urgent to continue fighting intolerance, exclusion,
racial hatred and discrimination. Those warning signs
must never again be ignored or underestimated. States
must be more effective in promoting and protecting
human rights, including respect for the rights of
minorities, and respond rapidly to reduce tensions and
prevent widespread violence. Similarly, the lawful
peaceful settlement of disputes is particularly
important, and national justice must act effectively
against those who commit or incite to commit crimes
under the criteria of the responsibility to protect.
With regard to the second pillar on international
assistance and capacity-building, we believe that
technical assistance on security sector reform and the
rule of law are key areas in strengthening the ability of
States to protect. Donors and partners should increase
their international cooperation and funding to improve
police and civil services, which are vital to restoring
order and trust in times of crisis. Furthermore,
capacity-building must ensure access to justice and
improve judicial services, as well as provide training to
national authorities to deal with cases under the
responsibility to protect and to assist victims. Here,
international mechanisms of justice, such as the
International Criminal Court, play an important role.
The concept of the responsibility to protect
involves a process that includes not only prevention
and response to violence, but also subsequent
reconstruction to prevent conflicts from reoccurring.
As the Secretary-General’s report clearly states, “The
surest predictor of genocide is past genocide”
(A/63/677, para. 48). The provision of assistance in the
context of the responsibility to protect has a critical
impact on peacebuilding. In that regard, the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission should be strengthened.
It is also important that international cooperation
reduce the risk of mass violations of human rights.
Costa Rica has stressed the importance of
incorporating ethical criteria into development
cooperation. Denmark, as a donor, will continue to
provide assistance to capacity-building efforts, both in
the legal sector and in the area of human rights, which
are relevant to strengthening national institutions.
Our countries agree with the Secretary-General’s
report with regard to the responsibility of the States
Members of the Organization to act collectively and in
a timely and decisive manner when it is evident that a

23

A/63/PV.97

State is not providing protection. The range of options
that the Secretary-General presents to us is broad and
in no way limited to coercive actions or application
exclusively by the Security Council. The responsibility
to protect prioritizes, first and foremost, prevention and
assistance, peaceful means over the use of force, and
the establishment of appropriate conditions if the use
of force should become necessary as a last resort when
other options have been exhausted.
We
recognize
the
importance
and
complementarity of the various United Nations actors
and bodies in implementing the third pillar. In that
regard, we support interaction among the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Secretariat, as
well as exchanges among those bodies and regional
and subregional organizations. Those organizations
play a key role in preventing or resolving conflict
situations or in avoiding that they result in crimes
under the criteria of the responsibility to protect. In
that sense, mediation, dialogue and preventive
diplomacy are essential both at the regional and at the
international levels. It is crucial to deploy a timely and
decisive response to prevent such crimes from being
committed. Early warning and assessment mechanisms
are critical to improving the rapid response capacity of
the Organization.
With regard to the use of force, far from
authorizing unilateral interventions, the responsibility
to protect seeks to expand the multilateral options and
to improve the Security Council’s performance. That
body has great deterrent potential and can apply other
binding punitive measures besides military action.
Some crimes that meet the criteria of the responsibility
to protect also constitute threats to international peace
and security, and the Security Council should therefore
make use of all the tools at its disposal, including in
situations that are not formally on its agenda.
Systematic violations of human rights constitute a
threat to peace and security that deserves the special
attention of the Security Council. No country or group
of countries should be allowed to interfere in or
hamper decisions that merit the implementation of the
responsibility to protect, including by veto. In that
regard, we support the Secretary-General’s appeal to
the permanent members of the Council to refrain from
using the veto in situations where it is evident that
there is manifest failure to meet obligations under the
responsibility to protect.

24

Costa Rica and Denmark came here to follow up
on the concrete implementation of the commitments
agreed at the highest level in 2005. We are committed
to international efforts to prevent the recurrence of the
crimes of the past. Promoting the responsibility to
protect must be a common objective that transcends
geographical borders, levels of development and
political, religious or ideological barriers.
In the words of a distinguished Scandinavian, the
late Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld, the United
Nations was created not to take mankind to heaven, but
to save humanity from hell. We urge the international
community to move forward together to ensure that the
responsibility to protect is an increasingly tangible
reality, a concept applicable in practice and a lasting
hope for the victims of mass atrocities. In order to
advance this concept, Denmark and Costa Rica support
the Secretary-General’s proposal that regular annual or
biennial reports be submitted on progress made in the
implementation of the responsibility to protect.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I am deeply
conscious of the fact that the first debate of the General
Assembly in which I have the honour to participate on
behalf of my country is focused on what the
representative of Sweden, speaking on behalf of the
European Union, described as the recurring nightmare
of mass atrocities. It is hard to imagine an issue more
significant or relevant to so many innocent victims or a
responsibility more historic. It is why we are here.
With that in mind, New Zealand thanks you President
d’Escoto Brockmann for facilitating this debate.
As many have already reminded us, in 2005 the
entire United Nations membership, including more
than 150 world leaders, adopted the World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1). In that declaration, as a
response to our collective failure to prevent genocide
and mass atrocity crimes — at a time when, as we were
reminded this morning, the world remained silent and
stood still — the international community
unequivocally agreed on the responsibility to protect
(R2P), its scope and its key elements. So the principle
of R2P has already been adopted. Given that clear
mandate, this debate can be only about the
implementation of the responsibility to protect and
should be a discussion of the Secretary-General’s
report (A/63/677), which was derived from the
Summit.

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

Above all, our discussion must be deeply
respectful of the millions who have died as a result of
genocide and mass atrocities in Rwanda, Srebrenica,
Cambodia and so many other places, and in the
Holocaust. Those victims stand as silent witnesses to
our debate. The moral burden of those tragedies is not
just the responsibility of individual States; it is also
that of the entire international community.
The concept of the responsibility to protect is not
new; it simply gives a name to what we have already
done and what we continue to do or what we should be
doing. It is firmly based in existing international law,
including international human rights and humanitarian
law. Activities related to the responsibility to protect
are evident in regional instruments, experience and
action. As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report, such regions as Africa have taken important
steps to establish frameworks for preventing mass
atrocities, but the rest of us have not always shared that
responsibility.
The present dialogue, which includes both
Member States and civil society, will build our
understanding of how to implement the responsibility
to protect. It is with that in mind that we commend the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Ed Luck, for an excellent and balanced report.
New Zealand supports the Secretary-General’s
proposals.
The World Summit agreement on R2P is clearly
based on four crimes and three pillars. Its scope is
specifically limited to those four crimes and violations.
It is clear that all three pillars are equally important; all
are part of a whole; all are interdependent. We
commend the Secretary-General’s report for its
emphasis on prevention rather than intervention — on
assistance to States before the worst atrocities are
allowed to occur.
The responsibility to protect is a common-sense
concept. It can help States, regional institutions and the
United Nations itself to understand, assist and organize
our ongoing response on these issues. It is all about
nations working, individually and together, to protect
people, and it will be most successful and have the
greatest impact when it is a collaborative and inclusive
exercise — a vision that is reflected in the proposals
set out in the Secretary-General’s report.
Pillars one and two focus on helping States to
exercise their responsibility to protect their own people

09-41971

and on building their protection capabilities.
Multilateral development institutions are well placed to
assist with those pillars, and if the United Nations is to
improve in this area, its development system needs
resources and needs our support.
As to pillar three, we acknowledge concerns that
the responsibility to protect might not be applied
consistently. However, such issues should not be used
as diversions or excuses to stop progress. As the report
makes clear, there is also no basis for arguing that the
concept might modify Charter provisions prohibiting
the use of force.
Although New Zealand supports structural reform
of the Security Council, we are concerned by
suggestions that such changes are a prior condition for
implementing the responsibility to protect. In the
context of this debate, there is an issue far more
important than structural reform. It is the way in which
the Council functions and the need for wide-ranging
changes in its practice and working methods,
regardless of its size and structure.
We are acutely aware of that because of New
Zealand’s experience as a member of the Security
Council in 1994, when it led the efforts of a small
group of States to persuade the Council to deploy
additional United Nations forces to Rwanda. The
problem in April and May 1994 was not one of
powerful States eager to intervene; it was exactly the
opposite. Some permanent members resisted even
recognizing that genocide was occurring and ultimately
blocked any deployment of additional United Nations
personnel.
So the present task for the General Assembly is to
challenge the Security Council — however it might be
constituted — to fulfil its role both consistently and
courageously. To that end, New Zealand believes that
we should all support the Secretary-General’s call for
restraint in exercising or threatening the veto. If we
value the legacy that we are to leave to our children
and grandchildren, we should never let it be said by
them that the veto prevented action to deal with
genocide, ethnic cleansing, widespread crimes against
humanity or war crimes.
This is not a question of whether we are ready for
R2P; we agreed on that at the World Summit, and no
one now argues against protecting peoples from
genocide and mass atrocities. It is only a question of
the next necessary steps, and we stand ready to take

25

A/63/PV.97

those steps. The United Nations must continue its work
on the responsibility to protect, as mandated by the
Summit, and enhance its capacity to assist in such
implementation. Early warning, assistance and
protection are key to credible implementation of the
concept.
Likewise, New Zealand supports the idea of a
biennial report of the Secretary-General regarding
implementation. Other areas requiring attention include
how the United Nations might assist States and
regional institutions in their implementation of the
concept. New Zealand hopes that, in the future, it will
be possible to approve more resources for early
warning and assessment, and for rapid reaction — an
aspect to which we must remain committed but which
still requires much work.
In 1945, we the peoples of the United Nations,
mindful of the events of preceding years, solemnly
agreed on the great collective responsibility of
preventing genocide and mass atrocities. New Zealand
has contributed in good faith to many efforts consistent
with the responsibility to protect, both within our
region and beyond, and will continue to strongly
support all endeavours that further implement that
responsibility.
It is a commitment so much necessitated by
history; a commitment so clearly underpinned by the
United Nations Charter and international law; a
commitment so unequivocally mandated by world
leaders in 2005; and a commitment we can now honour
by taking the next steps proposed by the SecretaryGeneral.
Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): At the outset, allow
me to state that my delegation aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union and that my remarks
should be seen as complementary.
The topic of our debate today touches on the core
of what the United Nations is all about — a collective
world institution inspired to take action when faced
with mass conflict and suffering; a world body, aiming
to foster the international community’s efforts to bring
peace and prosperity across the globe.
There have been a few landmark occasions in the
existence of the United Nations when Member States
have transcended their differences to underline what
they collectively share and to set out a common

26

agenda. The World Summit of heads of State and
Government that took place in 2005 — the largest of
its kind — was such an occasion. It consolidated a
consensus that, in the true spirit of the Organization’s
founding fathers, laid down our shared moral
responsibility to prevent the occurrence of conscienceshocking mass atrocities: genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. Our Heads of
State and Government have thus laid out before us an
agenda that forces us to look towards the future and, in
the words of the Secretary-General, to ready ourselves
for the moment when we will be tested by horrors
similar to those that have occurred in the past.
Our task is to translate our moral commitment
into political and operational readiness. This is not a
legal discussion, nor should it be. The responsibility to
protect is firmly anchored in the provisions, purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Rather, our discussion must be one that centres on
translating our commitment into reality. To that end, it
will need to focus on practical and effective
mechanisms that can help States live up to their
individual responsibilities, that can help us all assist
such States where necessary, and that can ensure that
our collective response is timely and decisive when all
else fails.
The Netherlands very much welcomes the report
presented by the Secretary-General (A/63/677) as a
well-calibrated and focused analysis, including a series
of proposals that merit our consideration and followup. Indeed, its focus on four types of crimes and
violations and its identification of three parallel pillars
present a solid basis for operationalizing the
responsibility to protect. We must build on this report,
and my delegation looks forward to further proposals
for putting into place and strengthening the
mechanisms needed, notably — but not only — an
increase in the United Nations early warning capacity,
which includes a Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide.
The Netherlands firmly believes that the approach
taken in the Secretary-General’s report is the right one.
The three pillars that have been identified should be
treated as integral parts of the concept of the
responsibility to protect. It is their sum that makes the
whole greater than its parts. It becomes a concept that
can truly make a difference in our collective response
to conscience-shocking situations, potential and actual,
that may occur.

09-41971

A/63/PV.97

At the same time, however, we should not read
more into this concept than was intended in 2005. It is
fundamentally about national obligations under the rule
of law and it complements state sovereignty rather than
undermining it. It is anchored in the United Nations
Charter and based on international humanitarian and
human rights law. It focuses on four types of crimes;
and it suggests a response tailored to each situation,
focused on saving lives.
It is worth stressing this last point. The
effectiveness of implementing our responsibility to
protect depends on the range of mechanisms that the
Secretary-General has suggested be put in place. It
falls to us, Member States, together with the
Secretariat, to ensure that this is done. The Netherlands
calls on the General Assembly to welcome the report
and to remain engaged on this agenda, enabling the
Secretary-General to continue his essential role. In this
respect, my delegation supports what was said by the
Permanent Representative of Guatemala.
At the same time, we need to acknowledge
current limitations in dealing with each specific
situation. As some have noted, in the past the Security
Council has not always been able to respond to critical
situations, due to a lack of consensus. This may recur
in the future, and we will need to continue our efforts
to overcome the kind of paralysis that at times has
haunted the world community.
Nonetheless,
the
endorsement
of
the
responsibility to protect does represent a major step
forward. It increases pressure on the Security Council
to optimize its functioning and, in fact, it has already
led to a discussion about restraining the use of the veto
in responsibility-to-protect-type situations. However, if
appropriate action is taken by the wide range of actors
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report, action by
the Security Council should not even be necessary.
This is the yardstick by which success or failure of the
responsibility to protect, and our commitment to it,
must be measured.
Our responsibility to protect points towards the
future and is a recognition that we have learned from
history. Historic wrongs and past inactions cannot be
undone and never will be. We bear collective
responsibility for inaction at critical moments in the
past. This must strengthen our resolve to put in place
what is needed for us to live up to our responsibility to

09-41971

protect. This is what must shape our future actions. Let
us focus on the task at hand.
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): Italy aligns
itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union. I warmly welcome the Secretary-General’s
report (A/63/677) on implementing the responsibility
to protect (R2P), and in particular commend the
balanced and insightful work of his Special Adviser,
Mr. Edward Luck. Today’s debate on the report is a
timely opportunity to build on the consensus achieved
at the 2005 World Summit and focus on the concrete
implementation of R2P.
The unanimous affirmation by our heads of State
and Government of the principle of the responsibility
to protect is a cardinal achievement of the United
Nations and one of the most innovative concepts to
emerge in recent years.
Europeans are particularly sensitive to this
principle. The memory is still fresh of the atrocities
perpetrated in the 1990s in the western Balkans —
which are a part of Europe culturally, historically and
politically — as well as in the Great Lakes region of
Africa. The Swedish presidency of the European
Union, along with other speakers, rightly referred to
the genocide in Rwanda and to the massacre in
Srebrenica.
I would like to structure my comments around the
three-pillar strategy that the Secretary-General has
outlined to advance the agenda mandated by the 2005
Outcome Document (resolution 60/1). Pillar one
focuses on the protection responsibilities of States. R2P
fleshes out a notion of sovereignty that entails special
responsibilities based on the pre-existing and
continuing legal obligations of States. Governments
must protect their own populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Prevention begins at home through the promotion of
human rights, the rule of law and democratic
governance. These are universal principles shared by
the international community today.
We thus welcome a number of the points
elaborated by the Secretary-General, from the role of
the Human Rights Council in advancing R2P goals to
the call for additional States to become parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The
link between accountability and prevention is clear; the
purpose of international criminal justice is to bring to

27

A/63/PV.97

justice the perpetrators of international
Preventing such crimes is at the core of R2P.

crimes.

the African Union to prevent, mediate and resolve
conflicts.

We also encourage the promotion of best
practices, such as the standards recalled in the African
Peer Review Mechanism and those established for
eligibility to membership of the European Union.
Fostering individual responsibility is another key
aspect of prevention. My Government supports the
Network of Young People Affected by War, which is
dedicated to helping former child soldiers from around
the world reintegrate into society, improve their lives
and tell their stories in order to prevent others from
falling into the same trap.

Pillar three is the responsibility of Member States
to respond collectively, in a timely and decisive
manner, when a State manifestly fails to provide
protection to its own population. Allow me to restate
that the responsibility to protect should not be
perceived in a confrontational manner; it should be
seen instead as an instrument available to the
international community to overcome crises, provided
that the conditions referred to in paragraphs 138 and
139 of the World Summit Outcome Document are met.

Pillar two examines international assistance and
capacity-building in terms of the international
community’s commitment to helping States protect
their people. This commitment means availing
ourselves of all bilateral, regional and multilateral
instruments.
This crucial task involves the entire United
Nations system. I would like to highlight, in particular,
the Security Council’s inclusion of civilian protection
clauses in the mandates of peacekeeping operations, as
well as the Council’s role in post-conflict institution
consolidation. In this regard, we reiterate our strong
interest in exploring the establishment of a rule of law
standing capacity on the model of the Standing Police
Capacity. Along those lines, we believe that
development programmes, security sector reform and
post-conflict peacebuilding mechanisms should
complement the activities of States in crisis situations.
Building the capacities of regional organizations
is a fundamental part of implementing the
responsibility to protect. Very appropriately, the
Secretary-General’s report underlines the relevance of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter as one of
the main legal frameworks for operationalizing R2P. In
2007, my Government launched the Italian African
Peace Facility, whose purpose is to strengthen the
institutional, operational and logistical capabilities of

28

Among the broad range of tools available,
including peaceful measures under Chapter VI, VII and
VIII of the Charter, we would like to focus on one
suggestion of the Secretary-General. Recognizing the
special responsibilities of the five permanent members
of the Security Council, the Secretary-General urges
them to refrain from employing or threatening to
employ the veto in situations of manifest failure to
meet obligations relating to the responsibility to protect
and to reach a mutual understanding to that effect.
Important voices of civil society and academia from
the permanent members have raised similar instances.
This is a very delicate issue driven by the concerns and
expectations of international public opinion, and Italy
believes that the debate must continue.
Today’s discussion shows that the United Nations
can give hope to populations at risk of being victimized
by international crimes that totalitarian regimes
commit or foment against their own citizens. We are
not here to debate philosophical, religious or
ideological approaches; we are here to give concrete
and credible answers that go well beyond the
Westphalian model. Human dignity has greatly
advanced since the Second World War thanks to the
adoption of the United Nations Charter and the efforts
of Member States.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

09-41971
