A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/15
25 November 1994

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 31
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/49/L.23)]
49/15.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/4 of 22 October 1982, 38/4 of
28 October 1983, 39/7 of 8 November 1984, 40/4 of 25 October 1985, 41/3 of
16 October 1986, 42/4 of 15 October 1987, 43/2 of 17 October 1988, 44/8 of
18 October 1989, 45/9 of 25 October 1990, 46/13 of 28 October 1991, 47/18 of
23 November 1992 and 48/24 of 24 November 1993,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 4 October 1994
on cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, 1/
Taking into account the desire of both organizations to cooperate more
closely in their common search for solutions to global problems, such as
questions relating to international peace and security, disarmament,
self-determination, decolonization, fundamental human rights and economic and
technical development,
Recalling also the Articles of the Charter of the United Nations that
encourage the activities through regional cooperation for the promotion of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
____________
1/

A/49/465.

94-60087
/...

A/RES/49/15
Page 2

Noting the strengthening of cooperation between the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system and the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and its specialized institutions,
Noting also the encouraging progress made in the nine priority areas of
cooperation as well as in the identification of other areas of cooperation,
Convinced that the strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and other organizations of the United Nations system and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference contributes to the promotion of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Taking into account the report of the Secretary-General entitled
"An Agenda for Peace", 2/ in particular the section therein concerning
cooperation with regional arrangements and organizations,
Noting with appreciation the determination of both organizations to
strengthen further the existing cooperation by developing specific proposals
in the designated priority areas of cooperation,
Welcoming the general meeting between the organizations and agencies of
the United Nations system and the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
its specialized institutions, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 May 1994, 3/
1.
Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral; 1/
2.
Takes note of the conclusions and recommendations adopted at the
general meeting between the organizations and agencies of the United Nations
system and the Organization of the Islamic Conference and its specialized
institutions;
3.
Notes with satisfaction the active participation of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference in the work of the United Nations
towards the realization of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations;
4.
Requests the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to continue cooperation in their common search for solutions to
global problems, such as questions relating to international peace and
security, disarmament, self-determination, decolonization, fundamental human
rights and economic and technical development;
5.
Welcomes the proposals of the general meeting to strengthen
cooperation between the two organizations in a number of different areas and
to review the ways and means for enhancing the actual mechanisms of such
cooperation;

____________
2/

A/47/277-S/24111.

3/

See A/49/465, sect. III.

/...

A/RES/49/15
Page 3

6.
Welcomes also the intention of the secretariats of the two
organizations to strengthen cooperation between them in the political field
and to undertake consultations with a view to defining the mechanisms of such
cooperation;
7.
Encourages the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system to continue to expand their cooperation with the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, particularly by negotiating
cooperation agreements, and invites them to multiply the contacts and meetings
of the focal points for cooperation in priority areas of interest to the
United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
8.
Urges the organizations of the United Nations system, especially
the lead agencies, to provide increased technical and other forms of
assistance to the Organization of the Islamic Conference and its specialized
institutions in order to enhance cooperation;
9.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
continued efforts to strengthen cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations and other organizations of the United Nations system and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to serve the mutual interests of the
two organizations in the political, economic, social and cultural fields;
10.
Requests the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to hold consultations on a regular basis between representatives of
the Secretariat of the United Nations and the General Secretariat of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference focusing on the implementation of
programmes, projects and follow-up action;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in
cooperation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, to continue to encourage the convening of sectoral meetings in the
priority areas of cooperation, as recommended by the previous meetings between
the two organizations, including follow-up to the sectoral meetings;
12.
Notes that the next focal point meeting of the lead agencies of
the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference will be held
in 1995, the date and venue of which will be decided after consultations
between the two organizations;
13.
Notes also that the date, venue and theme of the next sectoral
meeting on technical cooperation will be decided after consultations between
the focal points of the lead agencies of the two organizations;
14.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in the promotion of cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, and expresses the hope that he will
continue to strengthen the mechanisms of coordination between the two
organizations;

/...

A/RES/49/15
Page 4

15.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its fiftieth session on the state of cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
16.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session the item entitled "Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference".
57th plenary meeting
15 November 1994
