S/2020/1104

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 10 November 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to bring to your attention a statement by the President of the
Republic of Azerbaijan, the Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia and the
President of the Russian Federation on a complete ceasefire and termination of all
hostilities in the area of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, signed on 9 November 2020
(see annex).
I should be grateful if you would circulate the present letter and its annex as a
document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia

20-14973 (E)

131120

*2014973*

S/2020/1104

Annex to the letter dated 10 November 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
[Original: English and Russian]

Statement by President of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia and President of the
Russian Federation
We, President of the Republic of Azerbaijan Ilham Aliyev, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Armenia Nikol Pashinyan and President of the Russian Fe deration
Vladimir Putin, state the following:
1.
A complete ceasefire and termination of all hostilities in the area of the
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is declared starting 12:00 am (midnight) Moscow time on
November 10, 2020. The Republic of Azerbaijan and the Republic of Armenia,
hereinafter referred to as the “Parties,” shall stop in their current positions.
2.
The Agdam District shall be returned to the Republic of Azerbaijan by
November 20, 2020.
3.
The peacemaking forces of the Russian Federation, namely, 1,960 troops
armed with firearms, 90 armoured vehicles and 380 motor vehicles and units of
special equipment, shall be deployed along the contact line in Nagorno -Karabakh and
along the Lachin Corridor.
4.
The peacemaking forces of the Russian Federation shall be deployed
concurrently with the withdrawal of the Armenian troops. The peacemaking forces of
the Russian Federation will be deployed for five years, a term to be automatically
extended for subsequent five-year terms unless either Party notifies about its intention
to terminate this clause six months before the expiration of the current term.
5.
For more efficient monitoring of the Parties’ fulfilment of the agreements,
a peacemaking centre shall be established to oversee the ceasefire.
6.
The Republic of Armenia shall return the Kalbajar District to the Republic
of Azerbaijan by November 15, 2020, and the Lachin District by December 1, 2020.
The Lachin Corridor (5 km wide), which will provide a connection between Nagorno Karabakh and Armenia while not passing through the territory of Shusha, shall remain
under the control of the Russian Federation peacemaking forces.
As agreed by the Parties, within the next three years, a plan will be outlined for
the construction of a new route via the Lachin Corridor, to provide a connection
between Nagorno-Karabakh and Armenia, and the Russian peacemaking forces shall
be subsequently relocated to protect the route.
The Republic of Azerbaijan shall guarantee the security of persons, vehicles and
cargo moving along the Lachin Corridor in both directions.
7.
Internally displaced persons and refugees shall return to the territory of
Nagorno-Karabakh and adjacent areas under the supervision of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.
8.
The Parties shall exchange prisoners of war, hostages and other detained
persons, and dead bodies.
9.
All economic and transport connections in the region shall be unblocked.
The Republic of Armenia shall guarantee the security of transport connections
between the western regions of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Nakhchivan
2/3

20-14973

S/2020/1104

Autonomous Republic in order to arrange unobstructed movement of persons,
vehicles and cargo in both directions. The Border Guard Service of the Russian
Federal Security Service shall be responsible for overseeing the transport
connections.
As agreed by the Parties, new transport links shall be built to connect the
Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic and the western regions of Azerbaijan.

20-14973

3/3
