A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/135
17 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 12
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/726)]
49/135.

Preventive action and intensification of
the struggle against malaria in developing
countries, particularly in Africa

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the agreed conclusions of the coordination segment of the
substantive session of 1993 of the Economic and Social Council on the
coordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies and
other bodies of the United Nations system in the fields of preventive action
and intensification of the struggle against malaria and diarrhoeal diseases,
in particular cholera, 1/
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1994/34 of 29 July
1994, including preventive action and intensification of the struggle against
malaria in developing countries, particularly in Africa,
Acknowledging the importance for endemically affected countries of
having a modern strategy to control this most deadly of all tropical diseases,
which annually causes more than one million deaths world wide and nine hundred
thousand deaths in Africa,
Deeply concerned by the development of more than three hundred million
new cases of malaria annually and by the emergence of a new type of drugresistant malaria,

1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 3 (A/48/3/Rev.1), chap. III, sect. B.

95-76837

/...

A/RES/49/135
Page 2

Noting with concern that a major problem complicating malaria treatment
and thereby contributing to malaria-related mortality is the continuous
intensification and spread of parasite resistance to anti-malarial drugs,
Noting with regret that chloroquine, which traditionally has been
prescribed both for prophylaxis and for curative purposes, can no longer be
totally relied upon,
Recognizing that malaria-related deaths in the world could be prevented
if appropriate health services were made available in endemically affected
countries,
1.
Endorses the new Global Malaria Control Strategy of the World
Health Organization, 2/ endorsed in 1992 by the Ministerial Conference on
Malaria, held at Amsterdam, which aims to prevent mortality and reduce
morbidity as well as social and economic losses due to malaria;
2.
Recognizes that, where the disease is most prevalent, malariarelated problems vary enormously from situation to situation owing to
epidemiological, social, economic and operational factors;
3.
Stresses that to achieve the objectives of the Strategy will
require the progressive improvement and strengthening of local, national,
regional and international capabilities, especially with the aim of enhancing
partnership and coordination efforts, involving sectors like education,
agriculture and the environment, as well as integrating activities with those
on related diseases;
4.
Notes with appreciation the continued efforts undertaken by
Governments to control the disease, in spite of their meagre resources,
including the actions they have taken to stop its outbreak through the
widespread spraying of insecticide and by making available appropriate
anti-malarial products;
5.
Welcomes the fact that the World Health Organization has recently
increased its commitment to malaria control, especially in Africa, where the
overwhelming majority both of cases and of deaths occur;
6.
Also welcomes the fact that Dr. Manuel Elkin Patarroyo of Colombia
generously offered in June 1993 to donate the full licence rights of his
vaccine SPF-66 to the World Health Organization;
7.
Notes that there is still a great need to increase resources
despite a concerted international effort launched by the World Health
Organization and other relevant regional and international bodies to mobilize
the necessary resources to control malaria world wide;
8.
Calls for continued support, in particular for the United Nations
Development Programme/World Bank/World Health Organization special programme
for research and training in tropical diseases and to the Division of Control
of Tropical Diseases of the World Health Organization;

2/
World Health Organization, A Global Strategy for Malaria Control
(Geneva, 1993).
/...

A/RES/49/135
Page 3

9.
Appeals to the international community, international
organizations, multilateral financial institutions, specialized agencies,
organs and programmes of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations as well as all interested groups to provide developing
countries, in particular African countries, with technical, medical and
financial assistance commensurate with the efforts needed to control this
endemic disease;
10.
Invites the Director-General of the World Health Organization, as
the lead agency in this field, to promote the mobilization of organizations,
agencies, organs and programmes of the United Nations system in order to
provide technical, medical and financial assistance for preventive action and
intensification of the struggle against malaria, and to elaborate a plan of
action detailing the coordination of all related activities in this field;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fiftieth session the report of the Director-General of the World Health
Organization, to be prepared in collaboration with other relevant
organizations, agencies, organs and programmes of the United Nations system,
on the implementation of the present resolution, including, inter alia,
answers to the many questions that still need to be addressed, as well as the
utilization of an effective malaria vaccine in an integrated approach,
together with other malaria-control tools, including the incorporation of
appropriate technologies for malaria control, with specific attention to the
results of scientific investigations concerning the latest developments in
this field.
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
