III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 39 of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, 2 s according to which qualitative and quantitative
disarmament measures are both important for halting the
arms race and efforts to that end must include negotiations
on the limitation and cessation of the qualitative improvement of armaments, especially weapons of mass destruction,
and the development of new means of warfare,
Recalling the decision contained in paragraph 77 of the
Final Document to the effect that, in order to help prevent
a qualitative arms race and so that scientific and technological achievements might ultimately be used solely for peaceful purposes, effective measures should be taken to prevent
the emergence of new types of weapons of mass destruction
based on new scientific principles and achievements, and
that efforts aimed at the prohibition of such new types and
new systems of weapons of mass destruction should be
appropriately pursued,
Expressing once again its firm belief, in the light of the
decisions adopted at the tenth special session, in the importance of concluding an agreement or agreements to prevent the use of scientific and technological progress for the
development of new types of weapons of mass destruction
and new systems of such weapons,
Noting that in the course of its session in 1981 the Committee on Disarmament considered the item entitled "New
types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of
such weapons; radiological weapons'·,
Noting with satisfaction that in the course of its session
in 1981 the Committee on Disarmament held informal meetings on this item with the participation of qualified governmental experts,
Convinced that all ways and means should be utilized to
prevent the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons,
Taking into consideration the part of the report of the
Committee on Disarmament relating to this question, 27
1. Requests the Committee on Disarmament, in the light
of its existing priorities, to intensify negotiations, with the
assistance of qualified governmental experts, with a view
to preparing a draft comprehensive agreement on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types
of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons, and to draft possible agreements on particular
types of such weapons;
2. Once again urges all States to refrain from any action
which could adversely affect the talks aimed at working out
an agreement or agreements to prevent the emergence of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems
of such weapons;
3. Calls upon the States permanent members of the
Security Council, as well as upon other militarily significant
States, to make declarations. identical in substance, concerning the refusal to create new types of weapons of mass
destruction and new systems of such weapons, as a first
step towards the conclusion of a comprehensive agreement
on this subject, bearing in mind that such declarations would
be approved thereafter by a decision of the Security Council;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to the
consideration of this item by the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
5. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to submit
a report on the results achieved to the General Assembly
for consideration at its thirty-seventh session;
27
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 27 (N36/27). sect. lll.E

59

6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Prohibition of the
development and manufacture of new types of weapons of
mass destruction and new systems of such weapons: report
of the Committee on Disarmament''.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/90.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a Zone of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone
of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832 (XXVI) of 16
December 1971 , and recalling also its resolutions 2992
(XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 3080 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3259 A (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3468
(XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/88 of 14 December 1976,
32/86 of 12 December 1977, S-10/2 of 30 June 1978.
33/68 of 14 December 1978, 34/80 A and B of 11 December
1979 and 35/150 of 12 December 1980, and other relevant
resolutions,
Recalling also that at its tenth special session, the first
special session devoted to disarmament, it stated that the
establishment of zones of peace in various regions of the
world under appropriate conditions to be clearly defined and
determined freely by the States concerned in the zone, taking
into account the characteristics of the zone and the principles
of the Chartc:r of the United Nations, and in conformity with
international law, can contribute to strengthening the security of Statc:s within such zonts and to international peace
and security as a whole, 28
Recalling further the report of the Meeting of the Littoral
and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, 29
Reaffirming its conviction that concrete action for the
achievement of the objectives of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace would be a substantial contribution to the strengthening of international peace and
security,
Recalling its decision, taken at the thirty-fourth session
in resolution 34/80 B, to convene a Conference on the Indian
Ocean at Colombo during 1981,
Recalling further its decision, taken at the thirty-fifth
session in resolution 35/150, to make every effort, in consideration of the political and security climate in the Indian
Ocean area, particularly recent developments, as well as the
progress made in the harmonization of views, to finalize,
in accordance with its normal methods of work, all preparations for the Conference including the dates for its
convening,
Recalling the exchange of varied views in the Ad Hoe
Committee on the Indian Ocean and noting that, while progress has been made, a number of issues remain to be
resolved,
Noting the exchange of views on the adverse political and
security climate in the region,
Noting that the Ad Hoe Committee has failed to reach
consensus on the dates for the convening, during I 981, of
the Conference on the Indian Ocean at Colombo,
Convinced that the continued military presence of the
great Powers in the Indian Ocean area, conceived in the
context of their confrontation, gives urgency to the need to
take practical steps for the early achievement of the objec'"Resolution S-1012. para. 64.
''' Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-fourth Session, Supplement No 45 (A/34145 and Corr. I).

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

60

tives of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of
Peace,
Considering that all other foreign mil!tary presence in the
area, whenever it is contrary to the obJect1ves of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United_Nations,
gives even greater urgency to the need to tak~ pr~ct1cal steps
towards the early achievement of the ob_1ect1ves of the
Declaration,
Considering also that the creation of a zone of peace in
the Indian Ocean requires the active participation of and full
co-operation among the littoral and hinter!and States, the
permanent members of the Security Council and the ma~or
maritime users to ensure conditions of peace and secunty
based on the purposes and principles of the Charter as well
as the general principles of international law,
Considering further that the creation of a zone of peace
requires co-operation and agreement among the _State_s ?f
the region to ensure conditions of peace and secunty w1thm
the area, as envisaged in the Declaration of the Indian Ocean
as a Zone of Peace, and respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the littoral and hinterland
States,
Calling for the renewal of genuinely constructive efforts
through the exercise of the political will necessary for the
achievement of the objectives of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
Deeply concerned at the danger posed by the grave and
ominous developments in the area and the resulting sharp
deterioration of peace, security and stability which particularly seriously affect the littoral and hinterland States, as
well as international peace and security,
Convinced that the continued deterioration of the political
and security climate in the Indian Ocean area is an important
consideration bearing on the question of the early convening
of the Conference and that the easing of tension in the area
would enhance the prospect of success being achieved by
the Conference,
I. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Indian Ocean 30 and the exchange of views in the
Committee;
2. Regrets that the Ad Hoe Committee has failed to
reach consensus on the finalization of dates for the convening, during 198 l, of the Conference on the Indian Ocean:
3. Emphasizes its decision to convene the Conference
at Colombo as a necessary step for the implementation of
the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
adopted in 197 l ;
4. Emphasizes also, in pursuance of that decision and
in consideration of the political and security climate in the
Indian Ocean area, its decision to request the Ad Hoe Committee to continue its efforts for the necessary harmonization
of views on the remaining issues related to the convening
of the Conference;
5. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to continue its
work on the necessary harmonization of views on the relevant issues, including those set forth in paragraph 4 above.
and to make every effort to accomplish the necessary preparatory work for the Conference, including consideration
of its convening not later than the first half of 1983;
6. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee as
defined in the relevant resolutions;
7. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to hold further
sessions in 1982 of a total duration of six weeks, including
the holding of a meeting at a venue outside New York to
be decided upon;
30

Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session. Supplement No 29 (A/36/29)

8. Requests the Ad Hoe Comm!ttee to. submit to the
General Assembly. at its second special s~ss1on devoted _to
disarmament and at its thirty-seventh session, reports on its
work and on the implementation of the present resolution;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to r~nder all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee, mcluding the provision of summary records.
91st plenary meeting
9 December /98/

39/91.

World Disarmament Conference

The General A.1.1c111hl_\·.
Recalling its re,olutions 28:n (XXVI) of lo December
1971. 2930 (XXVII) of 29 November I972. 3183 (XXVIII l
of 18 December 1973. 32(10 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974.
3469 ( XXX) of 11 December 197.'i ..1 I/ I90 of 21 December
I976, 32/89 of 12 Decemher I977 ..1.~109 of 14 December
1978. 34/81 of I I December I 979 and 3.'i/1.'i I of 12 December 1980.
Reiterating its conviction that all the peoples of the world
have a vital interest in the success of disarmament negotiations and that all States should be in a position to contribute
to the adoption of measures for the achievement of this goal.
Stressing anell' its conviction that a world disarmament
conference. adequately prepared and convened at an apprnpriate time. could provide the realit.ation of such an a11n
and that the co-operation of all nuclear-weapon Powers
would considerably facilitate its attainment.
Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on
the World Disarmament Conference. 11
Recalling that. in paragraph 122 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly. ' 2 the
tirst special session devoted to disarmament. it decided that.
at the earliest appropriate time. a world disarmament conference should be convened with universal participation and
with adequate preparation.
Recalling that. in paragraph 2.1 of the Declaration of th~1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade. contained in the
annex to its resolution 3.'i/46 of 3 December I980. the General Assembly considered it pertinent also to recall that in
paragraph 122 of the Final Document it had stated that at
the earliest appropriate time a world disarmament conference should be rnnvened with universal participation and
with adequate preparation.
Further recalling that the subject of the possible convening of a world disarmament conference ~as be~n in-_
eluded in the draft agenda for the second special session ot
the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. 1-1 to be held
from 7 June to 9 July 1982.
1. Notes with satisfaction that in its report to the General
Assembly the Ad Hoe Committee on the World Disarmament Conference stated, inter alia, the following:
"Having regard for the important requirements of a
world disarmament conference to be convened at the earliest appropriate time, with universal participation and
with adequate preparation, the General Assembly may
wish to decide that. after its second special session devoted to disarmament, a world disarmament conference
would take place as soon as the necessary consensus on
its convening has been reached": 14
" /hid .. Supplt•mem ll'o 28 (Ai.,(,/28).
'-' Resolution S- I 012.

"0/jiual Records o( 1h,· General A1.1<•mhh-. Thi rt, ,i,1h S,·.1Sio11 . .'i111>
r>lement No . .JC) ( A. 36!..\9 and Corr. 11. para. I 8
"/hid .. Supplnnent No. 28 IA/.,6128). para. In.
