S/PV.7866

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7866th meeting

Thursday, 19 January 2017, 1 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-01425 (E)
*1701425*

S/PV.7866

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The meeting was called to order at 1.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/55, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Senegal.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation would like to convey the heartfelt
congratulations of the Government of Senegal to
His Excellency Mr. Adama Barrow, President of
the Republic of The Gambia, who has just officially
assumed office following the oath-taking ceremony that
took place in the Embassy of The Gambia in Dakar. The
ceremony took place in the presence, inter alia, of the
Senegalese authorities; the diplomatic corps accredited
to Senegal, including ambassadors of Security Council
members; and Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
In this regard, we welcome the joint communiqué
issued by the United Nations, the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) at the conclusion of the ceremony, thereby
strengthening the united approach that had consistently
prevailed in the management of this issue. Senegal
takes this opportunity to express its full gratitude to
the international community for its unwavering support
and firmness, which led to this outcome.
The draft resolution before us, submitted by the
Senegalese delegation, is part and parcel of the ongoing
diplomatic and political efforts of ECOWAS, the African
Union and the United Nations to find a solution to the
post-electoral situation in the sisterly Islamic Republic
of The Gambia. In Senegal, we say that Gambia is more
than our neighbour. Senegal, as a State of the region,
therefore thanks all members of the Security Council
for their support for and solidarity with the efforts
of ECOWAS and the African Union to overcome the
attempt to usurp the will of the sovereign people of
The Gambia, democratically expressed on 1 December
2/7

19/01/2017

2016. In that regard, I must stress the appeal made
today by President Adama Barrow to the international
community, and in particular ECOWAS, the African
Union and the United Nations, to help ensure respect
for the sovereign will of the people of The Gambia.
In the light of all I have said, the Senegalese
delegation calls on all Council members to vote
unanimously in favour of the draft resolution before us.
The President: The Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it. I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2337 (2017).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay thanks Senegal for its efforts within the
Council and in Africa with respect to the situation in
The Gambia.
However, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, I note that we
should have preferred the negotiating process on
resolution 2337 (2017), which we have just adopted,
had been undertaken in a more inclusive manner. The
resolution was circulated on Tuesday evening, with
only a brief window for comments and without face-toface negotiations, and was then put to a brief silence
procedure before being issued in blue, which did not
allow the various legitimate concerns expressed by
Council members to be taken into account. Moreover, it
was not made available in all official languages of the
United Nations. Uruguay recognizes that the Security
Council had to act urgently and take a timely decision
in this instance, but that does not justify the failure
to open the process to the dialogue and inclusiveness
required when negotiating any draft resolution.
Uruguay, as a champion of the rule of law,
democracy and the the freedom of expression, expresses
17-01425

19/01/2017

Peace consolidation in West Africa

its support for the will of the Gambian people, expressed
in the elections of 1 December 2016. In that regard,
we were alarmed by the measures adopted by former
President Jammeh, which represented a violation of the
Constitution that threatened peace in the The Gambia
and regional stability, and gave rise to the need for the
resolution we have just adopted.
Uruguay reiterates its position, pursuant to
Article 53 of the Charter of the United Nations, that
no enforcement action shall be taken under regional
arrangements or by regional agencies without
the authorization of the Security Council. Such
authorization must be express, affirmative and prior.
Uruguay underscores that nothing in resolution 2337
(2017) can be interpreted as express authorization of
the use of force.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
resolution 2337 (2017) on the situation in The Gambia
on the basis of the need to ensure the peaceful transfer
of power in the country and avoid bloodshed and further
destabilization. We also voted in support of the efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States
and the African Union to unblock the post-electoral
crisis through peaceful means.
We highly appreciate the mediation efforts of these
organizations, as well as the countries of the region and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa. We hope that the joint efforts will help
to maintain peace and order in The Gambia. Russia
recognized the election results of 1 December 2016, and
from the very outset of the crisis has advocated a search
through exclusively peaceful means to resolve it and to
safeguard the security of its citizens and respect for
their fundamental rights and freedoms in accordance
with universally recognized democratic norms. We
note the flexibility shown by the sponsors of the
resolution, aimed at finding the necessary consensus
in the Council.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia takes the floor
to recognize the work undertaken by Senegal and of
subregional and regional organizations with respect to
the issue at hand. We also draw attention to our belief
that the negotiating process was regrettably hasty. We
understand the urgency of the situation, but we believe
that prior negotiations could have facilitated a better

S/PV.7866

exchange of views and improved the text of resolution
2337 (2017), which we adopted today.
Pursuant to the first preambular paragraph of
the resolution, we are committed to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and unity of The
Islamic Republic of The Gambia. Bolivia believes that
we must continue to pursue mediation efforts and good
offices to identify a peaceful solution to this problem.
We do not feel that at this stage this situation poses
a threat to international peace and security. Bolivia
therefore believes that the adoption of the resolution
cannot and should not be interpreted to represent
Security Council support for or endorsement of the use
of force. To that end, we would need a specific resolution
providing such a mandate or endorsing such action.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming the unanimous adoption of resolution 2337
(2017). I commend Senegal for its swift and decisive action
in presenting the text of resolution 2337 (2017) today.
But in truth, the Council should not have to do this.
The people of The Gambia spoke clearly at the elections
in December. They chose Adama Barrow to be their
President. Their voice now needs to be heard, and their
will needs to be heeded by just one man.
Resolution 2237 (2017) is clear: former President
Jammeh must respect the decision of the Gambian
people and immediately hand over power. His failure
to do so up until this point is only bringing uncertainty
to the people of The Gambia. Despite this setback, the
Gambian people have shown admirable restraint and
stoicism by remaining calm in the face of uncertainty.
They have given former President Jammeh time to
consider the many options that are open to him. We look
to all parties in The Gambia, particularly the security
forces, to continue to act with restraint and to maintain
that calm.
We welcome the work of the Economic Community
of West African States to resolve this. At a time of
unease in The Gambia, it is reassuring to see effective
regional leadership on display. Mr. Jammeh has been
given many opportunities by his neighbours and
partners and, most important, by the Gambian people
themselves. It is now time for him to do the right thing.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of resolution 2337 (2017). China has been
following the developments in The Gambia since its
presidential elections. We call on the parties concerned

17-014253/7

S/PV.7866

Peace consolidation in West Africa

in the country to remain calm, to put the interests of
the country and of the people first and to resolve the
ongoing political crisis appropriately, through dialogue
and political consultation, in order to maintain peace
and stability in The Gambia.
China has been consistently supportive of
Africans settling African issues in the African way,
and commends the positive efforts of regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States,
to help address Gambian issues through good offices
and mediation. China supports the countries and
organizations concerned in their efforts to bring their
respective influence to bear; to step up good offices
and mediation efforts; and to continue to encourage
the parties to move towards a proper solution of the
Gambian issue, and thereby contributing to regional
peace and stability.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan welcomes
the adoption today of resolution 2337 (2017), on the
situation in The Gambia. We thank Senegal for its
efforts to find consensus on the resolution. Kazakhstan
commends the tireless mediation efforts of the
Presidents of Nigeria, Liberia, Ghana and Mauritania,
as well as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States and other stakeholders.
Kazakhstan voted in favour of resolution 2337 (2017)
for the following reasons.
First, we believe that it is important to respect
the will of the people of The Gambia, as expressed
in the result of the election last month. Kazakhstan
is committed to peace and long-term stability in The
Gambia so that its people can freely enjoy their rights
and freedoms.
Secondly, the Security Council should seize the
opportunity to send a clear message to the Government
and people of The Gambia, as well as to the international
community, that the United Nations is closely engaged
and requests all stakeholders, including the Gambian
defence and security forces, to exercise restraint.
That message is also to encourage all stakeholders to
prevent any steps that could lead to possible violence
in the country.
Finally, with this resolution we call for a
demonstration of wisdom, responsibility and political
will to effectively resolve the current crisis and ensure
the peaceful and orderly transfer of power to President
Adama Barrow.
4/7

19/01/2017

Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2337 (2017). Japan strongly
condemns the refusal by Mr. Jammeh to transfer power
to President Barrow, against the will of the Gambian
people, which was demonstrated in the presidential
election last December. Japan highly commends the
strenuous mediation efforts undertaken by subregional
and regional actors, including the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African
Union to bring about a peaceful and smooth transition
of power to avoid a crisis.
By unanimously adopting resolution 2337 (2017)
today, the Security Council is sending a clear message
to Mr. Jammeh to carry out a peaceful and orderly
transition of power to President Barrow. He should
do so immediately. The Council should work together
with ECOWAS and the African Union to prevent any
aggravation of the situation.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2337
(2017). My delegation thanks Senegal warmly for its
leadership. From the beginning, France supported
the efforts led by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and its African partners.
The 1 December elections in The Gambia were
carried out in a way that is beyond reproach. They
illustrate a phenonemon that may be commonplace
elsewhere, but that is nonetheless extraordinary in West
Africa. Democratic governance and respect for the will
of the people are now taken for granted — a situation
that none would wish to reverse. Last year, six of the
10 elections in the region led to a transition in power.
Elections are taking place in a tranquil atmosphere and
there is no thought of questioning their legitimacy. I am
referring to Ghana, as the most recent example, but also
to Nigeria, the Niger, Benin and Burkina Faso.
In The Gambia, the challenging of the results of
the election by President Jammeh — even though
he himself recognized them — was unanimously
condemned by Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and the Security Council.
They all called on Mr. Jammeh to respect the sovereign
decision of his people and to agree to hand over power
to President Barrow, in accordance with the Gambian
Constitution. Since then, the countries of the region
have spared no effort to reach a peaceful resolution
to the crisis, pursuant to the charters of ECOWAS
and of the African Union. The Heads of State and
17-01425

19/01/2017

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Government of ECOWAS met on 17 December. The
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
met on 13 January specifically to deal with this topic.
And the Security Council adopted a clear presidential
statement (S/PRST/2016/19) on the matter.
France commends the tireless efforts of ECOWAS,
the mediation efforts of President Buhari, President
Johnson-Sirleaf, and President Mahama, who visited
Banjul and have been in constant contact with Gambian
stakeholders. In particular, we commend the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mohammed Ibn Chambas, who has done everything
in his power to ensure a peaceful transition. We also
welcome the efforts of Morocco and Mauritania, which,
in a final push, used their diplomatic skills to ensure
that President Jammeh accepted to step down from
office in a dignified way at the end of his term.
We often refer in the Security Council to the need
to strengthen preventive diplomacy. The Gambian
crisis is an excellent example in that regard. No effort
was spared by any of the actors involved to achieve a
peaceful transition of power to the President-elect. At
present, Mr. Jammeh continues to refuse to heed theoe
appeals, in spite of all the guarantees provided by his
successor to accord him the respect due him as former
President of the Republic. Mr. Barrow took the oath
of office this morning and today he is the legitimate
President of The Gambia. That is why France thought
that it was essential for the Security Council to make
its position known and to adopt a resolution that sends
a clear message to Mr. Jammeh today. We welcome
the fact that resolution 2337 (2017) was adopted
unanimously and that the Security Council has thereby
expressed its full support to the efforts of the region to
resolve this crisis.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the adoption of resolution 2337
(2017). With the unanimous adoption of this resolution,
the Security Council stands united in calling for a
peaceful transition of power from one president to
another; endorses the mediation of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS);
and upholds the clear determination of ECOWAS
and the African Union that the will of the Gambian
people — clearly and peacefully expressed — must
be respected.
The patience and commitment to peace
demonstrated by Adama Barrow and the Gambian

S/PV.7866

people since December have been remarkable.
Gambian civil society organizations have refrained
from violent demonstrations; instead, they have made
their voices heard by issuing statements calling for a
peaceful transfer of power. The Gambian people have
placed their faith in ECOWAS and the international
community to safeguard the integrity of the election,
and we must not let them down.
We welcome the ECOWAS decisions from the
fiftieth ordinary summit, held 17 December 2016 in
Abuja. We applaud continued efforts by ECOWAS,
the African Union and the United Nations to broker a
peaceful transition, and call on all parties to exercise
restraint and to avoid bloodshed. It is important that
we support Adama Barrow, the democratic choice of
the Gambian people. We are eager to work closely with
Mr. Barrow and his team in order to help achieve the
aspirations of the Gambian people.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would first like to thank the
delegation of Senegal for its work on the text of resolution
2337 (2017). We support taking rapid action on the
resolution, in the belief that the Council should make
its voice heard in these crucial hours for the country’s
future and the stability of the region. We fully support
the preventive diplomatic efforts that the international
community, and especially The Gambia’s neighbours,
have been engaged in. We also commend the mediation
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the support of the African Union and the
role played by Mr. Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa. All of that is
proof of African ownership and leadership on the issue.
The about-face of former President Jammeh on the
outcome of the presidential election, in which he was
defeated, is deplorable. Today, however, the countries
of West Africa and its subregional organizations are
walking steadily along the path of democracy and the
rule of law. At such a sensitive time, we would like to
reiterate the urgings — of ECOWAS, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the African Union
and the Security Council in today’s resolution — that
the Gambian army should respect the will of the people,
support a peaceful and democratic transition of power
to the new President and stand loyally by the side of
the country’s elected authority. Today Mr. Adama
Barrow is the legitimate President of The Gambia. We
congratulate him on the swearing-in ceremony that just
took place and that we attended.

17-014255/7

S/PV.7866

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We also welcome the
Council’s unanimous adoption today of resolution
2337 (2017), and we appreciate the work done by our
Senegalese colleagues, who have discharged their
responsibilities with flexibility and resolve in drawing
the Council’s attention to the issue as early as possible.
We have indeed been following the developments in
The Gambia very closely. In line with the position
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union, Ethiopia fully
supports respect for constitutional order in The Gambia
and for a peaceful transfer of power aimed at preserving
peace and stability there.
The political crisis in The Gambia could have serious
ramifications not just for the country itself but for the
entire region. We have seen how quickly things there
have deteriorated and, for that reason, every possible
effort must be made to ensure that it does not descend
into chaos. The State institutions should not be allowed
to collapse. While Ethiopia attaches great importance
to that matter, we also believe that the usurpation of
power and an unconstitutional move to retain it should
not be allowed to succeed. In that regard, we are fully
behind the ECOWAS regional efforts to resolve the
current political impasse through dialogue, in full
conformity with the country’s Constitution and with
respect for the will of the Gambian people. We believe
that it is important to ensure that the Security Council
supports the efforts of ECOWAS and the African Union
and continues to send a unified message.
That is why Ethiopia supported the adoption
of today’s resolution. We commend Senegal for
accommodating the concerns expressed by members
during the negotiation process, with a view to facilitating
the Council’s unity. It is vital that we maintain that
unity of purpose. We also salute all the members who
showed the flexibility needed to ensure the resolution’s
adoption by consensus.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted in favour of the Security Council’s adoption today
of resolution 2337 (2017), on the developments in The
Gambia, because we hope that it will eventually help to
achieve a breakthrough in the current political impasse
there. We believe in the importance of the Council’s
aim, which is to promote and support the brave and
principled positions of the regional Powers concerned,
represented by the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, and which also
6/7

19/01/2017

coincide with our deep-rooted belief in the necessity of
finding African solutions to African crises.
Egypt joined the unanimous consensus on
the resolution after the introduction of important
improvements into the text, and in that regard I would
like to thank the delegation of Senegal for its flexibility.
We were anxious to see the inclusion in the resolution of
wording reflecting one of the most important purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which is the peaceful settlement of disputes. We believe
that efforts to achieve that should be exhaustive if we are
to avoid chaos and uphold the principles of international
law. However, in the light of the last amendment to the
draft, which underlined the importance of a political
settlement of the impasse in The Gambia, we are
convinced that today’s resolution does not endorse any
mandatory automatic enforcement, as such processes
require the Security Council’s clear and unquestioned
authorization, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, Egypt hopes that the political crisis
in The Gambia can be brought to an end through the
assumption of office of the democratically chosen
President-elect, Mr. Adama Barrow, because we badly
need a shining example of a peaceful democratic
transition of power on our continent that can ultimately
enable it to create a bright future for its peoples.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine) (spoke in French):
Ukraine welcomes the Security Council’s unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2337 (2017). My delegation
would also like to congratulate Mr. Adama Barrow,
who was inaugurated today as the new President of the
Islamic Republic of The Gambia. We hope he will soon
be able to return to his country in order to complete the
transition of power and begin fulfilling his duties so as
to ensure peace and stability in the Gambia.
Since the announcement of the results of the
presidential elections of 1 December, the international
community has been working hard to convince the
outgoing President to respect his country’s Constitution.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and of Nigeria’s President Buhari,
as the ECOWAS mediator in The Gambia, Ghana’s
former President Manama and other regional leaders
who have worked to resolve this impasse. We would also
like to pay tribute to the role played by Mr. Mohamed
Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of the Secretary
17-01425

19/01/2017

Peace consolidation in West Africa

General for West Africa and the Sahel, and to thank
the delegation of Senegal for its proactive efforts on
the issue.
It is regrettable, however, that despite the clearly
expressed will of the Gambian people and intensive
efforts on the part of the international community,
including the Security Council, to achieve a peaceful
transition of power, the situation has deteriorated to
the point that a Council resolution is needed. I want to
emphasize that, in the light of recent developments, we
must step up the diplomatic pressure and the political
initiatives supporting it if we are to resolve the political
crisis. The adoption of today’s resolution is an integral
part of those efforts to ensure peace in the Gambia and
implement the election results.
In conclusion, we believe that right now the most
critical immediate task is to convince Gambia’s military
and security actors to remain calm and refrain from any
action that could lead to the deterioration of the country’s
human rights, security and humanitarian situation.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as representative of Sweden.

S/PV.7866

Sweden welcomes the Security Council’s adoption
today of resolution 2337 (2017) and its display of unity
once again on The Gambia. I would like to add my
voice to those expressing appreciation for the work
of Senegal in that regard. The resolution affirms the
Council’s political support for Mr. Adama Barrow as
the democratically elected President and legitimate
representative of The Gambia. It is an important effort
for conflict prevention on the part of the Council and a
positive example of action under Chapters VI and VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. The Council has
given its political endorsement to the commitment of
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union to ensuring respect for the outcome
of the election. It emphasizes that all stakeholders,
inside and outside the Gambia, must exercise restraint
and respect for the rule of law. We are confident that
the regional mediators will continue working for a
peaceful transition and the restoration of normalcy in
the Gambia.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

17-014257/7
