30

-----------------·------·----·

t.eneral Assembly- F ortieth Session

independent and emerging States ali possihle assistam:e in
the economic, social and other fields;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Committee with the facilities and services required for
the implementation ofthe present resolution, as well as of
the various resolutions and decisions on decolonization
adopted by the General Assembly and the Special C'ommittee.
99th plenary meeting
2 December l 985

40/58. Dissemination of information on decolonization
The General Assembly.
Having examined the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the
dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of the United Nations in the field of
decolonization, 44
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and ali other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in particular General Assembly resolution 39/92 of
14 December l 984,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument
for furthering the aims and purposes of the Declaration
and mindful of the continuing pressing need to take ali
possible steps to acquaint world public opinion with ali
aspects of the problems of decolonization, with a view to
assisting effectively the peoples of the colonial Territories
to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence,
Aware ofthe increasingly important role being played in
the widespread dissemination of relevant information by a
number of non-govemmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization, and noting with satisfaction
the intensified efforts ofthe Special Committee in enlisting
the support of those organizations in that regard,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. Considers it incumbent upon the United Nations to
continue to play an active role in the process of self-determination and independence and to intensify its efforts for
the widest possible dissemination of information on decolonization, with a view to the further mobilization ofinternational public opinion in support of complete decolonization;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard to the
suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue to take
concrete measures through ali the media at his disposal,
including publications, radio and television, to give
widespread and continuous publicity to the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization, and, inter
alia:
(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic material,
44 fbid., chaps. 11 and lll.
4s A/40/743.

studies and articles relating to the problems of decolonization and, in particular, to continue to publish the periodical Objective: Justice and other publications, special articles and studies, including the Deco/onization series, and
to select from them appropriate material for wider dissemination by means of reprints in various languages;
(b) To seek the full co-operation of the administering
Powers concemed in the discharge of the tasks referred to
above;
(e) To mtensify the activities of ali United Nations
information centres;
(d) To maintain a close working relationship with the
Organization of African Unity by holding periodic consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant information with that organization;
(e) To enlist, with the close co-operation of United
Nations information centres, the support of non-govemmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization in the dissemination of the relevant information;
(/) To ensure the availability of the necessary facilities
and services to that end;
(g) To report to the Special Committee on the measures taken in implementation of the present resolution;
4. Requests ali States, in particular the administering
Powers, the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system and non-govemmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization to
undertake or intensify, in co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral and within their respective spheres of competence, the large-scale dissemination of the information
referred to in paragraph 2 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and report thereon to
the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th p/enary meeting
2 December 1985

40/60.

Co-operation between tbe United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Committee

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/38 of 18 November 1981,
37/8 of 29 October 1982, 38/37 of 5 December 1983 and
39/47 of 10 December 1984,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the state of co-operation between the United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee, 45
Having heard the report ofthe Secretary-General ofthe
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee on the steps
taken by the Committee to ensure continuing, close and
effective co-operation between the two organizations, 46
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General; 45
2. Notes with satisfaction the further progress achieved
towards strengthening the existing co-operation between
the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the study on the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations prepared
by the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee on
the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the United
46 See Officia/ Records o( the General Assembly. Fortieth Session. Plenan•
Meetings. 108th meeting.

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Nations, 47 as well as the study on the role of the Intemational Court of Justice48 and other efforts of the Committee in the continuation of its programme of support to the
work of the United Nations in severa! areas;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on cooperation between the United Nations and the AsíanAfrican Legal Consultative Committee;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the ítem entitled "Co-operation between
the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee".
108th plcnary meeting
9 December 1985

40/62. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of
action for the foil implementation of the Declaration,
Recal/ing also its previous resolutions, in particular resolutions 3161 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3291
(XXIX) of 13 December 1974, 31/4 of 21 October 1976,
32/7 oíl November 1977, 34/69 of6 December 1979, 35/
43 of 28 November 1980, 36/ 105 of 1O December 1981,
37/65 of 3 December 1982, 38/13 of 21 November 1983
and 39/48 of 11 December 1984, in which it, inter alía,
affirmed the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Reca/ling, in particular, its resolution 3385 (XXX) of 12
November 1975 on the admission of the Comoros to
membership in the United Nations, in which it reaffirmed
the necessity of respecting the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago, composed of the islands
of Anjouan, Grande-Comore, Mayotte, and Mohéli,
Recal/ing further that, in accordance with the agreements between the Comoros and France, signed on 15
June 1973, conceming the accession of the Comoros to
independence, the results of the referendum of 22 December 1974 were to be considered on a global basis and not
island by island,
Convinced that a just and lasting solution to the question
of Mayotte is to be found in respect for the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago,
Convinced further that a speedy solution of the problem
is essential for the preservation of the peace and security
which prevail in the region,
Bearing in mind the wish expressed by the President of
the French Republic to seek actively a just solution to the
problem,
Taking note of the repeated wish of the Govemment of
the Comoros to initiate as soon as possíble a frank and
serious dialogue with the French Government with a view
to accelerating the return of the Comorian island of Mayotte to the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 49
Bearing in mind the decisions of the Organization of
African Unity, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference on this
question,
47 A/40/726 and Corr. l. annex
48 A/40/682, annex.
49 A/40/619.

SO Officia/ Records uf thc Third United Natwns Con/érence on the La..- o/
the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publicati.on, Sales No. E.84.V.3), docu
ment AICONF.62/122.

31

1. Reaffirms the sovereignty of the lslamic Federal
Republic of the Comoros over the island of Mayotte:
2. Invites the Government of France to honour the
commitments entered into prior to the referendum on the
self-determination of the Comoro Archipelago of 22
December 1974 concerning respect for the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros;
3. Calls for the translation into practice of the wish
expressed by the President of the French Republic to seek
actively a just solution to the question of Mayotte;
4. Urges the Government of France to open negotiations with the Government of the Comoros with a view to
ensuring the effective and prompt retum of the island of
Mayotte to the Comoros;
5. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to maintain continuous contact with the Secrctary-General of the Organization of African lJnity with
regard to this problem and to make available his good
offices in the search for a peaceful negotiated solution to
the problem;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to report on
this matter to the General Assembly at its forty-first session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Question of the
Comorian island of Mayotte".
109th p/enar)' meeting
9 December 1985

40/63. Law of the sea
rite General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/66 of 3 December I 982, .18/
59 A of 14 December 1983 and 39/73 of 13 Deccmber
1984, regarding the law of the sea,
Taking note ofthe increasing and overwhelming support
for the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, 50 as evidenced, ínter afia, by the one hundred and
fifty-nine signatures as of 9 December 1984, the closing
date for signature, and twenty-four ofthe sixty ratifications
or accessions required for entry into force of the Convention,
Considering that, in its resolution 2749 (XXV) of 17
December 1970, it proclaimed that the sea-bed and ocean
floor, and the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits ofnational
jurisdiction, as well as the resources of the arca, are the
common heritage of mankind,
Recalling that the Convcntion provides the régime to be
applied to the Area and its resources.
Further recalling the Declaration adopted by the Preparatory Commission for the Intemational Sea-Bed Authority
and for the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
on 30 August 1985, 51
Seriously concerned at any attempt to underminc the
Convention and the relatcd resolutions adopted at the
Third Unitcd Nations Conference on the Law ofthc Sea, 52
Recognizing that, as stated in the third preambular paragraph of the Convention, the problems of ocean spacc are
closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole,
Convinced that it is important to safeguard the unified
character of the Convention and relatcd resolutions
adopted therewith and to refrain from any action to apply
5l LOS/PCN/72; see also A 40 923, paras. 109-112. on the Dedarat10n
and the Chairman's statement at its adoption.
52 Otfic1a/ Records ()( the Th1rd Unitcd Nailon., Conkrence on the /,aw o/
the Sea. vol. XVII (United Na11ons publication. Sales No F 84 V.3). docu
ment A CONF.621121, annn l.
