UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/36
27 July 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3408th meeting of the Security Council, held on 27 July 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "An agenda for
peace: preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-keeping", the President of
the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 30 June 1994 concerning stand-by arrangements for peace-keeping
(S/1994/777), submitted pursuant to the statement by the President of the
Council of 3 May 1994 (S/PRST/1994/22).
"The Security Council reiterates the importance it attaches to
improving the capacity of the United Nations for rapid deployment and
reinforcement of peace-keeping operations. The recent history of United
Nations peace-keeping operations demonstrates that such an effort is
essential.
"In this context, the Security Council is grateful for the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General in respect of stand-by arrangements and
welcomes the responses so far received from Member States. It also
welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to maintain a comprehensive
database of the offers made, including the technical details of these
offers.
"The Security Council notes that one of the major limiting factors in
the timely deployment of troops for United Nations peace-keeping is the
lack of readily available equipment. It stresses the importance of
urgently addressing the issue of availability of equipment both in the
context of stand-by arrangements and more broadly.
"The Security Council notes the Secretary-General’s view that the
commitments made so far do not yet cover adequately the spectrum of
resources required to mount and execute future peace-keeping operations.
It also notes that additional commitments are expected from other Member
States. In this context, it welcomes the Secretary-General’s call to those
Member States which are not already doing so to participate in the
arrangements.

94-30474 (E)

270794

/...

S/PRST/1994/36
English
Page 2

"The Security Council looks forward to a further and more
comprehensive report on the progress of the stand-by arrangements
initiative."

-----
