UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTIETH

1827 th

YEAR

MEETING: 5 JUNE 1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

NOV 2 8 1983

Page
~/~c& L-2 &(-J[~~~
1
Provisional agenda @/Agenda/ 1827) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV. 1827

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1827th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 5 June 1975, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Abdul I&rim AL-SHAIKHLY (Iraq).

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with a further
decision taken at the 1823rd meeting, I now invite the
delegation of the United Nations Council for Namibia
to take places at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fonseca
Martinez and other members of the delegation of the
United Nations Councilfor Namibia tookplaces at the
Security Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania
and United States of America.

3. The PRESIDENT? I wish to inform members of
the Security Council that I have received a letter
dated 4 June 1975 [S/f1710 and C0rr.Z) from the
representatives of the United Republic of Cameroon
and the United Republic of Tanzania, requesting the
Council to extend an invitation under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure to the Reverend Canon
Burgess Car-r of the All-Africa Conference of Churches.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to him.
At the appropriate time I shall invite the Reverend
Canon Burgess Carr to make his statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l827)
1.

Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia
The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

It was thus decided.
The situation in Namibia

4. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Bulgaria and I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions taken by the Security Council at its 1823rd to
1826th meetings, I shall now invite the representatives of Bulgaria, Burundi, Cuba, Dahomey, the
German Democratic Republic, Ghana, India, Liberia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, United Arab Emirates,
Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber in order
that they may participate in the current discussion
without the right to vote. When any one of them wishes
to address the Council, he will of course be invited
to take a place at the Council table.

5. Mr. GHELEV (Bulgaria) (interpretation from
French): The head of the Bulgarian delegation,
Mr. Grozev, deeply regrets that he is not in a position
to express the views of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria on the important question which is on the
agenda of this series of meetings of the Council. Owing
to a temporary indisposition, Mr. Grozev has appointed
me to tender his apologies to the Council. I shall
therefore proceed to read out the statement which
Mr. Grozev would have delivered before the Council
today.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ghelev (Bulgaria), Mr. Mikanagu (Burundi), Mr. Alar&n (Cuba),
Mr. Adjibade (Dahomey), Mr. Neugebauer (German
Democratic Republic), Mr. Boaten (Ghana),
Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Dennis (Liberia), Mr. Ogbu
(Nigeria), Mr. Matin (Pakistan), Mr. Datcu (Romania), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Djigo (Senegal),
Mr. Blyden (Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussein (Somalia),
Mr. Humaidan (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Petri6
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Mwaanga (Zambia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. Mr. President, I should like first to extend my
thanks to you and to the other members of the Council
for giving the Bulgarian delegation this opportunity
of expressing the views of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria on the question of Namibia. I should like at
the same time to address my warmest congratulations
to you personally, Mr. President, the representative of
Iraq, a country with which Bulgaria has established
and is developing friendly relations and the broadest
co-operation. We are convinced that under your skilful
guidance the Council will be successful in adopting
a decision which will assist the people of Namibia
1

to. recover its freedom and indkpendence in the
nearest future.

authority, such as, for example, the conferences of
non-aligned countries, Afro-Asian Peoples Solidarity
Organization, the World Peace Council, the Congress
of Peace Forces in Moscow, the Conference on Namibia in Brussels, the Oslo Conference and many others.

7. Namibia continues to be one of the most striking,
and at the same time the most intolerable, examples
of colonialism and racism. The United Nations has
adopted many resoultions condemning ,the illegal
occupation of Namibia by South Africa, the colonial
policy of the Pretoria tigime and the apartheid system
which it is endeavouring to entrench in Namibia.

1 4 . The attitude of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) which supports the people of Namibia and
SWAP0 with characteristic firmness in the struggle
against colonialism is entirely understandable. The
declaration adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
OAU at its Ninth Extraordinary Session, held at Dar
es Salaam from 7 to 10 April 1975, testifies to the
political maturity of the African countries which have
worked out their strategy and their tactics at the
present stage of the struggle against colonialism.

8. Guided by the understanding that there can be no
compromise where the sacred right of the peoples to
independence and self-determination is concerned,
the United Nations has long since confirmed the right
of the Namibian people to be free and independent
and to exist as a national entity in a single territory.

1 5 . The participation of a large number of African
countries in this debate is significant. It testifies to the
urgency of the problem and the grave concern of
Africa over developments in Namibia. The statements
made by many Ministers for Foreign Affairs, who have
come especially to take part in this debate, and the
statements by the heads of the other African delegations clearly reflect that concern.

9 . The United Nations has also long recognized the
legitimacy of the struggle of the people of Namibia
for the exercise of its right to independence under
the guidance of its sole representative, the national
liberation movement, the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO).
10. We are all familiar with the efforts of the
Secretary-General to facilitate the solution of this
important international problem.

16. Africa is once again looking to the Security
Council, thus expressing its faith in the Organization
and its desire to look to the United Nations for
assistance in arriving at the only just solution of an
international problem which should long since have
been resolved and which can brook no further delay.

1 1 . We also recall that, for its part, the International
Court of Justice, in its Advisory Opinion of 21 June
1971,’ did in fact confirm the resolutions of the United
Nations by stipulating that the continuing occupation
of Namibia by South Africa represents an illegal act
and that South Africa is obliged to withdraw from
the territory and to terminate its occupation.

1 7 . We have heard the voice of the people of Namibia in the person of its devoted son, the President of
the national liberation movement of Namibia, SWAPO,
Mr. Sam Nujoma [1823rd meeting]. The weight of
irrefutable evidence he presented to the Council proves
one thing alone, namely, that South Africa is continuing
its policy of colonization and occupation of Namibia,
refusing to recognize the lawful rights of the people
of that country and offering a permanent challenge to
the demands of the United Nations. In these circumstances, the people of Namibia have no choice but to
step up their national liberation struggle under the
guidance of SWAPO.

1 2 . The Security Council has adopted many resolutions clearly and unequivocally recognizing the guilt
and the heavy burden of responsibility of South Africa
and also the importance of demanding an accounting
from that ~country. As far back as 1972, in its resolution 310 (1972), the Council noted that the persistent
occupation of Namibia by South Africa was not only
at variance with the Charter and the decisions of the
United Nations, but that South Africa’s behaviour
created conditions which represented a grave danger
to peace and security in that region of the world.
Furthermore, in its most recent resolution on Namibia,
resolution 366 (1974), the Council explicitly required
that South Africa formally declare its willingness to
pay attention to the resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations as well as of the views of the Intemational Court of Justice and to declare that it‘recognized
the territorial integrity and the unity of Namibia as a
nation.

1 8 . The situation in Namibia and the debate in the
Security Council so far have very clearly shown that
South Africa is continuing its illegal occupation of
Namibia, establishing the theory and the racist practice
of apartheid which has been recognized by the United
Nations as a crime against humanity, and attempting
to divide the people of Namibia, to break its territorial
integrity and to trample underfoot its right to selfdetermination and independence.

1 3 . The right of the people of Namibia to self-determination and independence, the role of its liberation
movement, SWAP0 and its capacity to represent the
Namibian people have been repeatedly reaffirmed by
other international forums enjoying unquestioned

1 9 . By so acting, the Pretoria rbgime is demonstrating
an unprecedented contempt for the clearly expressed
will of the international community. South Africa’s
behaviour vis-a-vis Namibia, as well as vis-a-vis its
own people, represents a crime against humanity.
2

There is no other way to describe its policy, a policy
which is absolutely unjustifiable.

25. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria, a member of
the socialist community, unswervingly pursuing its
policy of peace has always been in the forefront of
the struggle of progressive and democratic forces
against imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism,
racial discrimination and apartheid.

20. It was quite rightly that the representatives of
the African countries and the President of SWAP0
rejected the most recent attempt by South Africa to
present its policies as acceptable to Africa and to the
United Nations. The South African regime, which
by its very nature is incapable of understanding what
the sacred right of a people to self-determination and
independence means, is doing everything possible to
gain time by endeavouring to engage in “deals” with
the United Nations regarding that right of the people
of Namibia.

26. It is only the united front of all these forces
throughout the world that can compel South Africa
to bow to the decisions of the United Nations. This is
particularly important today, when a unity of aspiration
and of action on the part of the African peoples is
more than essential to bring about a just solution of
the problem of Namibia and to the other problems of
Africa.

21. There is no question but that these attempts are
doomed to failure. The pity of it is, however, that there
are forces which in practice are supporting South
Africa and encouraging its policy of imperialism,
racism and apartheid and which are preventing the
Security Council from taking the necessary actions and
measures against South Africa.

27. We join all those who most categorically condemn
South Africa for its refusal to comply with the decisions of the United Nations and for its persistent and
illegal occupation of Namibia, because it tramples
underfoot the right of the Namibian people to selfdetermination and refuses to recognize the sole
representative of that people, SWAPO.

22. The last bastion of colonialism in Africa, the
Pretoria regime, cannot long hold out, because no one
can stem the irresistible onward march of human
civilization.

28. We unreservedly support the people of Namibia
and SWAP0 in their struggle for freedom, against the
colonial yoke of South Africa, and shall continue to
do so. Accordingly, we warmly support the just and
urgent appeal for the Security Council to impose an
embargo on deliveries of all types of military equip
ment and material to South Africa and to impose
mandatory economic sanctions against that country.
Furthermore, it is essential for all countries to break
off their relations with the Pretoria regime. And, if all
that should prove insuffrcient to produce the desired
results, we shall have to think about applying the most
stringent sanctions provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations in order to extirpate once for all that
source of colonialism and racism and to put an end to
that direct threat to world peace and international
security.

23. The development of the world situation in recent
times and the process of the reduction of tension in
the world have greatly assisted the intensification of
the national liberation struggle and of the struggle for
international peace and security, for democracy and
social progress. The collapse of the Portuguese colonial
empire following the courageous struggle of the
peoples of Mozambique, Angola and the Cape Verde
islands, as well as the victory of the Portuguese
people over fascism and the forces of reaction, has
opened the way to the rapid and complete elimination
of colonialism in Africa. Neither South Africa nor those
who support it can impede this process. There is no
doubt that, thanks to its self-sacrificing struggle, the
people of Namibia, under the leadership of SWAPO,
will win the final victory and obtain its freedom. The
United Nations must play its deserved part in that
struggle in order to respond to the ideals and the
principles of the right of people to self-determination
and independence and the complete elimination of
colonialism.

29. If South Africa in its present policies continues
brutally to trample the rights and freedoms of the
people of Namibia and refuses to comply with the
many resolutions of the Organization, then the question
of its continued presence among us will inevitably
arise, and with even greater urgency than before.
30. May the Security Council respond to the faith of
Africa in the Organ&&ion by adopting a categorical
and concrete decision, a decision which can make an
effective contribution to the effort of the Namibian
people to achieve without further delay their freedom
and independence.

24. That is why the question now before the Council
and the question before world opinion is the following:
is South Africa going to be allowed still more time on
the insistence of those who have always opposed the
just demands for the application of stringent measures
against the Pretoria regime? More time for what
purpose? So that this antipopular r&ime can continue
its attempts to break the unity of the people, to dismember its territory and to trample underfoot its right
to be free, so that it may continue to massacre its

31. The PRESIDENT: I regret that the Permanent
Representative of Bulgaria was unable to attend this
meeting. I wish to convey Mr. Grozev our best wishes
for a speedy recovery.

sons?

3

32. The next speaker is the representative of Cuba.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

rather simple. Primarily it is to ascertain whether
South Africa’s reaction has met the conditions laid
down by the Council more than live months ago.
If the conclusion is negative, then the Council must
do what it decided to do in the aforementioned
resolution-that is, it must consider the adoption of
appropriate action vis-a-vis South Africa.

33. Mr. ALARCGN (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): First, I should like to say how pleased we
are, Sir, to have this opportunity to appear before
the Security Council under your presidency. We are
pleased for two reasons. First, we are well aware of
your personal qualities. Secondly, you represent a
country, Iraq, with which my country has the most
fraternal relations. Iraq has always followed an active
and positive line of conduct in support of the emancipation of peoples still subjected to colonialism and
racism.

39. I believe that there would be very few, if any,
members of the Security Council or Members of the
United Nations as a whole that would dare to assert
that South Africa had fulfilled even part of the conditions laid down last December by the Security Council.
The South African tigime has not made the solemn
promises it was asked to make. It has not sent any
solemn declaration to the Security Council that it will
do what the Security Council has asked it to do.
Instead, in a communication that has been distributed
to members of the Council and that contains the most
recent statement by the Government of South Africa
[see S/11701], it has denied that the United Nations
has any right to deal with this matter. South Africa
has not taken the necessary steps to withdraw from
Namibia and to transfer power to the people of
Namibia, nor has it indicated when or how it proposes
to do that. It has complied neither in spirit nor in
practice with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Bights. It has not released political
prisoners. It has not abolished the application in
Namibia of all racially discriminatory and politically
repressive laws and practices. It has not given any
guarantees for the return of the persons exiled for
political reasons.

34. We should like to extend our greetings, too, to
the delegation of Guyana. It has always made the most
constructive efforts in the United Nations in defence
of the cause of the oppressed peoples of the world,
and in particular in defence of the cause of Namibia.
Those efforts have been epitomized during the present
debate by the activities of Mr. Ramphal and
Mr. Jackson.
35. In the circumstances of the present discussion
of the item before the Security Council, long speeches
are not required. It is not necessary to repeat arguments
in support of facts already known to everyone, nor
to reiterate the well-known principles and positions
of each Government. We are taking part in this series
of Council meetings not to reopen the eternal debate
on Namibia which began with the very creation of
the Organ&&on, but because we believe that the
debate in the Council has reached the point where
the Council must now, in accordance with past
decisions, take certain practical steps to follow up the
discussion on Namibia held here in December 1974
[I81 1 th and 1812th meetings].

40. On the contrary, in the statement of the Govemment of South Africa, to which I and a number of other
speakers have referred, it is clear that South Africa
intends to pursue in that Territory certain colonialist
manmuvres designed to weaken the principle of selfdetermination of the Namibian people. It is persisting
in the promotion of its policy of Bantustan homelands
with the aim of dismembering the Territory and
dissolving its territorial integrity. That is a poiicy of
great cynicism if one recalls an historical fact-namely,
that the problems and tensions which have existed
among the Namibian people were caused by the
European invasion of that Territory and came about
because of the social problems arising from the seizure
of land and livestock in that country by European
colonizers, who were at the origin of all the conflicts,
that, fomented by Europeans, broke out towards the
end of the nineteenth century.

36. We believe that the Security Council has rarely
met in circumstances such as these, where the situation
before it could not be clearer, and where the action
it should take has been worked out beforehand, with
the agreement of ail the members of the Council.
We need only read again Security Council resolution 366 (1974) to realize that the task facing the
Council today is a very specific one.
37. In that resolution the Council declared that
South Africa’s occupation of Namibia was illegal and
arbitrary. It called upon the Pretoria regime to take a
number of specific steps in connexion with that
Territory. It gave that regime a time-limit within
which to submit South Africa’s reaction to the resolution. It even indicated the form in which that reaction
should be presented. It decided to meet five months
after the adoption of the resolution to consider the
appropriate measures to be taken if South Africa had
not complied with the decision of the Security Council.

41. The only guarantee for the territorial integrity
of Namibia, the sole guarantee for the maintenance
of the national unity of that people, lies in the elimination of the regime imposed by European colonists and
the removal of the foreign presence in that Territory.
42. In summary, my delegation would venture to say
that South Africa has not fulfilled the conditions which
the Council unanimously decided upon. Therefore the

38. For that reason we believe that, in procedural
terms, the task now before the Security Council is
4

Security Council has an obligation under that earlier
decision, and even out of respect for its authority
and prestige, to abide by the programme laid down in
resolution 366 (1974) and to implement paragraph 6
of that resolution, which requires the Council to take
appropriate action. Of course, we are aware of the
possible room for manoeuvring that the term
“appropriate” might offer some delegations, but we
believe that the very least that can be expected of
those traditionally inclined to take a somewhat
generous view of the policies of Pretoria is that, no
matter how flexible or mild they would like the
measures adopted by the Council to be, they should
agree that any decision that does not represent a
practical and effective means of compelling South
Africa to change its position or that cannot be included
under the heading-a sufficiently clear one-of
“action” would be inappropriate for the Council to
take at this time.

48. That action has, we believe, been spelled out in
the statements made to the Council by the African
representatives I mentioned a few moments ago: It
might perhaps be possible to accept the suggestion
which was made a few days ago by one delegation, a
member of the Council, to the effect that a committee
or a body under the Council might be created, although
we believe that such a group could only be established
and act within the framework of the Council’s resolutions. Perhaps it could be patterned after the present
Committee on Rhodesia to see to the implementation
of any action which the Council might adopt in respect
of South Africa, and to keep the situation in Namibia
more or less systematically under review.
49. Finally, the Council should establish a date for a
reassessment of developments in the Territory, in order
to decide whether to repeal measures it might now
resolve to impose upon South Africa, because the
situation has changed in the way prescribed by resolution 366 (1974), or, if the present state of affairs still
obtains, to adopt sanctions against .the regime of
South Africa.

43. As regards the practical action the Security
Council should take at the present time, we have
listened with interest to the arguments put forward
by various representatives of African countries. We
should like to say that we fully agree with the concrete
proposals they have made recently. In particular I am
referring to the statement made a few days ago by
Mr. Mwaanga [1824th meeting], head of the Zambian
delegation, and that made yesterday [182&h meeting]
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United
Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Malecela.

50. I am aware that some may feel that the Council
is not in a position at the present time to adopt the
necessary effective practical action against the regime
of South Africa and that this body once again, because
of the position of a minority in the United Nations,
may be prevented from taking the kind of action which
the overwhelming majority of the international community has been requesting with regard to South
Africa for many years now. In that case, we believe that the African States, which have borne
the brunt of the struggle against colonialism and
racism within the United Nations, should not stand idly
by. If the Security Council fails to act in accordance
with what was decided upon five months ago, and if the
Security Council, because of the action of certain
Western Powers which have supported apartheid and
the illegal occupation of Namibia, were to be unable
to discharge the great historical responsibility which
falls to it today, nevertheless, we believe that many
possibilies would still be open to us within the framework of the United Nations and that they should be
thoroughly explored by the anti-colonialist and progressive forces in the Organization. Were the Council
to fail to perform its duty, we believe that the socialist
countries, the non-aligned countries, and all those of
us who are truly interested in the emancipation of the
Namibian people, should give serious consideration to
the possibility of further action in the course of this
year which might allow us to achieve the goals we are
all pursuing in connexion with Namibia.

44. We believe that looking logically at the conduct
of the Security Council in relation to resolution 366
(1974), no one can deny the rightness of the proposals
put forward by African delegations, nor the fact that
they are in accordance with the letter and spirit of
that resolution, and whatever efforts of imagination
we make, that can hardly be said of other suggestions
put forward in this body by some western Powers.
45. We believe that the Council can reach some
kind of compromise with those delegations traditionally
sympathetic to South Africa only if those delegations
accept the basic underlying principle behind these
meetings of the Council. They are taking place as a
direct consequence of the decision adopted last
December. Therefore an agreement must be reached
on the basis of at least the following elements.
46. First, the Security Council must reaffirm what
it decided in resolution 366 (1974) and, consequently,
it must reject the letter distributed on behalf of the
Government of South Africa-because it does not
correspond to what was requested of South Africa and
because, in addition, it implies a show of disrespect
for this body and for the entire United Nations
system.

51. We believe that what is most important, what is
truly decisive, would be the adoption of concrete
measures to provide every type of assistance and
practical, wide-ranging co-operation with SWAP0 in
an effort to help it in its liberation struggle in that
Territory, including the adoption of the necessary
steps to enable the Namibian national liberation

47. Secondly, the members of the Council must agree
at least on what is the minimal action acceptable to
everyone at the present time.
5

stubborn opposition of
Namibia and Rhodesia.

movement to secure international legal recognition
as the sole representative of, that Territory. We also
believe that it is possible for us to call on other
forces, which are not always fuIly represented in the
Organization, but which agree with the anti-coIoniaiist
States in our aims with regard to Namibia. We should
do everything possible in the United Nations, %I the
Genera! Assembly and in the various bodies working
against colonialism and racism in the Organization, to
mobihze world public opinion through the various
workers’ organizations and the -~ organizations of
intellectuals and students, so as to induce them to
impose sanctions, with the support of the masses of
the entire world, and to compel the application of
those effective measures which it might be difficult to
achieve through this body. World public opinion
should also be mobilized to impose the appropriate
moral sanctions against those States, interests and
corporations which are contributing to the maintenance of the regime of apartheid among the Namibian
people. We should not forget that even within those
States which .are we11 known in the United Nations
as supporters of the policies of apartheid, there are
institutions and organizations which ever more openly
repudiate the policies of South Africa and those of
their Governments which are favourable to Pretoria.

the

racist

minorities

in

55. My delegation and my Government, here and
now, pledge their willingness to participate in that
undertaking to the best of their ability, for the sake
of our brothers from the African continent.
56. Mr. SAITO (Japan): Sir, my delegation wishes
first of all to congratulate you on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council. Under your
skilful guidance I am sure that the work of the Council
will proceed in a most smooth and constructive
manner.
57. I wish also to pay tribute to the delegation of
Guyana for its services to the Council in May. My
delegation wishes to express its appreciation to the
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ramphal, who
honoured us by coming to New York to preside over
the opening discussions of the important question
with which we are now concerned. We wish also to
express our appreciation to Mr. Jackson, who presided at the meetings earlier in the month.
58. My Government has consistently maintained
the following basic position regarding the question of
Namibia. First, the continued presence of South
Africa in Namibia is illegal, and South Africa is under
obligation to withdraw from the region immediately.
Secondly, the United Nations has direct responsibility
for Namibia, and it should have the primary role
during the tmnsition to independence. Thirdly, the
question of Namibia should be solved peacefully by
realistic, constructive and effective approaches. My
delegation is examining this most important question
in accordance with the position I have now stated.

52. It would be best, of course, if the Security
Council were able to discharge its responsibility. But
if that is not possible, then Member States in the
Organization must discharge theirs. This year, two
anniversaries will be commemorated which compel us
to recah the plight of the Namibian peopIe and should
encourage us to take all possible international action
to help it to achieve its emancipation.
53. Thirty years ago, the world saw the defeat of
fascism in Europe. From the ashes of that Nazi regime,
the oppressor of many nations, there arose the intemational Organization. It is obvious that the most
elementary duty of the United Nations in this anniversary year of the defeat of fascism is to see to it that
no trace of that system shah persist in certain parts
of Africa, as indeed it does today. We must mobilize
all those forces throughout the entire world which
30 years ago were united in bringing about that
victory to ensure that a handful of fascists does not
continue to impose that same racist policy,-that same
unacceptable philosophy of the superiority of one
race over another, that same desire to enslave the
majority for the benefit of a handful of supposedly
“superior” men.

59. South Africa’s reply to the Council [see S/11701]
once again fails to recognize the authority of the
United Nations over Namibia and does not agree to
South Africa’s immediate withdrawal from Namibia
and.the transfer of power to the people there.
60. In view of the position that my delegation has
taken over the years, we are disappointed with South
Africa’s reply. Our disappointment is all the greater
because Prime Minister Vorster’s statement last fall,
and his subsequent contacts with some African leaders,
kindled the hope that his Government might at last
be willing to adopt a less rigid position regarding
southern African questions, and in particular the
question of Namibia.

54. This year, likewise, we shah be celebrating the
fifteenth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Conntries and Peoples
[resolution 1514 (XV) of the Generuf Assembly]. To
celebrate it in the best possible way, all States that
support the principles of that resolution should
endeavour to see to it that it is truly implemented
everywhere in Africa, and that it prevails over the

61. My delegation deplores the fact that South
Africa has not responded to the Council’s demand for
concrete commitments regarding its withdrawal from
Namibia and the transfer of power to the people there.
South Africa’s reply to the Council, in the view of my
delegation, fails to satisfy the terms of Security Council
resolution 366 (1974).
6

62. In defending South Africa’s illegal occupation,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa
actually denied in Cape Town on 27 May 1975 that it
is an occupation, claiming that South Africa is merely
administering Namibia “with the consent and at
the wish of the people concerned”. He added that if
South Africa were to withdraw “prematurely” it would
thereby create the risk of disorder and even internal
strife.

to discuss Namibian developments with the intemational organizations directly concerned with the
problem, the Prime Minister said that African leaders
who wish to visit Namibia to acquaint themselves
with conditions there would be very welcome to do so,
either personally or through their representatives.
69. Provided that there is some indication that
common ground exists for a discussion of the transfer
of power to the Namibian people, it might be worth
exploring these offers. It would also be useful for the
Security Council to seek clarification through such
discussions of the ambiguous points in South Africa’s
reply and in fact to ascertain whether we can depend
upon South Africa’s good faith in helping to achieve
the aims of the United Nations in Namibia.

63. It should be noted, however, that the United
Nations has assumed direct responsibility over
Namibia, and therefore it is the United Nations, not
South Africa, which would be called upon to deal
with any situation that might develop as a consequence
of South Africa’s withdrawal.
64. Moreover, I would remind the Council that
resolution 366 (1974) addressed four specific demands
to South Africa, including the release of all Namibian
political prisoners and the abolition of the racially
discriminatory Bantustans and homelands, pending
the transfer of power to the people of Namibia. South
Africa’s response was vague and equivocal.

70. The recent important developments in southern
Africa, particularly the emergence of new independent
States from Territories previously under Portuguese
administration, deepen our conviction that a peaceful
and just solution for Namibia will be achieved.
71. Last year, by unanimous vote, the Security
Council adopted resolution 366 (1974). In the event that
the Council should decide on appropriate measures
under the Charter to induce South Africa to comply
with this resolution, it would be desirable that the
Council again take unanimous action, thereby
consolidating the advance made last year. My delegation is prepared to give its co-operation to this end.

65. Despite the negative elements in South Africa’s
reply regarding most of the vital issues in the Namibian
question, there are some parts which might be
worthy of careful study and thorough examination.
First, the reply recognized the international status of
Namibia and the right of its “peoples” to selfdetermination. Second, it referred also to the territorial
integrity and unity of Namibia. Third, the Prime
Minister expressed his willingness to discuss the
progress and developments in the Territory with the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia
and the Special Committee of the OAU and also with
the personal representative of the Secretary-General.

72. Bearing in mind those two points, my delegation
suggests that the Security Council consider the
following course of action: first, reaffirm Security
Council resolution 366 (1974), in particular its confirmation of the right of the people of Namibia to
self-determination and independence, and respect for
the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia; secondly,
with a view to ascertaining the intentions of South
Africa regarding compliance with resolution 366
(1974), authorize an appropriate body to initiate contact with South Africa; thirdly, request all Member
States to provide their assistance and co-operation
for this purpose; fourthly, meet before the end of
January 1976 to examine the report by the body
entrusted with this contact and, in the event of noncompliance by South Africa, to take furtherappropriate
measures under the Charter; fifthly, combined with
such contact, adopt a new resolution or reaffirm
previous Security Council resolutions, calling upon
all States, in particular the major arms-exporting
States, to refrain from the sale and shipment of arms,
ammunition and military equipment to South Africa
until it complies with the Council resolutions regarding
Namibia.

66. My delegation sincerely hopes that South Africa
will spare no effort to assist the people of Namibia
in achieving independence as a unitary State under
one government and that it will not take any action
which threatens the territorial integrity and unity of
the Territory pending the transfer of power.
67. We wish to emphasize that elections to enable
the people of Namibia to determine freely their own
future must be held under the auspices of the United
Nations and under its supervision. In such elections
SWAPO’s participation must be assured. An act of
free choice by the people of Namibia from which the
United Nations is excluded is unacceptable to my
delegation.
68. My delegation has taken note of the South
African Prime Minister’s statement that his Govemment is in agreement with the most important aspects
of the United Nations point of view and that it has no
quarrel with the OAU’s position on self-determination,
independence and the maintenance of the territorial
integrity of the Territory. In addition to his willingness

73. In conclusion, I wish to state that we are fully
aware of the gravity of the situation in Namibia.
We hope that the Security Council will take appropriate
measures which will help induce South Africa to
accept the aims of the United Nations for Namibia.
7

74. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President,
allow me first of all, speaking on behalf of the Soviet
delegation, to warmly welcome you as the representative of a friendly country on your assumption of the
high office of the presidency of the Security Council
and to wish you all possible success in carrying out
the responsible duties which are incumbent upon the
President of the Council. I should like also to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Jackson of Guyana,
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana,
Mr. Ramphal, who so actively and with such good
results conducted the work of the Council last month.

in essence reaffirmed their policy aimed at breaking
the unity of the country and at perpetuating the policy
of dismembering the country into separate Bantustans.
79. The Security Council in its resoiution demanded
that the South African authorities should withdraw
from Namibia their administration and police, whose
presence there was illegal. The reply to this was a
categorical refusal on the part of South Africa to
comply with the Council decision that it should
withdraw from Namibia.
80. Consequently, the South African racists who are
illegally occupying Namibia, exploiting its natural
resources and oppressing its people, have refused
to comply with that decision of the Security Council
and with its most recent warning. Such is the true state
of affairs in Namibia and such is the appraisal of the
present position of South Africa in this matter by
the African countries.

75. Pursuant to its earlier decision, the Council is
once again discussing the problem of Namibia, in order
to ascertain whether South Africa has complied with
the provisions of resolution 366 (1974). As we know,
in that resolution the Security Council resolved that,
if South Africa should fail to comply with the provisions of that resolution, it would consider what further
measures should be taken in regard to South Africa
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
This decision was adopted by the Council unanimously.

81. The representative of SWAPO, Mr. Nujoma,
described South Africa’s reply as a direct refusal
to comply with resolution 366 (1974). He declared
that this refusal “was nothing more than a reiteration
of South Africa’s determination to go ahead with the
imposition of Bantustans on the Namibian people so
as to ensure Pretoria’s domination and economic
exploitation of Namibia” [ihid., paw. 661. The fact
that South Africa’s reply is unsatisfactory and
unacceptable and that it is completely rejected by the
African countries has been stated here by the representatives of all those countries.

76. The international political significance of the
question of Namibia is widely known. It is further
indicated by the active participation in the Council’s
present consideration of the question by the representatives of such a large number of African and other
States Members of the United Nations, a number of
which have been represented at a high level, by their
Ministers for Foreign Affairs. The Security Council
has also heard the parties directly concerned, in
particular the representative of SWAPO, Mr. Nujoma
[1823rd meeting].

82. The United Nations Council for Namibia, as was
stated by its President, the representative of Zambia,
Mr. Banda [1823rd meeting], likewise came to the
conclusion that South Africa has virtually rejected the
key provisions of the Security Council resolution.
This position of the African countries is in complete
accord with resolution 23 (IX) on Namibia that was
adopted in Africa this year by the Council of Ministers
of the OAU at its Ninth Extraordinary Session. That
resolution noted that the racist regime of Pretoria
was continuing its policy of systematic and violent
repression of the national liberation movement and
was continuing to interfere in the domestic affairs of
neighbouring independent African States, making
use of terror and subversive activities.

77. The substantial statements of the African representatives have merged into a single, powerful and
convincing voice, the voice of Africa, on the substance
of the problem of Namibia. It is a voice of protest and
of just condemnation of the racist regime of South
Africa.
78. The thorough explanation of the essence of the
problem and the convincing arguments adduced in the
statements we have heard have made possible a
comprehensive consideration and a better understanding on the part of the Security Council of the
present state of the problem of Namibia. It is
perfectly clear what situation today confronts the
Council as regards the racist policies and practices of
South Africa vis-a-vis Namibia. In its resolution 366
(1974), the Council demanded that South Africa
offtcially declare that it would implement the United
Nations decisions on Namibia. Today it is clear to
one and all that South Africa is openly and cynically
ignoring those decisions of the United Nations and is
refusing to implement them. In its resolution the
Council demanded that South Africa should recognize
and respect the territorial integrity and unity of
Namibia. In response, the South African leaders have

83. It is therefore entirely justified, right and proper
that the African States, owing to the refusal of South
Africa to implement resolution 366 (1974) and other
decisions of the Security Council on Namibia, have
now in full compliance with those decisions raised the
question of having the Council take new and more
effective measures with respect to South Africa in
accordance with the Charter. It is also perfectly
logical that they should expect the Council to take such
decisions.
84. It is not persuasion that is needed, but rather
effective measures against South Africa; not exhorta8

tions addressed to the South African racists, but rather
decisive pressure. What is necessary is concrete
enforcement measures against South Africa that would
be mandatory for all States Members of the United
Nations. That is the position of the African countries
and that position is fully shared and supported by the
delegation of the Soviet Union.

88. The Security Council has, however, displayed
great restraint and patience. In resolution 366 (1974)
the Council once again gave South Africa time and an
opportunity to take a more’ serious and responsible
approach to the problem of Namibia’s independence
and to make positive changes in its position. This
has, however, not happened. The South African
racists, with the stubbornness of the doomed, continue
to cling to their old racist, colonialist policies, and
continue to ignore the decisions and demands of the
United Nations and the Security Council. Patience
and postponement have produced no positive results,
and for that reason the time has come for the Council
to take new and more effective measures in regard
to the racist regime of South Africa.

85. One cannot but agree with Mr. Nujoma when he
said that since the time-limit for receiving a reply
from South Africa concerning its intention to withdraw
from Namibia has now expired and since South Africa
is continuing its unlawful actions in Namibia, there is
now a heavy responsibility on the shoulders of the
members of the Council. Mr. Nujoma emphasized
that the world today expects decisive action from the
Council.

89. The maintenance of a racist, colonialist preserve
in Namibia is a dangerous anachronism against the
background of the great historical changes that continue to take place on the African continent. We are
all witnesses of-and, if you will, participants in-the
process of the collapse of the last colonial empire on
the continent of Africa. The decolonization of
Territories under Portuguese administration is drawing
to a close. As a result of the collapse of the Portuguese
colonial empire under the assault of the African
national liberation movements, with the active support
of the socialist countries and other freedom-loving
countries, both within and outside the United Nations
system, and also as a consequence of the democratic
revolution in Portugal itself, there has been a radical
change in the balance of power in southern Africa,
where the last remnants of centuries-old colonial
rule and oppression had continued for so long.

86. There are, however, official representatives of
certain countries who have come to the Council and
sung soothing lullabies to rock us to sleep. They are
attempting to appease Africa and for that purpose
attempting to discern an alleged change in the position
of South Africa with respect to Namibia. On that
basis they call for further studies of South Africa’s
reply and for the continuation of dialogue with the
racist leaders. But it is perfectly obvious from the
statements of those representatives that they have
a clear desire to create illusions, both in their own
minds and in the minds of others, that they wish to see
in the reply of South Africa something that really is
not there at all and thereby distract attention from the
real state of affairs by figments of the imagination.

90. The racist regime of Vorster, with the support
of only an insignificant group of his protectors, has in
fact found itself facing complete international isolation. As reaffirmation of this we have the just
proposals of the African States, justified by the Charter
of the United Nations, that South Africa be expelled
from the United Nations and the decision adopted
at the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly
that the delegation of South Africa should be excluded
from participation in the work of that session. What
is important is that the United Nations and its principal
organ for the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Security Council, should not slacken
in their continuing pressure on the South African
racists but, rather, that they should step up and
intensify this pressure.

87. Everyone knows perfectly well that the question
of dialogue with the racist regime in Pretoria is not a
new one. Those who are attempting to distract the
attention of the United Nations and the Security
Council from the real state of affairs with the assistance
of illusions have done so as far back as 1972 at the
series of meetings of the Council in Addis Abeba
[1627th to 1639th meetings], where they did everything
possible to prod the Council and the United Nations
into a dialogue with the racists of Pretoria. At that
time the delegation of the Soviet Union expressed
serious doubts and spoke out against dialogue with the
racists of South Africa, fulIy realizing that it was a
futile and hopeless undertaking. Events and subsequent developments have fully vindicated the
position taken by the Soviet Union in that regard. The
idea of dialogue is merely a convenient pretext for
the racist regime of South Africa and its protectors
in the United Nations to postpone endlessly and to
put off indefinitely any solution of the problem of
Namibia’s independence. At the insistence of the
initiators of the idea of dialogue, the Secretary-General
was also at one point involved in this hopeless undertaking. The fallaciousness and the unreality of the idea
of dialogue with racists on the question of Namibia’s
independence is now obvious to all.

91. In the Council’s consideration of this question,
we must also bear in mind the detente that has now
become a decisive factor in the development of inteniational relations. It is detente that creates auspicious
conditions and prospects for the further successful
deployment and the culminating stages of the national
liberation struggle of oppressed peoples on the continent of Africa against colonialism, neocolonialism
and racism.
9

-92. The -ticist kgime of South Africa with its
continuing occupation of Namibia is one of the final
.stronghoids of the cold war and of colonial slavery
On the African continent. The ongoing assault of the
African countries, with the support of all freedomloving and progressive forces of the world, against
this last bastion of racism is in keeping with the task
of strengthening international dttente and extending
it to all continents, including the continent of Africa.
93. The unanimous appeal of all Africa to the Security
-Council on the question of Namibia is an expression
of Africa’s faith in the United Nations and the Security
Council, a faith that stems from the understanding
that racist violence in Namibia and racist violence
visited upon its people is radically opposed to the
purposes and principles of the Charter. Africa has
appealed to the Council on this matter for the further
reason that under Article 25. of the Charter, the
Members of the Organization have undertaken to
submit to the decisions of the Security Council and to
implement them.
94. Voices are sometimes heard alleging that the
Charter is at fault because thus far the decisions of
the Council on Namibia and on a number of other
important questions have not been implemented. But
it is not in the Charter that one should seek the
reasons why many important and useful decisions of
the United Nations on international issues have
remained on paper and continue to be a dead letter.
It is not the fault of the Charter if the shameful, open
wound of colonial and racist rule has not yet been
healed and if in a number of regions of the world
there continue to be hotbeds of tension and military
danger. The fault for this rests not with the Charter
but with those States Members which fail to observe
the provisions of the Charter and act contrary to and
in violation of the lofty and humanitarian principles
and purposes proclaimed in the Charter.

of Namibia to self-determination and independence
on the basis of the territorial integrity and the complete
sovereignty of that country. It recognizes the
legitimacy of the struggle of the people of Namibia
by ail means available to it against the forcible
occupation of its territory and the plunder of its
natural resources.. The Soviet Union continues to
support all resolutions of the General Assembly and
decisions of the Security Council providing for the
earliest possible emancipation of Namibia from racist
rule and the proclamation of its independence.
97. The victory over Hitler’s fascism-the thirtieth
anniversary of which was solemnly celebrated on
9 May 1975 by the peoples of the Soviet Unionrepresented a deathblow to the ideology of racism and
racial or national supremacy. The decisive contribution
to that world historic victory was made by the Soviet
Union, its heroic people and its valorous armed forces.
The victoriouS conclusion of the Second World War
opened the way to the freedom and independence of
all colonial peoples. Scores of new independent and
sovereign States have appeared on the map of the
world. We welcome and fully share the following
view expressed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Zambia, Mr. Mwaanga, in his statement to the
Council on 2 June: “[The African countries] have no
quarrel with the Socialist countries, because they have
always given practical support to the struggles of the
African people [for freedom and independence]‘*
[1824th mecling, para. 381.

98. We the people of the Soviet Union are entitled
to take pride in the fact that it was the Soviet Union
that initiated the adoption by the United Nations in
l%O of the historic Declaration- on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The
anti-colonial struggle of oppressed peoples requires
that everything possible be done to step up pressure
on the racist tigime of South Africa with a view to
its maximum isolation in the world arena. Accordingly,
the Soviet delegation in the Security Council supported
the draft resolution [S/l1543 of 24 October 19741 on
the expulsion of South Africa from the United Nations.

95. If the illegal occupation of Namibia by South
Africa has yet to be brought to an end, if Namibia
has not yet acquired its independence as a single,
sovereign State, it is not the fault of the Charter. It
is because the racist Government of South Africa
refuses to carry out the obligations it has undertaken
under the Charter; and, in turn, this happens because
certain Member States also see fit to disregard their
obligations under the Charter. In fact, they attempt to
conceal and to justify South Africa’s failure to observe
the Charter, and it is this that enables the racist regime
of South Africa to set itself at odds with the Security
Council and the United Nations at large, against the
countries of Africa and world opinion. What must be
done, therefore, is to compel the racist r&me of
South Africa to respect and to implement the decisions of the United Nations and to compel the States
concerned to refrain from lending support and
patronage to that racist rbgime.

99. At the same time, in the view of the Soviet
delegation the time has come to take more decisive
.measures against the racists in Pretoria, up to and
including the mandatory sanctions provided for under
the Charter. The delegation of the Soviet Union,
together with the delegation of the African countries
and other countries that respect and observe the
Charter, is ready to support the African countries’
proposals for the application against the racist rkgime
of South Africa of the effective measures provided
for under the Charter which would dompei that
r&ime to implement the decisions of the United
Nations and to strike from Namibia its racist and
colonialist fetters.

%. So far as the Soviet Union is concerned, it
consistently supports the inalienable right of the people

100. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council
will recall that at the beginning of this meeting it was

decided, in accordance with the request made by the
representatives of the United Republic of Cameroon
and the United Republic of Tanzania to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure to the Reverend Canon Burgess
Carr of the All-Africa Conference of Churches. I understand that Canon Cat-r is present and is prepared to
make his statement. I therefore invite Canon Car-r,
in accordance with the Council’s decision, to take a
place at the Council table in order to make his
statement.
101. Canon CARR: On behalf of the All-Africa
Conference of Churches I bring greetings to the
Security Council, meeting on this solemn occasion,
this awesome moment in our history. I am most
honoured, also, in extending to you, Mr. President,
our congratulations on the able manner in which you
have conducted this debate. I extend also to the
representative of the Republic of Guyana and to his
Minister for Foreign Affairs our felicitations on their
contribution to this debate.
102. I am privileged to have been given this
opportunity to put forward the position of the AllAfrica Conference of Churches on the matter of the
continued shameful and illegal occupation of Namibia
by the Republic of South Africa. Ever since our
organization was constituted, 12 years ago, we have
subscribed to the view that in order to effect change
in the situations of racism and colonialism in southern
Africa, situations which are obstacles not only to
peace on our continent but to world peace, it has to
be demonstrated that white racism, which constitutes
the nexus of the problem in the region, is not just an
expression of immoral or emotional prejudice; it is a
system nurtured and strengthened by an international
network of economic, political and military structures.
103. African Christians, therefore, have protested
loudly and clearly against the misuse of the Christian
message to bolster this sytem of exploitation and
oppression. We are more than aware that it has been
and still is very largely Western elements of Christian
forms of thought and organization, developed through
the history of the Church and in the history of
European theology, which has favoured the oppressive
structures in southern Africa, structures which
constitute .a stumbling block to national independence,
unity and human freedom.
104. We meet here under the clouds of ominous
threats, fears and frustrations. The Security Council
does not need me to tell it that this could well be its
last opportunity to serve as a midwife for non-violent
change in Namibia. The unequivocal voices of
previous speakers have given cogent testimony to
Mr. Vorster’s own prediction that the alternatives to
peaceful change in southern Africa are too ghastly to
contemplate.
105. I come here to speak today in the name of the
Christian Church in Africa, because too often we

Christians, by our silence on the burning issues of
social and political injustice and by our active support
of a social order that denies millions of persons their
birthright, have helped to sow the seeds of violence
and to cause these seeds to spread, thereby hindering
any possibility that non-violence could be a realistic
or desirable alternative. But violence and nonviolence are symptoms of an evil social order which
requires radical change. No people--and certainly
not the peoples of Africa, just coming into national
independence and confronted by the enormous
problems of human development-wishes to embark
on a course of violence for the sheer joy of it. But
we are driven to this position by the sheer force of the
intransigence of the political order that we know as
upcrrtheid.
104. We in the All-Africa Conference of Churches
take the view that the use of violence as an ultimate
course of action is legitimate when the established
authorities are instruments of injustice and oppression.
That is the situation in Namibia today. At the same
time we have reached agreement that the indiscriminate
use of violence for the achievement of coliective
vengeance or personal gain is never justified. Consequently we have consistently endorsed and given
moral and material support to the armed liberation
struggle against colonialism, white racism and its
odious manifestations through settler colonialism
and crpurthcid in southern Africa.
107. But we have remained unwavering in our
commitment to mediation and reconciliation, to which
the churches have an inescapable commitment. Let
me hasten to say, however, that by reconciliation
we do not mean a balancing or compromise between
the interests of those who are exploited and their
exploiters. Nor do we mean appeasement with
oppression and evil. Reconciliation is never a cover-up
for injustice. Reconciliation is, rather, to be understood
in relation to the fact that the divine solicitude
favours the poor, the humiliated and those who
because they are deprived of their inherent human
rights and dignity, with which they were endowed by
their Creator, must fight for justice.
108. The goal of Christian reconciliation is liberation
and redemption for both the oppressed and their
oppressors. It is only in so far as the churches actively
support the liberation of the oppressed black people
in southern Africa in their just demand for the redistribution of power. and wealth that we shall gain the
credibility to redeem the white minorities in the region
from the stigma that characterizes them as racists
and oppressors.
109. There is one further consideration which conditions our attitude towards the matter under discussion
by the Council. Even while we continue to fight
injustice and terrorism against the masses by the
minority regimes in southern Africa, we feel that the
words spoken by President Kenneth Kaunda last

May, when he opened our third assembly, have
particular relevance to this discussion. He urged
African leaders, whether free or still oppressed, to be
united more than ever in developing the spirit of
forgiveness. This spirit must be promoted and
nourished even under the most tempting conditions,
like those existing now in our part of the world. This
commitment to reconciliation and this challenge to
cultivate the spirit of forgiveness make it imperative
that we should be sensitive to any signs of a change
of heart among those who wield power in southern
Africa. I regret to have to say that we have looked
in vain for signs that the rhetoric of detente promulgated by South Africa is matched by concrete
actions leading to the dismantling of the structures
and policies that continus to make that country a pariah
in the world of decent and wholesome society.

to combine in order to overcome the most blatant
forms of exploitation. The black renaissance convention was held inside South Africa, and the participants comprised not extremist radicals but a middle
stratum of black urban intellectuals. The organizers
were black churchmen, pastors and priests. I underline
this fact in order to demonstrate that our support in
the All-Africa Conference of Churches for the iiberation movements outside South Africa is based on the
grass-roots support those movements enjoy among the
broad masses of the people inside that country.
114. Whether they are outside South Africa or inside
it, black people are unanimous with regard to the
ultimate objectives of the liberation struggle. They
demand freedom now. They want their land. They want
political and economic power, and they want to be the
masters of their own destiny. In other words, they want
revolution, a complete and radical change of the
system.

110. The changes brought about in what has been
described as petty clpcrrtheid, evidence of which I have
seen this morning on the press wire, and the changes
South Africa says it is prepared to make, are peripheral
and only remotely marginal to the complete restoration
of the inherent dignity and personhood of black people
in South Africa and in Namibia.

115. The All-Africa Conference of Churches is
fully committed to doing everything possible to
promote the black consciousness movement inside
South Africa as a means of furthering the noble
objectives of the armed liberation struggle being
waged by the liberation movements.

111. What do black people demand? A few months
ago, just at the time the Council was giving its ultimatum to South Africa, we heard the authentic voices
of the oppressed in South Africa in a black renaissance
convention organized at Hammerskraal. This event
demonstrated that the goals of the movement for
liberation outside South Africa are not lost to the
emerging generation of young intellectuals and workers
and the masses of the people inside that country.
The struggle of the liberation movement continues to
expose the inconsistencies of apartheid and especially
of Mr. Vorster’s dialogue and detente manoeuvres.

116. It is these two aspects, the building of awareness
among the oppressed within South Africa and moral
and material assistance to the liberation movement,
that we believe will create conditions favourable
for forgiveness and reconciliation in South Africa.
117. An identical set of dynamics is also at work in
Namibia. At about the same time as the black renaissance convention was being held in South Africa,
there was a corresponding “Blacks, let’s unite”
conference in Namibia. Here 50 blacks came together
-to quote from the objectives of the conferenceto “reaffirm our standing in our fatherland, to reaffirm
our objection to neo-colonial rulers, and above all,
despite our so-called ethnic differences, to think of a
future, a common future for us all”.

112. Because of the liberation movement a spirit of
black consciousness has developed and is spreading
like wildfire throughout that country. It was that spirit
that was the immediate inspiration behind the black
renaissance convention. The convention condemned
the separate development policy of which the Bantustans represent the final solution. Three hundred
participants dedicated themselves to striving for a
totally united and democratic South Africa free from all
forms of oppression and exploitation, a society in
which all people participate fully in the government of
the country through the medium of “one man, one
vote” , a society in which there is an equitable distribution of wealth and power, an anti-racist society.

118. They were inspired, in this first conference of its
kind; to search for and to find, among themselves,
an intense desire on the part of all blacks to unite in
their endeavour to shake off the yoke of crpwtheid.
The Chairman of this conference said, in his opening
speech:
“Yes, we do recognize that we have been born
Coloureds, Hereros, Damaras, Namas, Ovambos,
Okavangos, and you name them, but our common
history of suffering, our common experience of
oppression, and our common fatherland, can and
must mould us together.”

113. They went on record as declaring legalized
racism in South Africa a threat to world peace, and
therefore they called upon all countries in the world
to withdraw all cultural, educational, economic,
manpower and military support for the existing racist
Government and all its racist institutions. They also
called on the Government immediately to recognize
African trade unions and urged workers and peasants

119. While we hear so much from Mr. Vorster and
his apologists for the Bantustan policy about separation, ethnicity, native nations and tribalism, it is both
12

impressive and inspiring that within South Africa itself
and within Namibia, black people are shaping their
own identity, not along the lines of these ancestral
ethnic divisions, but around a common experience of
suffering from oppression and the experience of
struggling for liberation. This current development
exposes even the most persuasive white liberals, and
certainly the Bantustan puppets, as being entirely
out of step and out of touch with the reality of the
situation around them.

the denial of human rights. It leads to solidarity with
our fellow oppressed, wherever they may be, disregarding race and language and colour. It inspires
the courage and the will so essential to the engagement
in the struggle for liberation, justice and peace.
123. With this background, it is no wonder that the
“Blacks, let’s unite” conference began the process of
radically restructuring the defunct national convention which Mr. Vorster was setting up and promoting
as an alternative to SWAPO. It established the Namibia
National Convention, overthrew the celebrated chief
of the Hereros, along with his advocacy of the
Balkanization of Namibia, and elected a new Executive
Committee whose membership includes two from
SWAPO. They fully endorsed the conditions put
forward by SWAP0 to the South African Govemment as the basis for any talks or any search for a
negotiated settlement for the problem of Namibia.

120. Recently I was in Swaziland, where I picked up
a South African newspaper which carried an article
with the caption “Urban Blacks Are Upset”. The
article began:
“Most urban blacks are firmly against the idea of
their interests being represented to the authorities
by the homeland leaders when they have their own
seasoned leaders.”

124. We all know these demands. They call for the
release of all political prisoners, whether they are
held in Namibia or in South Africa. They call for
the lifting of the banning order against the President
of SWAPO. They call for the setting aside of the
R-17 Emergency Regulations still existing in the north
of Namibia, which were brutally enforced during the
recent elections in Ovamboland. They call for all
Er’amibians, of whatever political organization, now
in exile, to be able to return freely to their home
country without fear of arrest or other form of victimization. They call for the withdrawal of South
Africa, of all of its troops, police and political administration from the Territory of Namibia: and they call
for an immediate end to the proceedings against the
National Chairman, David Mereru of SWAPO.

It went on:
“South African black observers see the claimed
success, if any at all, of the detente bandwagon,
not only as specious but also highly misleading as
long as such detente is not encouraged at home.
And until white South Africa understands this
truism, the Prime Minister’s journey towards
meaningful detente with black Africa may be a
difficult one.”
121. The point I am endeavouring to stress here is
that it is not the factors of ethnic origin that provide
the watershed for African identity in South Africa or
in Namibia; rather, it is blackness. But let me quickly
add that blackness in this context has no colour
connotations. As the protagonists of the black
consciousness movement would themselves quickly
point out, the obsession with colour as ascribed to
blackness is a white phenomenon. In black consciousness thought, black people are a group of people
formed together by a common experience of suffering
and of struggle against suffering. It is something
positive, shaking off the negative characterization
of non-white. It also implies a search for new values,
rejecting everything that dehumanizes them as
Africans and forces them into regarding themselves as
non-beings. Black consciousness transcends the
particularities of culture, since culture was never
meant to serve as a basis for discrimination or
polarization, but rather as an enriching factor,
something dynamic and enabling, adapting itself to the
forward march of the human race.

125. These actions were taken inside Namibia, and
I mention them here in the hope that we can lay to
rest once and for all the objections of those who would
try to confuse us by claiming that there is a difference
between the position of SWAP0 inside Namibia and
SWAP0 led by our esteemed and distinguished
brother, Mr. Sam Nujoma, outside Namibia.
126. That is absolutely false, and for those who may
not be fully informed it could be dangerously divisive
propaganda. The strongest and most persistent voice
in Namibia calling for an end to South Africa’s
illegal occupation has been, and still is, that of SWAPO.
The men and women linked to SWAPO, inside and
outside Namibia, are the ones who have paid the
tremendous price for their witness for freedom.
127. The Security Council does not need to be
reminded by me of the public floggings, the political
arrests, the torture of prisoners, the constant embarrassment and harassment and intimidation that
SWAP0 members have undergone. It is they who are
the martyrs in the pursuit of independence for Namibia,
and their words must be heard as the authentic voice
of the Namibian people. It is a voice that we all know

122. This is not all esoteric. The “Blacks, let’s
unite” conference in Namibia represented a considerable step forward in politicizing the black consciousness movement, making it one in which black
people can become aware of the potential power they
wield as a group, both economically and politically.
It is a call to unite in order to resist oppression and
13

Prime Minister Vorster does not wish to hear. He
prefers to establish what he calls “reasonable leaders”
that South Africa can manipulate and control. But
his very opposition should solidify in our minds the
legitimacy of SWAP0 and of its struggle for the
freedom and independence of Namibia.

was unclear. One of them even went so far as to refer
specifically to the immorality and criminality of the
social and political order prevailing in Namibia as a
major factor in its decision to refrain from further
exploration for oil.
132. This is an important precedent for other foreign
investors in Namibia to emulate. SWAP0 has called
for ail investors to withdraw immediately from Namibia. The decree on national resources of the Council
for Namibia has forbidden the mining or distribution
of Namibia’s natural resources without that Council’s
permission. We urge support from the Council for
SWAPO’s appeal, and an endorsement of the declaration on national resources of the Council for Namibia.

128. It is not my intention to &ke a long address,
but it is important to recognize that one of the things
that South Africa is still trying to protect for itself
are the vast mineral riches of Namibia. In its exploitation of the patrimony, the wealth and the people
of Namibia, South Africa has as its partners the United
States of America, the United Kingdom, Japan,
France, the Federal Republic of Germany and many
other great Powers, some of whose use of the veto in
the Council has prevented you from taking the kind
of decisive action that this question requires.

133. There is a cruel injustice and blatant burglary
occurring in Namibia. For more than half a century,
that country’s mineral wealth has been robbed by
South African and foreign companies, while massive
profits have been streaming out, as the backs of its
people bleed, bestowing opulence upon those claiming
to be their benefactors. The African peoples of Namibia
are victims of starvation wages, discriminatory treatment in their places of work, separation from their
families and every other manner of inhuman expioitation. Africa will find it hard to forget this rape of its
land and its peoples.

129. The search for profit has been made the first
priority for those nations. Consequently, the right of
Namibia to be free and independent has been given
a very low priotity. Even though the United Nations
has repeatedly called for an end to South Africa’s
occupation of Namibia, and has called on States not
to give any legitimacy to the occupying Power, we see
numerous companies that have received contracts
from South Africa to mine its minerals and to search
for its oil. Simply by signing a contract with South
Africa, those companies and their nations give credibility and legitimacy to South Africa, as ifit had a legal
and moral right to administer the economic life of that
land. Their activities serve as a signal to South Africa
that “business as usual” will continue, and this has
aided and abetted the racist regime in Pretoria in its
intransigence and obstinacy in flouting the moral will
of the international community as reflected in the
resolutions that have been adopted time and again by
the Council. It is a signal that the Council must reverse.

134. Let me conclude with the observation that the
clear frustration which characterizes white politics in
Namibia at the present time is, for me, a sure sign
that the international community is on the verge of a
ghastly catastrophe.
135. Mr. Vorster’s “New Deal” for Namibia is, in
the words of a prominent Namibian church leader,
“a New Deal to safeguard what can be saved for the
whites in the political chaos which is prevalent in our
country”. He went on to say: “Mr. Vorster has said
that the people of the country will decide their own
future. But, we ask, who are these people? The black
man in Namibia has become used to being told that
he is not included among ‘people’, and therefore the
logic speaks for itself that what Mr. Vorster means
here is that it is the white people of Namibia who
must decide upon their future and the future of the
other ethnic groups in that Territory”. This is a nuance
which I consider it important to emphasize,
especially because it is voiced from within Namibia
itself.

130. It must be made clear to South Africa now that
it cannot expect “dollar and cents diplomacy” to
continue, any more than it .can expect political
diplomacy to sanction its illegal occupation of Namibia.
131. In this regard, I have the honour to report some
small but significant victories that have been won in
this area. Inspired by the call of the World Council
of Churches and the All-Africa Conference of
Churches, United States church bodies, both Protestant and Roman Catholic, have worked over the last
three years to get American oil companies exploring
off-shore in Namibia to withdraw. As a result of
numerous conversations with management, public
statements, resolutions at stockholders’ meetings,
submissions to the Council for Namibia and other
such actions, by February 1976 Continental Oil,
Phillips, Getty, Texaco and Standard Oil of California
will all have withdrawn from Namibia. I wish I could
report the same for companies operating in European
countries. Several of those companies have noted that
in their explorations that the issue of “sovereignty”

136. You have heard in the Council appeals for
patience, for time to cultivate better relations between
the races, appeals for dialogue to allow for meaningful
change to occur-appeals which all sound well. But,
we ask, what is the motivation behind these appeais?
And we answer that as long as this demonic system
prevails, no such dialogue can bring about the change
requisite and necessary to affirm the full humanity,
dignity and freedom of the Namibian people.
14

137. In no uncertain terms, therefore, we urge the
Security Council to condemn colonialism and neocolonialism in Namibia. The Council must make clear
to the advocates of Mr. Vorster’s “New Deal” that
the wounds of colonialism are stiil raw and festering,
and that black people in Namibia, under the leadership
of SWAP0 and inspired by the churches, have reached
a stage where they can in no way be expected to be
satisfied with a few rights dished out to them by the
“boss”.

provisions included in.Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, in order to compel South Africa to
recognize that the Council means business this time.
We urge the Council to insist upon immediate independence, full territorial integrity and an immediate halting
of the Bantustanization of Namibia.
The meeting rose crt 1.20 pm.

NOIPS

138. Therefore we urge the Council to call upon the
Republic of South Africa to withdraw immediately from
the Territory of Namibia. We urge this Council to take
measures that would put into effect all the articles and

I Legal Cunsequences for Stutes of the Continued Presence of
South Africu in Nomibiu (Soud~ West Africu) notu*ithstunding
Security Council resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.
Reports 1971. p. 16.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED

NATIONS PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES

PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agences dipositaires du
mondc entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des venta, New York ou Gcneve.

COMO CONSEGUIR

PL’BLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las pubhcaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Comuhe a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations. New York

00400

82-6 1202-November

1983-2,200
