UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 9

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 9

FOUR HUNDRED AND SIXTH
MEETING

QUATRE CENT SIXIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, Ne'w York,
on Friday, 28 January 1949, at 3 p.1n,

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le vendredi 28 janvier 1949, a. 15 /tellres.

President: General

(Canada).

President: Le general McNAUGUTON (Canada).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Rcpubliques socialistes
s?vietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amenque.

I. Provisional agenda (S/Agenda 406)

1. Ordre du jour provisoire
(SI Agenda 406)

McNAUGHTON

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de I'ordre du jour.

2. The Indonesian question.

2. La question indonesienne.

2. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was Mapted.

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
-L'ordre du jour est adopti.

3. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian question

3. Suite de la. discussion sur la question

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hood,
representative of Australia; lvlt'. van Langenhove,
representative of Belgium; U So Nyun, representative of Burma; Mr. Menon, representative
of India; Mr. 'va,/! Roijell, representahve of the
Netherlands; Mr. I1lgles, representative of the
Philippines and A.Ir. Palar, representative of the
Republic of Indonesia, took their places at the
Scwrity Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. H Dad, representant de l'A1tstralie; M. van Lang01lllOve,
representant de la Belgique; U 50 N:yun, representant de la Birmanie; M. Meno"», rep resentull.f.
de l'lnde; M. van Roijen, represe1lta11t des PaysBOoS; M. Ing1es, re,prisentant des Philippines, et
M. Fa/ar, representant de la Repuvliqloe d'lndonisie, pnmnent place a la table du Co.nse;/ de
securite.

The Pln:sloRNT: As usual there will be consecutive interpretation of the speeches of members of the Security Council and simultaneous
interpretation of the speeches of all others.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais): Comme
d'habitude, it y aura une interpretation consecutive
des discours prononces par les membres du Conseil
de securite et une interpretation simultanee des
autres discours.
A la fin de la derniere seance, le repres<:tltant
de l'Egypte a indique qu'il desirait faire, avant le
vote, Une declaration au sujet du projet de reso·
lution comrnun tel qu'il a ete ame.nde [5/1219,
5/1230, 5/1232]. Je donne la parole au representant de I'Egypte.

At the conclusion of our last meeting, the
representative of Egypt indicated that he wished
to make a statement on the draft joint resolution,
as amended [5/1219, 5/1230, 5/12321, before
it was put to a vote. I now call upon the representative of Egypt.

indonesienne

2
Mahmotld FAWzr Bey (Egypt) : On previous
occasions, I have stated the views of the Egyptian
delegation concerning the present phase of the
Indonesian question. At the 403rd Security
COtlncil meeting on 25 January, I attempted to
make dear the attitude of my delegation towards
the joint draft joint resolution [S/1219] now
before us. The amendments which the sponsors
of the resolution have presented or accepted
since -then, and which have been circulated as
documents S/1230 and S/1232, are partly a continuation of the sponsors' efforts to help in reaching what, in their view, would be a fairly good
solution of the present phase of the Indonesian
question.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egyptc) (traduit de
l'anglais) : J'ai deja eu plusieurs fois l'occasion
de faire connaitre le point de vue de ma delegation
en ce qlli concerne b situation actuelle en Indom~sie. A la 403eme seance du Conseil de securite,
le 2S janvier, j'ai essaye de preciser I'attitude
de mn delegation a l'egard du projet de resolution
conjoint [.'1'/1219] qui nous est soumis. Les
amcndements que les auteurs du projet de resolution ont presentes on aeceptes depuis 10rs, et qui
ont ete distriblles sous les cotes 5/1230 et S/1232
sont, pour une part, le resultat des nouveaux
efforts effectues par 1es uutellrs du projet en vue
de resoudre de la mani(~re qui leur parait la plus
acceptable l~ difficultes qui existent actuellement
en Indonesie.

I feel bound to state, however, that the Egyptian delegation-and, I am sure, almost all other
delegations, including the sponsors-would have
liked to see a still better draft than the present
one, a draft more in line with what is called for
by considerations of foresight and the equities of
the situation.

Je dois declarer cepelldant que la delegation de
l'Egypte et, j'en suis certain, presque toutes les
autres delegations, Y compri.'3 ceJ1es qui ont presente le projet de resolution, .auraient prefere un
projet plus satisfaisant et plus juste, et qui tienne
micux compte des perspectives d'avenir,

This is an additional reason why my delegation looks upon the draft resolution, even in its
present form, as merely one step forward, which
must be followed by other steps on the road to
the solution of the Indonesian problem.

Voil.a, pour rna delegation, une raison de plus
pour considerer que le projet de resolution, meme
sous sa forme actuelle, ne constitlJe qu'une etape
qui devra etre sui vie par bien d'autres, avant
que I'on parvienne a regIer le probleme indonesien.

I take it that the Security Council is fully
aware of the fact that a resolution such as the
one now proposed will not be effective without
the co-operation of both the Republic of Indonesia and the Netherlands Government. In this
connexion, it is to be hoped that _the manner and
tile spirit in which the resolution, if adopted, is
dealt with by other parties, will be such as to
secure the maximum co-operation of the Government and leaders of the Republic of Indon~ia.
It i.'3 also partiCularly to be hoped that the Neth·
erlan?s S;overnment will keep pace with time,
that It WIll not-to use a two-day-old expr~sion
uttered by the Secretary of State of the United
State,s on a s.imilar occasion-take a basically
reaetlOnary attItude or make an attempt to crawl
back into the cocoon of history.

Le Conseil de securite se rend bien compte,
fen suis sur, que le succes d'une telle resolution
depend de la cooperation de la Republique d'Indonesie et du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas. A
ce sujet, i1 faut esperer que l'esprit dans leque!
cette resolution, si elle est adoptee, sera appliquee
par 1es autres parties, rendra possible une cooperation sans reserve du Gouvernement et des dirigeants de la Republique d'Indonesie. It faut
notamment esperer que le Gouvernernent des
Pays-Bas saura evo1uer avec le temps, et que,
pOUf reprendre une expression employee i1 y a
deux jams en une semblable occasion par le Seeretaire d'Etat des Etats-Uriis d'Amerique, ce Gouvernement n'adoptera pas une attitude resolument
reaetionnaire et n'essaiera pas de chereher refuge
dans Ull passe revolu.

It i~ ft!rther to be hoped that the Security
CounCil wlll keep the situation in Indonesia under
review and will continue itS co·operation with all
concerned until an ultimale and complete solution is achieved.

Il faut esperer, en outre, qne le Conseil de
securite eontinl1era de surveiller la question indonesienne et de cooperer avec tous les interesses
jusqu'a ee que le probleme soit comp1etement
et definitivement n;:solu.

It i5 with this understanding, and in the light
of what I have stated previously, that I shall
vote for the draft joint resolution submitted to
the Security Council by the delegations of China
Cuba, Norway and the United States of America:
as amended.

C'est clans eet esprit, et compte tenu de cc
que j'ai dit precedemment, que je voterai en
faveur dtl projet de resolution cornmun presente
au Conseii de securite par les delegations de la
Chine, de Cuba, de la Norvege et des Etats-Uois
cl'Amerique, tel qu'i1 a ete amende.

Mr: MUNOZ (Arg~ntina) (trans/.(l.ted from
~pau.lsh): My delegatlOo has already expressed
Its Vlews on the Indonesian question. 'Ne sl1are
the g-eneral feeling that colonialism is in the last
stage of its existence and that the world is at
present witnessing thc process of liberation of
tl~e last !erritories fro~ the chains of subjection.
1 he baSIC cause of thIS evolution, indicative of
hun: an p~og~ess, lies in the efforts of peoples to
ach.leve Ille mdependent ~n~ sovereign life they
deSIre by themseh'e5. This IS the path which the
inhabitants of Indonesia have firmly and boldly
followed. The Security Council must use all the

M. MUNOZ (Argentine) (trad1til de l'espagnol):
Ma delegation a deja expose ses vtles au s\ljet de
la question indonesienne. Nous partageons le
sentiment general seIon lequel le c:olonialisme
touche a sa fin et le Iti.onde assiste actuellement
au processus de liberation des derniers territoires
encore assujetis. Le motif essentiel de cette evo11:!ti.on, qui ternoigne du progres de l'hLlmanite,
reSide dans les effo:rts des peuples memes qui veulent vivre clans l'independanee et en exer~ant leurs
droits de souverainete. C'est la le but que se soot
resolument assigne les habitants ele l'Indonesie.
Le Consei1 de seeurite se doit de faire en sorte,

3

means at its disposal to realiz~ the high ideals of
peoples fighting for their freedom.
We continue to believe that the best way of
attaining those aims is to make use of the United
Nations' powers of mediation. To go beyond
those limits would be dangerolls, especially at a
time when, as we have said on various occasions,
the differences between the great Powers are
hampering the normal development of the
Council's work and preventing it from meeting
situations which require a singleness of purpose
and international harmony ,vhich it has not yet
achieved. We therefore think that the use of the
good offices of the Security Council in seeking
agreernent between the parties and trying to
bring them together when possible is the best way
of reaching a satisfactory result.

The objections of various delegations concerning the Council's competence to deal with this
matter will acquire greater weight if these limits
are exceeded. On the other hand, when this body
acts within the limits of its mediatory capacity,
the weight of such objections is diminished: the
parties themselves, as we have seen in practice,
submit implicitly or explicitly to the moderating
action of the Council, thus allowing the elements
of the problem to take shape, and, in turn, the
peaceful settlement of the dispute to be expedited.
The draft resolution presented by the delegations of China, Cuba, Norway and the United
States seems generally to be inspired by the sarrie
aims, and we shall support it on that understanding-, with the sole exception of those parts which,
in our opinion, are radically different from our
view.
Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (trmtslated from Russian): The drawnout debate on the aggression committed by the
Netherlands Government against the Indonesian
Republic would seem to be drawing to its close.
What can be inferred from this prolonged discussion? An obvious conclusion is that some of
the members of the Security Council are openly
evading the adoption of a decision by the
Security Council for the \vithdrawal of Netherlands troops from the territory of the Indonesian
Republic. Even the modest proposal to liberate
immediately just the area of ]ogjakarta, il5 set
forth in the resolution adopted at the New Delhi
Conference by the representatives of nineteen
Asian countries [S/1222J, is considered by the
authors of the joint draft resolution to be "too
extreme" and unacceptable, as was evident from
the statements and explanation furnished by the
representatives of the United States of America
and China yesterday [405th meeting].
As regards the joint draft resolution, its essential purpose is not to secure the withdrawal of
N ether1arids troops, but la consolidate their presellce in the Indonesian Republic and to "legitima.
tize" the occupatioll regime. The amendment
which the authors of the draft joint resolution
introduced in their own draft yesterday [5/1230]
does not change its substance.

par tous les lfloyens en son pouvoir, que les peu·
p1es. qui 1uttent pour teur liberte puissent atteincire ces ideaux eleves.
Notls sommes toujours d'avis que la meilleure
O1ethode pour obtenir un te1 resultat consiste a
recourir aux moyens de mediation clont dispose
cet organe de l'Organisation cles Nations Unies.
I1 serait d'autant plus dangereux de depasser
ces limites que, a I'heure actuelle, aimi que nOllS
I'...vons fait observer a plusieurs reprises, les
divergences de vues entre les grnndes Puissances
entravent le fonctionnemem normal uu Conseil
de securite et ne permettel'.t pas i celui-ci de faire
face a des situations qui exigent une identite de
vues et une harmonie intemationale qu'il n'a pas
encore ete possible d'obtenir. Il me semble done
que le meilleur moyen d'obtenir un resu1tat satisfaisant est pour le Conseil d'offrir ses bons offices
en vue d'obtenir un accord entre les parties et,
dans la mesure du possible, de rapprocher leurs
points de vue.
Pour tout ce qui irait au dehi de ces limites,
les objections des diverses delegations qui pretendent que le Conseil n'a pas qLlalite pour traiter
ceUe c;uestioll auraient plus de poids. Par contre,
lorsque le ConseiJ agit en taut que mediateur, ces
obJections perdent de leur valeur et, comnte on
a pu l'observer dans la pratique, les parties elles~
me-lOes se conforment cl'une fa<;on tacite ou explicite a l'action moderatrice du Conseil, ce qui
permet de degager les elements nature1s dll pro·
bJeme et de .hater ainsi la :Solution du differcnd
par des moyens pacifiques.
Le projet de resolution presente par les delegations de la Chine, de Cuba, de la Norvege et
des Etats~Unis parait, d'une fa<;on generale, s'inspirer des principes que je viens cl'exposer; nou~
lui donnerons done notre appui sauf en ce qUt
concerne 1es parties qui s'opposent mdicalement
a notre fa~on de penser.
M, M."LIK(Union des Repuh1iq:.tes socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit du l"1tsse): 11 semble.que la
tres longue discussion sur la question de l'agression commise par le Gouverr.ement neerJandais
contre la Repub1ique d'Indonesie touche a sa fill.
QueUes conclusions peut-on en tirer? Dne seule
conclusion s'impose, a savoir que certains membres du Conseil de secllrite 'cherchent ouvertement a empecher le Conseil d'aclopter une j'esolution tendant au retrait des forces neerlandaises
du ter,itoire de la 'Republiqlle d'Indonesie.'
Corrime l'indiquent les discours prollOnces hier
par les rep'resen/ants des Etats-Unis d:Ameriqu.e
et de la Chine [40.5Mne selJ:nce 1, et aUSSl les exph~
cations que ces orateurs ont donnees par la suite,
me-me la rnodeste proposition tendant a h liberation immediate de la seule region de Djokjakarta, proposition qui fait l'objet de la resolution
adoptee par les representants des dix~nettf pay~
d'Asie reunis a New-Delhi [5/1222], a semble
"extreme" et inacccptable <lUX auteurs du projet
de resolution des quatre.
Qllant a ce demier proj et de resolution, il tend
dans son essence, non pas it fail'e evacuer les
forces ncerlandaises, mais a consolider leur presence dans la Republiql1e d'Indonesie et a "tegitimer" le regime d'occupation. L'amendement que
les auteurs du projet des quatre ont eux-memes
apporte hier a leur proposition [5/1230] n'en
modi6.e pas la substance.

4
It has thus become quite evident that a number
of co'mtries belonging to the so-called Ang:lo~
American Bloc have openly sided with the aggressor and have rejected even the modest and restrained proposals contained in the resolution of
the Asian countrb [SJ1222J. This is a striking
example of the attitU(Je of the West to the East
and of the extent to which the Governments of
\Vestern Europe and the United States of
America heed the voice of the countries of Asia,

I1 est done tout a fait evident qu'un certain
nombre de pays appartenant i ce que 1'on appelle
le bloc anglo-americain se sont ouvertement ranges
du cote de l'agresseur et ont rejete meme les offres
timides et moderees qui font l'objet de la resolution des pays d'Asic [S/1222]. Cela montre
d'une fa~on frappa!lte les veritables sentiments
que I'Dccident eprouve pOUT l'Orient, et le peu
d'attention que les Gouvernements de l'Europe
occidentale et des Etats~Unis d'Amerique pretent
a l'opinion des pays de l'Asie.

The representative of. Belgium yesterday tried
to prove, in the face of facts, that the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
has been favouring extremist tendencies during
the discussion of the Indonesian question. He
himself called upon the Security Council to en~
courage the so-called moderate tendencies. These
lucubralions about extremist and moderate tendencies an nothing but an attempt to cover up
the acts 0 f aggression committed by the Netherlands Government amI to defend aggression, The
representative of Belgium is apparently i!lclined
to believe that the acts of aggression against the
Indonesian Republic by the Netherlands Government represent a "moderate tendency" and that
the Security Council should support this moderate tendency, and not adopt any measures designed to put an end to that aggression and protect th e lawful rights and interests of the Indonesian Republic and its peoples. That, in the view
of the representative of Belgium, is what is meant
by a "moderate tendency". To any honest and
l.:mprejudiced person, it must be quite clear, howver, that this is not a moderate tendency, but an
acti ve support of the aggressor to the end and a
defence of, aggression itself.

Contrairement a tous les faits, le representant
de la Belgique a tente hier de. montrer id que,
lors de la discussion de la Question indonesienne,
le representant de l'Union sovietique avait enCQu·
rage les tendances extremistes. De son cote, le
representant de la Belgique a recommande au
Conseil de securite d'encourager ce que I'on
appelle les tendances moderees. Toutes ces elucubrations sur les tendances extremistes et les
tendances moclerees ne sont rien d'autre qu'une
tentative de couvrir les agissements agressifs
du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas et de defendre
l'agression. Le representant de la Belgique semble
encEn a penser que I'agression commise par le
Gouvernement neerlanuais contre la Republique
d'Indonesie represente "une tendance moderee",
que le Conseil de seccrite doit encourager cette
tendance et qu'iI ne doit prendre aucune mesure
pOur mettre fin a l'agression et pour proteger Ies
droits et les intert~ts legitirnes de la Republique
d'Indonesie et de sa population. Voila en quoi
consiste, d'apres le representant de la Belgique,
cette "ten dance moderee". Cependant, tout homme
honnete et impartial doit reconnaitre qu'it ne
s'agit pas la d'une tendance moderee, mais d'UD
effort de soutenir I'agresseur activement et jUE~
qu'au bout, et de justifier l'agression.

It is well-known, after all, that one of the
reasons why the Netherlands has committed
aggression against the Indonesian Republic is the
fact that from the very beginning the Security
Council had not carried Ol1t its duty of maintaining pe\lce. The representative of Belgjumis try~
ing to lead the Security Council even further
along this road.

L'on sait bien que, si les Hollandais ont pu
lancer leur agression contre la Republique d'Indonesie, c'est notamment parce que, des le debut, le
Conseil de securite a failli it son devoir qui etait
de maintenir la paix. Le representant de la Bel~
gique s'efforce d'entrainer le Cooseil de securite
plus loin encore sur cette voie.

It is equally well-known that ever since the
question of the aggre~sion committed by the
Netherlands Government against the Republic of
Indonesia was opened, the delegation of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has demanded that the Security Council should adopt
n;easures for the immediat~ cessation of aggresSlon, for the release of pTlsoners, for the withdrawal of Netherlands troops, and for safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of the
Republic. Had the representative of Belgium
been present at the very first meetings at Lake
Success at which the question was reopened, or
had he taken the trouble to peruse carefully the
records of the Security Council, he could not
have h:lp~d noting the indignation expressed by
the maJonty of the representatives of the countries which took part in t11at debate at the aggression committed by the Netherlands and at the
fact that the Netherlands Government has ignored
the resolutions of the Council [S/1150 alld
[SJl164] , These representatives, together with
the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, had demanded the withdrawal of
the troops, the release of prisoners, and restora.

L'on sait egalement que des les premiers jours
oil l'agression commise par le Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas contre la Republique d'Indonesie a ete
mise en discussion, la delegation de l'URSS a
demand6. que le Conseil de sec.urite prit des
mesures en ,vue de mettre immediatement fin a
l'agression, de faire liberer les detenus, de faire
retirer les troupes neerlandaises et de garantir
les droits et les interets legitimes de la Repu.
blique. Si le representant de la Belgique avait
assiste, des la reprise de I'examen de cette qllestion, aux seances qui ont eu lieu a ce sujet ;It
Lake Success, ou s'il avait pris la peine de. lire
attentivement les proces-verbaux du Conseil de
securite, il se serait certainement rendu compte
que la majorite des representants des pays qui
ant pris part a ce debat s'est montree indignee
de l'agression commise par les Hollandais et du
nH~pris dont le Gouvcmement des Pays-Bas a
fait preuve a l'egard des resolutions du Conseil
de securite [5/1150 et S/1164J. Tout comme le
representant de I'URSS. ces representants ant
demand6 le retrait des troupes, la liberation des
detenus et le retablissement de la situation dont
la Republique jouissait avant les recents evene-

5
tion of the Republic to its former status. That
demand was made by the representative of Indo~
nesia, and by the representatives of India, Burma,
Pakistan, Australia, Egypt and other countries.

ments. Ces denmndes sont venues de la part des
representants de l']ndonesie, de l'Indc, de la Birmanie, du Pakistan, de l'Australie, de l'Egypte
et d'autres encore,

Moreover, that demand is also being made by
the nineteen Asian countries attending the New
Delhi Conference. Does this mean that all these
cottntries are encouraging, to use the words of
the representative of Belgium, "extreLllist tendencies"? No, it means that all these cQuntries
want the Security Council to take action in
accordance with the principles of the United
Nations Charter; they want it to take speedy and
effective steps to safeguard international peace, to
put an end to the aggression, and to protect the
lawful rights and interests of a country which
has fallen victim to aggression. If the representative of Belgium and those who share his
view had let themselves be guided by the principles of the Charter, and not by the narrow and
mercenary interests of colonialism, they would
not lightly bandy such words about as "the
encourag-ement of extremist tendencies", nor
lightly take up the unenviable role of shielding
and openly supporting the aggressive tendencies
and actions of the Netherlands Government.

Bien plus, les memes demandes ant ete formulees par les dix~neuf pOlyS d'Asie representes
la Conference de New-Delhi. Est-ce dire que
taus ces pays encouragent des "tendances extremistes", pour reprendre I'expressioll du representant de la Belgique? Non, celo signifie qu'ils
demandent au Conseil de securite d'agir conformement aux principes enonces dans la Charte des
Nations Unies et de prendre des mesures rapides
et efficaces en vue de maintenir la paix inlemal'agression et de
tionale, de couper court
garantir les droits et les interets h~gitimes u'un
pays devenu victime d'une agression. Si le representant de la Belgique et ceux qui partagent ses
vues s'inspiraient des principes de la Charte, au
lieu de se laisser guider par d'etroits interets colonialistes, ils' se garderaient bien d'employer a la
legere des mots tels que "l'encouragement des
tendances extremistes" et n'assumeraient pa.'1 ce
role peu enviable qui est de couvrir et d'encouragerouvertement les velleites et les agissements
agressifs du Gouvemement neerlandais.
Te voudrais encore attirer I'attention uu Conseit
de'securite sur un autre fait que I'on ne saurait'
passer sous silence.
Le bulletin public par le Departement de l'infor~
mation du Secretariat de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies contient, dans son numero du
24 janvier, une information selon laqu~lle la
Banque internationa1e pour la reconstrnctlon et
le developpement, qui a son siege Washington
et qui est, aux termes de l'Artic1e 57 de la Charte,
une institution sp&ialisee de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies, a ouvert, en aout 1948, aux
compagnies de navigation neerlan<1aises un credit de 12 millions de dollars pour l'achat de
navires et qu'elle poursuit encore a l'heure actuelle
c:ertaines operations relatives ces credits" D'autre part, le deuxieri1e rapport annuel etabli par
c:eUe Banque pour l'exercice 1946-1947 montre
que, en aout 1947 aussi, la Banquc avait ouvert
<lUX Pays·Bas un credit
long terme de" 195 mil·
lions de dollars. Ce n'est certes pas un hasard
que cette Bangue, qui fonctionne sous le controle
des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, ouvre de genereux
credits aux Pays-Bas precisement au moment ou
ce pays se livre une guerre d'agression contre
la Republique d'Indonesie. 11 en emit ainsi en
1947. lorsque les Pays-Bas ant <;-ttaque. Ill; Rep~­
blique en violant l'Accord de LlOggadJab1 , et 11
en est encore de meme aujourd'hlli. Ne faut-il
pas en condure que cette Banque, qui est une
institution specialisee. se. specialise dans le financement de l'agression? L'Organisation des Nations
Unies et le Conseil de sew rite ne sauraient pas ne
pas prendre note d'nne telle situation.

I should also like to draw the Council's attention to the following fact which should not pass
unnoticed:
A Press release of the United Nations Department of Public Information dated 24 January
states that the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development in vVashingtonwhich, as members of the Councll know is a specialized agency under the terms of Article 57 of
the C11arter-granted a loan to Netherlands shipping companies for the purchase of vessels to the
amount of 12 million dollars and, at the present
time, is continuing its operations in conne.xion
with these credits. The second report of the Bank
for the year 1946-1947 shows that in August
1947 the Bank also granted a long-term loan to
the Netherlands in the amount of 195 million
dollars. It cannot be regarded as a coincidence
that this Bank, the activities of which are contro1\ed by the United States of America, is ex.tending generous credits to the Netherlands at the
very time when that country is waging an aggressive war against the Indonesian Republic. That
was the simation in 1947 when, in violation of
the Linggadjati Agreementl, the Netherlands at~
tacked the Republic, and that is the situation at
the present time, Does it not follow that this
Bank, which is a specialized agency, is specializing in financing aggression? The United
Nations and the Security Council cannot avoid
taking note of such a circumstance.

The delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, in making clear its position with regard to the joint draft resolution of the four
Powers, has already stated that all Netherlands
troops must be withdrawn immediately, unconditl0l1ally and without any reservations or conditions, from the territory of the Republic. Ftlt1

S~e

Th" Politital Events in the Republic of Indo-

"esia, Nethulands Inf,ormation Bureau, New YOl"k,
pltge 34.

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

En exposant ses vttes sur le pro jet de resolution
des Quatre, la delegation de l'Union sov~etique
a deja declare que tOlltes les troupes neerlan~
daises doivent etre retirees du territoire de la
Republique, immediatement, sans allcune condition et sans aucune exception. D'autre 'Part, la
delegation de l'URSS a indique que, si les trOll'Voir The Political BvwJs ill Ihe .Ref>!tblic of Indo~
nesia, ouvrage pooIie riar le Bureau d'information del
Pays-Bas, New-York, page 34.

6
thermore, the delegation of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics has pointed out that without
the withdrawal of Netherlands troops and the
restoration of the Republic's former status, the
adoption by the Council of the proposed draft
joint resoll1tion would amonnt to open approval
of the Netherlands aggression against the Indonesian Republic.
On that basis, and taking into account the provision contained in the eighth paragraph of the
preamhle to the joint draft resolution that "the
rights, claims and position of the parties may
not be prejudiced by the use of force", the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist RepUblics
presents the following amendment to the joint
draft resolution, namely, to substitute the follow·
iog text for the first operative paragraph of the
draft resolution:
"The Netherlands troops shall be withdrawn
immediately to the positions provided for by the
Renville Truce Agreement [5/649, appendix
Xl]."
This amendment proposed by the delegation of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Repnblics is based
on the concept that the Sectlfity Council, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter, is
the organ representing the United Nations; that,
when a question is examined-in particular the
question of the maintenance of international
peace and security-which necessitates the taking
of a decision, the primary dllty of the Security
COl1neil is to serve the basic interests of all
Members of t11e United Nations, and not the
narrow and selfish interests of individnal countries, separate groups of cOllOtries, or the mem·
bers of the Secllrity Council, whether permanent
or non-pemlanent.

pes neerlandaises n't~taient pas retirees et si le
statu quo de la Republique n'etait pas retabli,
l'adoption par le COllseH du projet de resolution
des Quatre equivalldrait a sanctionner ouverte.
ment l'agression neerlandaise contre la Republique d'Indonesie.

Pour toutes ces raisons et "afin d'eviter que
les parties ne se voient, par recours a la force,
lesees dans leurs droits, revendications et position", comme le recommande le huitieme considerant du preambule de la resolution des Quatre,
la clelegation de l'URSS propose d'amender ee
projet de resolution en rempla<;ant le point pre·
mier du dispositif par le texte suivant:

"Les troupes neerlandaises se replieront imme:diatemer.t sur les positions prevues par l'Accord
de treve du Renville [5/649, anne.~e XI]."
Cet amendement de la delegation de l'Union
soviHique s'inspire de l'idee qu'amc termes de
la Charte de l'Organisation le Conseil de securite
est l'organe representatif des Nations Uni!':s;
lorsqu'il s'agit d'examiner une question, notam·
ment la question du maintien de la paix et cl!': la
securite internationales, et qu'il faut prendre :me
decision a ce sl1jet, le premier devoir du ConseJ1
de securite est de servir les interets fondamentaux
de toutes les Nations Unies et non point les interets etroitement ego'istes d'un pays ou d'un groupe
de pays, DU d'un mcmbre, permanent Oll non, du
Conseil.

Basing itself on this principle, the delegation
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics considers that the adoption of meaSllres for putting
an end to the Netherlands aggression against the
Indonesian Republic, the withdrawal of Nether.
lands o~cupation forces fro~ the territory of the
Republic, and the restoratIOn of the Republic's
former status, are not only in ~c.c:ordance with
the desires and hopes of the Indonesian people
but also with the interests of an Members of the
pnit.ed Nati.ons and with the aim of strengthenmg mternatlOnal peace and security.
In the light of theSe considerations the delegation of. the Union o:f Soviet Socialist Republics
presents Its proposal tor the withdrawal of Neth.
erlands troops in the hope that it will be stip~
P?rtccl by those WJlO, not by word but by deed,
alnl to strengtl1~n mternational peace and to protect the lawfd mterests of the Republic of Indonesia and its people.

En s'inspirant de ce princip!,:, la delegation de
I'URSS esHme que, en adoptant des mcsures en
Vlle de mettre fin a. l'agression lancee par le Gou·
vernement des Pays-Bas Contre la Republique
d'Indonesie, de rappeter les trollpes d'occupation
neerlandaises du territoir!': de la RepuhJique et de
retablir la Republiqlte dans la situation qui etait
la sienne, l'on se conformera non seukment aux
vo::ux et aux espoirs du peuple indonesien, mais
anssi nux inten!ts fondamentaux de toutes les
Nations Unies, et I'on contribuera a maintenir
la paix et la securite internationa1es:
C'est compte ten11 de taus ces facteurs QI:e la
diMgation de I'URSS presente sa proposition tend,mt au retrait de troupes neerlandaises. EUe
espere que cette proposition sera accueillie favorablement par tous ceux qui cherchent vrairnent,
et non seulement en paroles, a consoiider la paix
intemationale et qui entendent proteger les
interets legitimes de la RepubliqL\e d'Indonesie
et de sa population.

.The PHESIOENT: 1£ 1":0 other representative
wlshes to speak, I shall accord the represelltative
of the Netherlands an opportunity to make' his
statement before we proceed to the vote.

Le PRRSiDENT (trad1lit de l'anglais) : Si aucun
autre representant ne desire prendre la parole,
je vais inviter le representant des Pays·Bas a.
faire sa declaration, avant que nous passions au
vote.

Mr. VAN ROIJICN (Netherlands): Last week

M. VAN ROTJEN (Pays-Bas) (tradttit de l'anglais) : La semaine derniere [402eme scattce], j'ai
[lromis de hire connaitre aussit6t que possible
au Conseil de .securite l'attitude du Gouvernement
des Pays-Das a l'egard clu projet de resolution
commun presente au Conseil par les deU:gations

[402nd meeting] I pronllSed to inform tlle
Security COLlOCil as SOon ;]s possible of the attitude of the ~~therlands .Government with regard
to the draft Jomt resolutlOn of China Cuba Norway and the United St<ites of America, which is

7

,

before the Council. Before I do so, I should like
to say a few words in connexion with the resolution adopted at the New Delhi Conference
[5/1222] of which mention has been made here
by several speakers.

de la Chine, de Cuba, de la Norvege et des Etats
Unis d'Amerique. Toutefois, je desirerais d'abord
dire quelques mats au su.iet de la resolution
adoptee a la Conference de New~Delhi [5/1222]
qui a ete mentionnec par plusieurs representants.

Since we were not invited to take part in that
Conference, and its recommendations were addressed not to us but to the Security Council,
I need not go into the details of that resolution.
I should like, however, to make one fundamental
remark

Puisque nous n'avons pas ete invites a prendre
part a cette Conference et que les recommanda·
tions de celle-ci ont ete adressees non pas aux
Pays.Bas, mais au Conseil de securite, ;1 est
inutile que j'examine cette resolution en detail.
Cependant, je voudrais faire quelques observations de grande importance.

The New Ddhi resolution, as was apparent
again from the speech of the representative of
India at the 403rd meeting, is based entirely on
the conception of what he called a resurgence of
Netherlands imperialism. The Indian representative made a plea to the Netherlands to unnerstand
the trends of the time and the rising nationalism
in Asia, and the New Delhi resolution in its preambie invokes the principle of "equal rights and
self-determination of peoples". I want to assure
the representative of India, and all the nations
represented at the New Delhi Conference, with
many of whom we have for centuries had, and
hope to maintain in the future, dose links of
friendship and co~operation, that we are really
not so foolisb and shortsighted as not to see what
is going on in Asia. The contrary :is tr'Je, and we
have proved and shall prove that we do not intend to set back the dock Equal rights and selfdetermination were at the basis of the programme
for the creation of the United States of Indonesia which we have hammered out in close cooperati.on with the Federalists in Indonesia-not
now, al1 of a sudden, under the pressure of the
Security Council, but ever since the Japanese
capitulation.

La resolution de New-Delhi est entierement
fondee sur l'ide~ qu'il existerait, comme 1'a dit
le representant de I'Inde a. la 403eme seance du
Conseil, une renaissance de l'imperialisme neer~
landais. Le representant de l'Inde a demande
avec insistance aux Pays-Bas de prendre conscience des nOl1velles tendances et de la naissance
des nationallsmes en Asie; d'autre part, la resolution de New-Delhi, dans son prearnbule, invoque
le "prineipe de l'egalite de droit des peuples et de
leur droit a disposer d'eux-memes". J'affirme
au representant de I'Inde et toutes les nations
representees i la Conference de New-Delhi et avec certains de ces pays nollS entretenons
depuis des siedes d'excellentes re}ations d:amit~e
et de collaboration, que nous esperons mallltemr
dans l'avenir - que nous ne sommes pas assez
sots et que nous n'avons pas la vue assez courte,
pour ne pas nous rendre compte de ce qui se
passe en Asle. Tout au contraire, nous avons
prOl1Ve, et nollS prouverons encore, que notr,e
intention n'est pas de faire un retour vers le passe.
Cest du principe de l'egalite des peuples.et d.e leur
droit a disposer d'eux-memes que s'msplre le
programme pour la creation des Etats-Unis d'Indonesie. Nous avons elabore ce programme en
etroite cooperation avec les fcderalistes d'Indonesie' nous ne nous sommes pas mis
cette
tache'tont d'un coup, sous la pression du Conseil
de securite, mals nous y travaillons depuis la
capit\1Jat~on du Japan.

p

a

a

r
i

It seems to me that this should be fully apparent to the nations concerned if only they would
not identify Indonesia with the Republic. The
issue at stake is not whether Indonesia will become independent-for that has long ago been
pledged by us-but the question is in what structure and under what leadership tbe new independent State wil1 set out on its course. We are
firmly determined not to leave behind us a State
in which one particular minority in Java domj~
nates all other groups and areas of the archipelago; nor a SWte ruled in fact by a dictatorial
group wbich lnlS, throughout the negotiations,
violently opposed the holding of elections in its
own territory; nor <l State tmder the hegemony
of a clique which had to depend for support on
its army and on the influential com0111nist group
of Tan Malakka.

,,

r\
,

!

I must therefore point ant that, although we
fully understand tbe interest taken in the developments in Indonesia by the Governments repre·
sented at New Delhi, the assumption which was
at the basis of their resolution is fundamentally
incorrect.

n me semble que tout cela devrait apparaitre
tres clairement
tontes les nations interessees,
du mains si elles vouJaient bien ne pas identifier
l'Indonesie a la Republique. La question ne se
pose pas de savoir si J'Indonesie deviendra independante - nOlls avons pris nos. e~ga~elI~ents
ce sujet depl1is longtemps - troiS 11 s.aglt.de
savoir SOtlS queUe forme et sous quelle ~lrectl~n
le notlvel Etat commer.cera de Vlvre dune vIe
independante. Nous sommes bien decides i ne
pas ceder .1a 1?1~ce ~ u~. Eta,t dans leq.uel une
certaine mmonte, qt11 reslde a Java, pUlsse dominer tous les autres groupes et toutes .les autr~s
regions de 1'archipel,
un Et~t SottmlS en fait
a la dictature cl'un groupe qm, pendant toutes
les negociations, s'est touj?urs ~io1emment oppos.e
ce que des elections aler:t .heu sur son t~rn­
to ire, a un Etat tyranmse par u~e clique
contrainte de s'appuyer sur son ar:uee et sur
l'aicle de l'important groupe commumstc de Tan
Malakka,

a

a

a

a

NOlls comprenons fort bien l'intel'l~t ql1e les
Gouvernements representes a la Conferenc: .de
New-Delhi portent aux evene;nent~ d'Inclonesl~;
mais je dois souligner que la resolutJ,on. e.st fonuee
sur une fausse conception de la reahte.

La resolution et la lettre du Premier Ministr~
The resolution, and the telegram of the Prime
Minister of India accompanying it, emphasize the de l'Inde qui l'accompagne reconnaissent pleinefull recognition of the authority of the Security ment l'autorite du Conseil de securite et expriment'
Council and the desire to assist it in the solution ,le desir d'aider le Conseil .i resoudre la question
of the Indonesian problem. I must point out, 'indone.sienne. Or, je dais· dire que cette declahowever, that it is hardly compatible with either ration ne semble guere compatible avec l,'attitude
of these <lims that several of the Governments de plusieurs des Gouvernements represenres a
represented at New Delhi have. on their own New-Delhi qui, de leur propre initiative, ont pris
initiative. taken action to deny to the Netherlands des mesures en vue de refuser au Gouvernement
Government facilities of transit by land, sea and des Pays-Bas des facilites de transit, par terre,
air. It seems undeniable that such action, taken par mer et par air. Qui peut nier que de telles
independently of tlle Security Council against a mesures, prises independamment du Conseil de'
Member of the United Nations, is at variance 'securite, contre \1n Membre de l'Organisation
with the principles and spirit of the Charter.
des Nations Dnies soient en contradiction avec
les principes et avtc l'esprit de la Charte?
Enfin, je dais avouer que la resolution de
Finally, I must confess that the New Delhi
resolution would make more impression on us if New-Delhi ferait plus d'impression sur nOllS si,
it had not, like some members of the Security tout comme le font plusieurs membres du Conseil
Council, given such obvious proof of applying de secur1te, tHe n'appliquait pas d'une manihe
two weights and two measures. The resolution aussi eviden!e deux paids et deux mesures. Lea
bases itself, so it says, upon the Charter of the auteurs de la resolution se fandent, disent-ils, sur
United Nations and upon the allegation that the la CJmrtc de l'Organisation des Nations Dni'es et
Netherlands has committed a breach of the peace partent du principe que les Pays-Bas se sont
and an act of aggression, and it calls for immedi- rendus coupables d'une rupture de la paix et
ate and complete freedom for the Republican : d'une agression; iIs demandent enlin que leur
leaders. The Conference was held in Hyderabad entie.re liberte soit immediatement rendue aux
House. Now I happen to have received a letter, dirigeants republicains. La Conference s'cst tenue
which I have before me, addressed to me by the a Hyderabad Honse. n se trouve que j'ai actuelhead of the Hyderabad delegation to the United lement devant moi une lettre qui m'a ete adressee
Nations, dated Karachi 18 January 1949, from par le chef de la delegation d'Haiderabad aux
which I may read the following sentences:
Nations Onies en date du 18 janvier 1949; j'cxtrais de cette lettre les phrases suivantes:
"Your Excellency rightly pointed O\1t that the
"Votre ExceIlence a tres justement fait remarNizam was virnmlly a prisoner in the hands of quer que le Nizam est, en fait, prisonnier du
the Indian Military Government and had no will Gouvernement militaire indien et n'est plus maitre .
of his own.
de ses actes.
"Je peux ajouter, ;,. titre d'infonnation, que le
"I may add for YOUf Excellency's information
that the Indian Military Government in Hyder- Premier Ministre, M. Laik Ali, et deux autres
abad has kept the Prime Minister, Mr. Laik Ali, membres du Cabinet sont egalement emprisonnes
.and the other Ministers of his Cabinet, under depuis l'entree des troupes indiennes a Ha'idcdetention since the entry of Indian troops into ! rabad, le 19 decembre 1948. La duree de lellr
Hyderabad on 19 December 1948. The period of emprisonnement a recemment ete prolongee de
theif detention has recently been extended by an- }trois mois. Le Gouvernement de l'Inde a declare
other three months. The Government of India :que l'invasion d'Haiderabad etait une "operation
termed the invasion of Hyderabad as a 'police de police" destinee a retablir l'orclre et la legalite,
a'ction' to restore law and order in Hyderabad a Haiderabad; il a proc1ame depuis que les condi- .
and have been trumpeting that the conditions tions etaient redevenues presque nOrmates dans·
there. had retmned almost to nonna!. The ques- le pays. La question se pose done de savoir
tion theref ore arises as to how they can reconcile comment le Gocvernement de l'Inde, s'il veut
this claim about normalcy of law and order con- etre logique avec Iui-meme, peut, d'une part
ditions in H vderabad and their demand for the affirmer que les conditions sont redevenues norimmediate release of certain Ministers of the males a Haiderabad et exiger la mise en liberte
Indonesian Republic with the continued detention immediate de certains membres de la Republique
0'£ the Hyderabad Ministers whose only fault had d'.Indonesie et, d'autre part, emprisonner les
been that they were opposed to Indian aggression Ministres d'Haiderabad dont la seule faute a ete
and had take'n steps to defend their country de s'opposer a l'agression de l'Inde et de prendre
against such aggression.
des mesures pour defendre lel1T pays contre une
telle agression.
.-"The Indian authorities have not only confl]\'ed at the wholesale massacre of the Muslim
papnbtion in Hyderabac1 and looting of their
property, but they have also been meting out
most inhuman treatment to the volunteers who
had been placed under the control of the Hydcrabad Army Commander and who were taken
prisoner. Otber reports have trickled out show~
ing that thousands of people arc being moved
out of Hyderabad in most pitiable conditions. All
these facts have been reported by me to the
Security Council Imt I am not aware of the action
which they have taken on these reports,

"Les autorites de I'lnde 11'oOt pas seulement
tolere 11n massacre general des musulmans d'Haiderabad et le pillage de leurs biens; clles ant, en
outre, cruellement traite les volontaires plaCES
sous le controle du commandant de I'armee d'Haidera1:arl faits prisonniers pe.ndant les operations.
D'autr~s rcnseignements nous sont parvenus,
montrant que des milliers de gens ont He expulsES
d'Halderabad dans des conditions lamentables.
TOllS ces faits, je les ai signales au Conseil de
securite, mais, pour autant que je sache, il n'a
pas ete pris de mesures comme suite a mes
communications.

9
"The Indian representative had asserted at the
Security Council [360th] meeting held on 28
September 1948 that there was liO censorship in
Hyderabad. In fact, not only does a strict censorship prevails but almost the entire local Press
has been gagg"ed, as Your Excellency will see
from tlle enclosed reports which have emanated
from Indian sources."
Should the Council allow itsel f to be influenced by a resolution of a conference which
ignores that the sponsoring Power is acting in
this way?
After making these preliminary remarks, I
shall now explain to the Security Council the
attitude of my Government with regard to the
draft joint resolution. I should like, at the outset,
to express the hope that my words may help to
prevent the Coundl from taking a most unfor·
tunate decision.
My Government has studied this draft with all
the attention and good will to which a draft resolution emanating from four prominent and highly
respected Members of the United Nations is
entitled. My Government has also taken cognizance of the speeches made by the four sponsors
in the Security Council and has not failed to
note with appreciation the sincere wish to find
a workable solution of the Indonesian question
which has prompted the sponsors. It is precisely
because it is aware o'f that sincere desire, that my
Government feels obliged to point out to the
Security Council that the adoption of this reso·
lution would have just the opposite effect to
what the sponsors intend; in fact, it would lead
to most harmful results for Indonesia, for the
Netherlands and for the United Nations.
I am sorry to have to say this, but it seeInS
better that I should make this clear from the
beginning in order that the' Security Council
should he able to act in full knowledge of the
facts and in full re.alization of the conseque.nces
of its decision.
My country must raise fundamental objections
to certain elements in this resolution, and I shall
try to clarify these objections, in so far as they
are not already sufficiently apparent from a
simple reading of the document.
In the first place, it must be clear to anyone
who ponders on what this draft res01ution really
means, that it contains a drastic and deep interference in the domestic affairs of a State, such as
no Member of the United Nations ever accepted
when signing the United Nations Charter. Moreover, in none of the cases before the Security
Council in which there was, contrary to the case
of the Indonesian question, a threat to international peace and security and in which there
existed no doubt as to the Council's competence,
has the Council ever adopted a resolution constituting such an incisive interference in the internal
affairs of a State. I need mention only a few
examples of tbis interference.

In paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, the
Council recommends negotiations,on the basis of
specifically-mentioned dates, for the establishment of a federal interim Government, for the

"Le representant de l'Inde a affirme au Conseil
de securite, lors de la 360eme sean::e tenue le
28 septembre 1948, qu'il n'y avait pas de censure
a Halderabad. En fait, une censure tres stricte
a ett instauree dans le pays et, de plus, toute la
presse locale a ete biiillonnee, COllIDe Votre
Excellence pourra s'en rendre compte d'apres les
rapports ci-joints, emanant de source indienne,"
Le Conseil se laissera~t-il influencer par une
resolution emanant d'une conference qui ne tient
pas compte du fait que la Puissance invitante
se livre a de te15 agissements?
Apres ces remarques preJiminaires, je vais
maintenant exposer au Conseil de securite la
position de man Gouyemement a l'egard du pro.,'
j et de resolution cOllrilUn. Je voud:ais tout
d'abord exprimer I'espoir que ma db::laration
pourra cQntribuer a detourner le Conseil d'une
decision qui serait tres regrettable.
Mon Gouvernernent a etndie le projet de reso·
lut;on avec toute I'attention et la bonne yolonte
que meritait un projet de resolution presen!e par
quatre Membres ~minents et respectes de l'Orga.,
nisation des Nations Vnies. Mon Gouvemement
a eU' ega1ement coIUlaissance des discours pro·
nonces par les quatre aateUrs du pro jet au Cons~il
de securite et a constate avec beaucoup de satIsfaction que ceux-ci etaient guides par le desir
sincere de trouver une solution .i la <J.l1estion indoR
nesienne. C'est en raison de ce destr meme que
mon Gouvernement estime qu'il doh signaler au
Conseil de securite que l'adoption de cette reso",:
lution aurait un ellet tout a fait COl1traire a. l'in·
tention des auteurs du projet: les plus graves
consequences en resulteraient aussi bien pour
l'Indonesie que pour les Pays-Bas et j'Organi R
sation des Nations Unies.
le m'excuse de devoir parIer aimi, mais it est
preferable que j'eclaircisse ce point des le debut
et que, avant d'agir, le Conseil de securite soit
en possession de tous les faits et se rende bien
compte des consequences qu'entrainerait une
telle decision,
Man pays se voit contraint de so?lever. dell
objections fondamentales contre certames d\spo.
sitions de ce projet de resolution; je vais essayer
de preciser la nature de ces objections, pour autant
que la lecture de ce texte ne suffit pas a faire
comprendre notre position.
En premier lieu, a quiconque 5.'1isit le veritable
sens de cc projet de resolution, it apparait c1ai~
rement que c'est la une intervention tres nette
et t[(::s grave clans les affaires interieures cl'un
Etat, intervention qu'aucun Membre de l'Organisation ne s'est jamais engage a accepter en
signant la Charte ues Nations Unies. De plus,
dans 1es autres cas qui ant ete jusqu'ici soumis au
Conseil _ cas differents de cehti de l'Indonesic
en ce sens qu'ils constituaient tme menaCe contre
la paix et la secul'ite internationales, et que la
competence du Conseil en la matiere ne faisait
aucun doutc - le Conseil n'a jamais adopte de
resolution entrainant une intervention aussi decisive dans les affaires interieures d'un Etat. Quant
all caractere de cette intervention, il me sumt de
specificr quelques points.
Le paragraphe 3 du dispositif du projet de
resolution, contient des recommandations prevoyant des negociations en vue de constituer un
gouvernement federal provisoire, des elections et

10
le transfert de la 50uverainete a Cl" gouvernement;
des dates sont specifH~es pour ehaeune de ces
operations. Ces dates coincident avec cenes qui
ant ete fixees par le Gouvernement neerlanc1ais
dans son programme, a I'exception de la date,
du transfert definiti f de la souverainete; celle-ci
est indiquee avec plus de precision dans le projet
de resolution, mais elk Ill" doit pas forcement etre
plus proche que celle qui est prevue dans le programme de man Gouvernement. Par consequent,
ces indications de dates ne susciteraient pas a
elles seules d'objections insllrmontables de notre
part; je dais cependant sign"ler que, dans notre
programme, ces dates se presentent plus nettement
comme un objectif a atteindre. Par contre, I'alinea c) du paragraphe 3 du dispositif prevoit que
"si aucun accord n'intervient entre les parties,
un mois au moins a,'ant" ees "dates", la Commission des Nations Unles "adressera immediatemenf'
des recommandations "all Conseil de securite ...
en vue de resoudre les difficultes". C'est done au
Conseil de seeurite qu'il appartiendrait en dernier
ressort de prendre des decisions dans ce dornaine.
Cela se trouve confirme par le discollrs du representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique qui a declare;
"Nous n'avons pas eherche a lui donner (it la
Commission) des pouvoirs que le Conseil ne peut
pas deleguer. En derniere analyse, le Ccnseil
demeure seul responsable" [402eme seance'].
Now, I urge every member of the Security
J'invite done chacun des membres du Conseil
Council to ask himself this (juestion: Is there a de securite a se poser eette question: le Conseil
more drastic and incisive interference possible in peut~il intenrenir d'une manierc plus nette et plus
the internal affairs of a State than for the Council radicale dans les affaires interieures d'un Etat
to take in hand the decisions about the setting up qu'en s'arrogeant le droit de decision relativement
of a specific government, and about the transfer a la constitution d'un gouvernement determine.
of sovereignty over seventy-five million people? et a un transfert de souverainete (jl1i interesse
Has the Council ever gone to that length with soixante-quinze millions d'individus? Le Conseil
regfird to any other State? Does any member est-il jamais alle aussi loin dans le cas d'un autre
senollsly contend that this remains within the Etat? y a-t~i1 un membre dtl Conseil qui puisse
limits of the obligations which the Governments vraiment pretendre que les Gouvernernents, en
accepted when signing the Charter at San signant la Cbarte a San-Francisco, ont accepte
Francisco?
de se soumettre a de tenes obligations?
Let me mention another paragraph, which cuts
Permettez-moi de cittr un autre paragraphe qui
as deeply into our internal affairs.
constitue une autre intervention non mains nette
dans nos affaires interieures.
'
According to sub~paragraph 4 (I) of the draft, , Aux tennes de I'alinea 4 f) du dispasitif du
the United Nations Commission for Indonesia projet de resolution, la Commission des Nations
would have the pO\\'er to "recommend the extent Unies pour l'Indoncsie aurait le pouvoir "d'indito wJlich . , . areas" formerly "controlled by the quer par voie de recommandation dans queUe
Republic
. should be . . . returned to the mesure . . . les region.s autrefois contrcl1ees par
administration of the Government of the Re- la Republique" devront "etre a nouveau confiees
public of Indonesia". The Commission would
a l'administration du Gouvetnemcnt de la Repufurthermore, have the power to "recommend blique indoIH~sienne". La Commission aurait en
which, if any, Netherlands fOI'ces shaH be re~ outre le pouvoir "d'indiquer, le cas ecl1eant, par
tained temporarily in any area". The implication voie de recommandation, queUes forces neerlanagain is that the Security Council would take the daises devront 61re temporairemcnt maintenues
ultimate decision, Here the Netherlands is asked dans une region donnee". Cela signifie une fois
to hand over to the United Nations the ultimate de p:us que c'est all Con,ei1 de securite qu'il
right to decide abont the transfer of enormous, appartiendrait de decider en demier ressort. Ainsi,
areas to the Government of the Republic of Indo- 011 demande allx Pays-Bas de se dessaisir, en fa~
nesia, and to decide about the withdrawal or veur de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, <lu
retention of Netherlands troops.
droit de 'decider de la remise de vastes regions
au Gouvernement de la Republique d'Indonesie
et du retrait ou du maintien des troupes neerlandaises.
Thus, the resolution ill (act does nothing less
La resolution ',la done jusqu'a exiger de nous
than ask us to renOUllce two of the most funda- que nous renoncions a dt"lIx des droits fondamental of the most vital rights which any State mentaux et essentiels qui sallt reeonnus a to'us les
possesses. Really, I am not exaggerating ;"'hen I Etats. Vraiment je n'exagere pas lorsque je dis
say that not only the present Netherlands Gov- que I'on ne peut pas demander au Gouvernell1ent
ernment, but no responsible Government of any neerlandais ni d'une maniae generale, an gOllholding of elections, and for the transfer of
sovereignty over Indonesia. These dates coincide
with those of the timetable of the Netherlands
Government, with the exception of the one for
the ultimate trnnsfer of sovereignty, which is
more speclnc though not necessarily earlier than
in our timetable. The mention of these dates
would, therefore, in itself not ,give rise to any
insmnlountable objection on Ollr part, although I
must point out that the dates in our timetable
had more the character of target dates. But sub~
paragraph (c) of paragraph 3 provides that, "if
no agreement is reached one month prior to"
those "dates", the United Nations Commission
"shall immediately" make recommendations "to
the Security Council . for a solution of the
difficulties". The implication is that the Security
Council will, if necessary, take the ultimate deci~
sion on those pDints. This implication is confirmed by the speech of the representative of the
United States of America who said, "We have
not, ' . soug"ht to give it (the Commission) any
power which the Council cannot delegate. In
final analysis, the responsibility rests with the
Council" [4021ld 1Il££ting].

11
country in the world, shol1ld be required to surrender such essential rights of sovereignty. The
far~reaching powers which the Netherlands is requested by this draft resolution to surrender are
still further extended by one of the amendments
proposed by the sponsors of the resolution in
docl1ment S/1230. That amendment would
autllorize the Commissioll to make recommenda_
tions "for such economic measures as are required for the proper fUllctioning of the adminis·
trntion".

vernernent souverain de n'imyorte quel pays du
monde, d'abandonner des droits aussi essentiels
que ceux-ci, Ce projet de resolution qui demande
.:lUX Pays-Bas de renoncer a des potlvoirs aussi
importants se trouve encore aggnve par l'un
des amendements proposes [Sj1230J par les
auteurs du projet de resolution. Cet arnendement
autoriserait en dIet la Commission a inc:1ure dans
ses recommandations "des dispositions visant a
assurer, sur le plan economique 1es mesures reguises pour le bon fonctionnement de l'administration".

All this goes to show that the Netherlands is
required by this resolution to hand over certain
vital rights to the United Nations Commission or
to the Security Counci1. Even if the competence
of the Security Council to deal with the Indonesian question, which we deny, were fully conceded by us and by all others, even then the
Council would be barred by the Charter from interfering in this way in our domestic affairs.
Article 2, paragraph 7 of the Charter says:
"Nothing contained in the present Charter shall
authorize the United Nations to intervene in
matters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any State or shall require the
Members to submit such matters to settlement
under the present Charter ...".

Tout ceta montre bien que I'on demande aux
Pays-Bas d'abandormer certains droits essentie1s
en favel1r de la Commission des Nations Unies
ou du Conseil de securite. Meme si.la competence
du Consei] .de securite en la matiere etait pleinement reconnue par notts - ee qui n'est pas le cas
- et par tous, la Charte interdirait au Conseil
d'intervenir de cette maniere dans nos affaires
interieures_ En effet. le paragraphe 7 de I'Artide 2 de la Charte declare:
"Aucune des dispositions de 1a presente Charte
n'autorise les Nations Unies a intervenir dans
des affaires qui reIevent essentiellement de la
competence nationale d'un Etat ni n'oblige les
Membres soumettre des ..ffaires de ce genre
Ilne procedure de reglement aux tennes de la
presente Charte .•.".
Si le projet de resolution etait adopte, ceUe
disposition, qui est 1'une des pier res angulaires
de l'Orga.nisation des Nations Unies, perdrait
desormais toute valeur.
Afin d'ecarter un tel danger, qui menace l'avenir meme de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
et de ses Membres, puis-je une fois de plus, inviter
le Conseil, de la part de mon Gouvernernent, a
renvoyel' a la Cour internationale de Justice la
question de savoir SI le Conseil est competent en
la matiere?
Cette ingerence sans precedent dans nos affaires
interieures, telle qu'elle est prevue dans le projet
de resolution, est une manifestation de ce manqne
de confiance dans les intentions du Gouvernement
des Pays-Bas qui caratterise l'ensemble du pl'Ojet
de resolution; ce m;],uque de confiance offcnse
mon pays, comme il offenserait toute nation cons·
ciente de sa dignite. Le representant de la Norvege a explique [398.nne seance] que c'etait
la mefiance regnant entre les parties et non pas
au sein du Conseil de securite, qui obligeait le
Conseil a exel'cer sa tntelle. Un.e telle mefiance
n'existait-elle done pas dans les autres cas deja
soumis au Conseil de sectlrite, par exemple dans
l'affaire de Palestine?
A propos de mefiance, les membres du Conseil
de securite auront remarque que M. Palar dans le
discours qu'il a prononce a la 404eme seance du
Consei1 a invoque a plusiew-s reprises la "mau·
vaise foi" et la "dl1p1icite" du Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas et les a opposees i la loyatlte avec
1aque11e le Gouverncment de la Republique s'est
scrupuleusement conforme i la lettre et a I'esprit
de ses obligations <LUX tcrmes de l'actord de treve
{Sj649, anne;v(! XI] et des principes du Renvitle

If this resolution is adopted, this provision,
which is one of the cornerstones of the United
Nations Charter, will from now on be a dead
letter.
In order to prevent such a danger to the future
of the United Nations and its Members, may I
once again, on behalf of my Government, urge
the Council to submit to the International Court
of Justice the question of whether the Council
is competent to deal with the Indonesian ques·
tion.
The 11llprecedented interference in our internal
affairs contained in the draft resolution is characteristic of the spirit of distrust in the intentions
of the Netherlands Government which pervades
this draft, and which htlrts my nation, as it would
any self-respecting- nation. The representative of
Norway has explained [398th meeting] that it
was not distrust on the part of the Council, but
between the parties. which necessitated this
tutelage. Did such distrust not exist, then, in
other cases before the Security Council, such as,
for in;:;tance, the Palestine case?

Speaking of distrust, members of the Council
will have noticed that Mr. Palar, in his speech
at the 404th meeting, repeatedly talked about the
"bad faith" and "double-crossing" of the Netherlands Government, in vivid contrast to the scrupU10llS way in which the Republican Government
has lived up to the letter and the spirit of its
obligations under the truce agreement [S/649,
Appendix X I) and the Renville principles,
[S/649, Appendices XIII and VIII]_

a

a

[S/649, annexes XIII et VIII].

Everybody who has been dosely connected
with the endless negotiations which took [lIace
after the si.gning of the truce agreement knows
how often the words of the Republican repre-

Tous cenx qui ont suivi de prcs Ies negociations
interminables qui ont eu lieu apl-es la signature
de l'Accord de treve s;],vent comlJien souvent les
paroles dll representant de la Republique etaicnt

sentative were at variance with the deeds of the
Republican Government. Let me mention one
example. At the 316th meeting of the Security
Council of 10 Jt1nc 1948, 1fr. Palar mid: "The
aepublic of Indonesia has withdrawn 35,000
troops in the belief that what it lost in tenns of
bullets it would undoubtedly win back in terms
of ballots. .. It has done this for the purpose
of implt:rm:nting article 9 of 6e truce agreement, ..".
I feel sure that Mc PaIar made bese statements in good faith. But the Republican Minister
of Defence, who was also a: the same time Prime
Minister of the Republic, had already, at the end
of May 1948, in Decree No. 60/J.A.192/48,
section IV, given new instructions with regard
to Republican activities in tb.e Netherlandscontrolle.r1 territories, in which it 'was said that
previous instructions must be amended ". . . in
such a way that disturbances must be caused in
a very subtle manner among all classes of the
population with the assistance of our brothers,
who have alre:uiy infiltrated into various organizations. Decide that from 1 June 1948 an
infiltration of 500 men per unit can take place
and that this shalt be repeated until u:timately at
least 10,000 men of the fighting forces per unit
:<rein occ:1pied territory.. ..

What value was the Netherlands Government
to attach to these n:ellifluous assurances of the
re.present..tive of the Republic on 10 June 1948
in the Security Council if the Republican Minister
of Defence, two weeks before that date, had
issued instructions,uch as those I have just
quoted? How often have we not observed that
what the Republican Goverruner,t was doing with
its left hand in Indonesia was just the opposite
of what it was doing with its right hand at Lake
Success? I should have thought that the representative of the Repe.blic of Indonesia would have
been a little more careful with his accusations of
bad faith and double-crossing; accusations which,
I may add, are obviously without any foundation.

en desaccord avec les actes de son Gouvernemcnt.
Permettez-moi de citer un exemple. A la -316eme
seance de. Conseil de secnrite (10 ;uin 1948),
M. Pnlar a dit: "La RepubIique d'Indonesie a
procede au retrait de 35.000 hommcs de troupes,
estimant t:ue ce qu'elle peldait par les armes, elle
le regagnerait sans nul doute par Ies bullct:ns de
vote ... EUe a fait eeci en vue de donner effet
a l'article 9 de \':lcCMd ne treve ...".
Je suis celtain que M. Palar a fait ces declarations en toute bonne foL M.. is le Ministre de
la cHensc natl,male de la Republique gu: etait
en r:J.eme temps President du Conseil, avait, anterieuremer.t a la fin du mois de mai 1948, dans le
decret No 60/J.A./92/48, section IV, dome de
nouvelles instructions au sujet de l'activite des
republicains dans Ies territoires occupes par les
Pays~Bas; il etait dit que les instructions precedentes devai.en: etre modifiees ". . . de fal;on
a causer des troubles d'une maniere tres voiJee
parmi toutes les classes de la population, avec
I'aide de :l.OS freres qui ont deja penetre d..ns les
differentes organisatlOns. 11 est decide que, a
partir du ler juin 1948, il peut y avail" tine
infiltration de 500 hommes par secteur et que
cette operation devra se repeter jusqu'a cc que,
fin::tlement, il.;; .ait dans les territoires O::CUpe5
10.000 hommes de!' tro~pes combattantes par
secteur ...".
Quelle va1eur le GOuvernement des Pays-Bas
pot:vait-il attacher aux assurances mtelleuses donnees par le Reprc5Cntant de la Republique le
10 juin 1948 au Conseil de securite, alors que le
1Iinistre de la defense nationale de la Republique,
deux semaines avant cette date, ava~t donne des
ins:ructions du genre de celles gue je viens de
citer? Comllien de fOls n'avons-nous pas signale
que le Gouvernement de la Republic;ue fait avec
sa main gauche en Indonesie, le eontraire de re
qu'jJ fait avec sa main croite
Lake Success?
J'aurais cru que le representant de la RepubHgue
d'lndonesie ferait preuve d'un peu plus de reflexion avant de porter ses accusations de mauvaise foi et de duplicite, .<..ccusations qui, je peux
le dire, n'ont evidemment aucun fondement.

a

Still, I UO llut think that the condu<:t of public
affairs and a just settlement of the Indonesian
problem can be helped by recriminations and insinuations about the good faith of the other party.
In fact, r do not believe that any good can come
from suggestions or proposab--or from reiSolutions of the Security Council, for that matterbased upon distrust and suspicion.

J'estimc toutefois que ni 1es plaintes ni les
insinuations sur la bonne foi de l'autre partie ne
peuvent aider
la conduite des affairel' internationales et a la solution equitable du prob1eme
ind.onesien, En fait, je crois que I'on ne peut
attt:ndre aucun rCSllltat favorable de suggestions
ou de propositions, ni, en l'occurre:lce, de resolutions du Conseil de securite, £ondees sur la
mellance et la suspicion.

There is another fundamental objection daf;ely
connected with that of the transfer to the
Security Council of essential rights, Sub-para·
graph 4 (a) of the draft resolution provides that
in the future the United Nations Commission for
Indonesia should take its decisions by a majority
vote. Since there is on the Commission one memo
ber chosen by the Netherlands and one member
chosen by the Republic of Indonesia, the decisive
vote would as a rule lie with the th:rd member,
the United States of An1£:rLca. This is not changed
by the provision that minority opinions can be
brought to the knowledge of the Security Council.
Thus, the real effect of the resolution would be
that the Netherlands would,. dUring the interim
period, hand l.iver fundamental Tights, constitut-

n e'l{i~te une autre objection fondamentale et
qui est etroitement liee a celle uu transfert des
droits essentie1s au Conseil de se:urite, L'alinea 4 a) du dispositif du projet de resolution
prevoit que desormais les decisions de la Commission des Nations Hnies pour l'lndonesie seront
prises a la majorite des voix. Comme la Commission comprend un membre choisi par les PaysBas et un membre choisi par la Republique d'Indone.3ie, c'est le trois:eme membre, les Etats-Unis
d'Amcrique qui, en general, aura voix decisiye.
La stipulation que le point de vue de Ja minode
peut etre pone a la con:1aissance cu Conseil de
securite n'y change rien. Ainsi, cette resolutiort
aurait pour effet veritable que les Pays-Bas tr"ansfereraient aux Etals-Unis d'Amerique, ~1.lI COtlrs

a

13
ing part of its sovereignty over Indonesia, to the
United States of America. Such a concession, I
submit, cannot be asked' from any State.

de la periode de transition, des droits fondamentaux qui hnt partie cie sa souverainete sur l'Indo~
nesie. L'on ne peut demander a aucun Etat, me
semble-t-i1, pareille concession.
This has nothing to do with our faith in the
Cela n'a rien a voir avec notre confiance en les
United States of America. We know that the Etats-Unis d'Amerique. NouE savons que 1es
ultimate aims of the United States are the same fins dernieres des Etats~Unis sont les memes que
as ot1rs-that is, the speedy creation of a free les notres, c'est-a-clire la prompte creation d'Etats~
and independent United States of Indonesia- Unis libres et ir.dependants d'Indonesie et nous
and we have full appreciation for the perseverance rendons p1einement hommage a la perseverance
with which the representatives of the United avec laquelle les representants des Etats-Unis
,States of America on the Committee of Good d'Amerique a la Commission de bons offices se
Offices have tried to further this aim and would sont efforces de poursuime ce but et continueront
no doubt continue trying to further it in the sans nul doute de le faire a l'avenir. Mais, jusqu',i
future. But the mere fact that one is convinced present, j.amais le simple fait d'etre convaincu
of the good intentions of a third party has up to de bonnes intentions cl'une troisieme partie n'a
now never been considered Jl. sufficient reason to paru une raison suffisante pour demander a un
ask any State to hand over such far-reaching Etat d'operer un transfert 'de pouvoirs aussi
powers as this draft resolution proposes.
etendu que ce1ui qui est prevu dans le projet de
resolution.
The Dutch have been in Indonesia since 1595
Les "Hollandais sont en Indonesie depuis 1595
and we cannot see any reason why, at the last et nous ne voyons pas pourquoi, a la derniere
minute before giving that area its complete inde~ minute, alors que nous nous appretons a donner
pendence, we should in fact hand over part of a ce pays une independance entiere, i1 nous fauour sovereignty to some foreign State or inter~ drait, en fait, transferer une partie de notre
souverainete a un Etat etranger ou a un organisme
national.agency.
internationaL
Outre le fait qu'il constitue une ingerence sans
In addition to its unprecedented interference
in our international affairs, the proposed resolu- precedent dans nos affaires interieures, ce projet
tion, if the endeavour were made to put it into' de resolution, si on s'effon;ait de le mettre a
effect, would prove to be comple!ely unrealistic execution, se reveLernit chimecique et absolumcnt
.and tlllpracticab1e in view of the existing circum- inapplicable, etant donne les conditions existantes.
stances. Thus, the resolution provides that the Ainsi. la resolution prevoit que I'on conliera a
former Government of the Republic of Indonesia l'ancien Gouvernement de la Ripublique d'Indo·shaH be entrusted with "appropriate functions ... nesie le soin cl'exercer "les charges qui lui incominduding the administration of the city" or the bent. notamment l'administration de la ville" ou
area "of ]ogjakarta", with the ultimate objective de la region "de Djokjakarta" avec pour fin
that other disputed areas should be progressively ultime de confier progressivement a nouveau a.
returned to its administration. The draft also, son administration les autres regions en litige. Le
provides tlmt the United Nations Commission projet de resolution ,prevoit egalement que la
should "recommend which, if any, Netherlands Commission des Nations Unies "indiquera, le
forces shall be retained temporarily in any area cas echeant, par 'Yoie de reco~lInandation •. queUes
in order to assist in the maintenance of law and forces neerlandaises devront etre temporalrement
maintenues dans une region donnee en vue de
order".
contribuer au maintiw de l'ordre public".
How do the sponsors of this resolution propose
that this Republican administration should maintain law and order? Apparently, one possibility
·which they had in mind was th<lt in some areas
it WQllid be able to do so by making use of Neth~
erlands forces. This possibility was expressly
mentioned by the, representative of Norway
.[39StJ~ meeting]. I need scarcely elaborate upon
.the anomalous situation which would be created
.if at the present time law: and order were to be
maintained by Netherlands troops under a R~~
publican administration. The subsequent pOSS1~
.bility envisaged in the resolution is that NetheJ"lands troops would withdraw. The Republican
a'dministration would then, for the maintenance
'of law and order, have to reconstitute part of
its army. Even if that were possible, it would
simply restore the situation which existed before
'.18 December and which was the very cause of
the inability of the Netherlands and the Republic
to come to' an agreement, namely, that of a Republican administration incapable of imposing its
will upon the unruly elements of its armed forces.
It would revive in full force the danger of acts
of terror and violence, hacked by the inflammatory propaganda from Jogjakarta, which, in the

Comment les auteurs de la resolution envisaque cette administ;ation republicaine
puisse maintenir l'ordre. pub,hc? L'une d~~ s?l~~
tions qu'ils avaient envlsagees, semble.-t~ll, e~alt
que, dans certaines region~ cette ,!-dmlnlstratlO,n
pourrait utiliser 1es forces neerlan.d'l.lses. Le r.epre:
sentant de la Norvege a exp~essement, ~e~tlO~ne
celte eventualite [398~me seallce]. J al a peme
besoin de montrer la situation anormale que I'on
creerait si, a present, I'ordr~ public. devait e!re
maintenu par les troupe~ ~eerl~nda,~es ~la~ees
sous les ordres d'une admmlstratlOn fepub~came.
L'autre eventualite qu'e~visage ~a resolution e~t
le retrait des troupes neerlandalses. Il f.audralt
alors, pour le ma~ntie~ d.e l'ordre p~bhc, que
I'administration ;epubl}came. rec~nE~ltue .une
partie de son armee. Meme sl,cela etmt pos~lb1e,
cc serait retablir purement et sl11!plement In sll1;1l1tion qui existait avant le ,.18 dec.e,??~e et qUI a
.( la cause meme de llmposslblhte pour les
~~ys~Bas et la Republique d'a~o~ltir ~ un ~ccor~,
a. savoir l'existence d'une admmlst;atlOn l·~publi~
, 'n" incapable d'imposer sa volonte aux elements
al ...
, .. C'
indisciplines
de ses forces armees
,e,a f eral't
surgir a nouveau dans toute son aCUltel: danger
d'actes de terreur et de violence appuyes par la

gent~i1s

14
last wee;C before our military action, resulted in
the murder of 67 Indonesian officials, not count~
ing the Indonesi"n civilians murdered i.lUll kid~
napped.

It is true that the draft resolution stipulates,
in sUb-paragraph 4 (f), t':Jat the return of the
Republkan administraticn and the withdrawal of
the Dutch troops would have to be con~
sistent with reasonable requirements of public
security and the protect!o~ of life and pr?p~rty
and be under the supervIsIon of the CommisSion.
BlIt, however satisfaLtory this mzy soum1 in
theory, if one tries to imagine :o'hat it would
mean in practice, it must be OhVlOllS that these
splendid sentences would in actual fact lead to
complete chaos. ~either the Security Council nor
its Commission :n Indonesia has at its disposal
the means to guarantee that these conditions are
actually observed. This :neans that they, like
the Refublican administration. wOllk have to rely
either on Netherlands forces or on $11ch forces
as the Repi.lblic c011ld recreate.
In tr:e first case we should get t~.e anomalous
situatio:1 that the United Nations would take certain decisions, but that the Netherlands forces
would be held responsible for the situation re~
suIting from t11O~e decisions. In tile second case
the United Nations would have to rely on recOl1stitutetl Republican forces, which uder the present cir::umstances would more tha:l ever mean
terror, retaliation and revenge, There is, as far
as I can see, no other alternative t:nless any of
the sponsors of the resolution shou~d themselves
be willing to prcvide troops to maintain law and
order.
[n any of the~e situations which would inevi~
tably result from an executiun uf the draft reso~
lutioll, there would be separation of authority on
the Ol:e hand and responsibility on the other,
which is contrary to the fundamentals of any
sound administration. The responsibility would
lie wit~l the Netherlands, which nobody contests,
while the authority would lie either with the
Republic or, in the last resort, with the Security
Council.
III tlli~ COfmexiun I should like to say a word
about the conc:usions of the report from the
Committee of Good Offices of 24 January 1949
[Sj1223]. These conclusions are based on the
personal views of the military observers which,
accordLng to the Netherlands military e.xperts,
are not justified by the real facts, the situation
in the affected areas being as satisfactory as can
be ex?ected after one month, These experts
unanimOll~ly deny the gratuitous assertion that
sufficient Dutch troops are not available for the
protec~ion of the civilian population.
A sober and realistic appraisal of this aspect
of the resolutior. must show that it is completely
unworicable and would lead to an even more un~
tenable Sitl.lation than existed before. Has the
Security Coi.mcil forgotten all the documentary
proof of the deliberately planned and executed
infiltrations and acts of violence of the Republic?
The C:>mmittee of Good Offices was not able to
put an end to these activities: is there any guaran~
tee that the proposed Commission will' be more
effective in this respect? May I remind the
Council of the atrocities perpetrated time and

propagande enflammee de Djokjakarta qui, au
de la derniere semail1e precedant notre
intervention militairt, a provoC[ue le meurtre de
67 fonctionnaires indonesiens, sans compter les
civils indonesiens assassines et disparus,
It est vrai que le projet de resolution stipule
l'alinea 4 f) du dispositif que le retour de l'adminislration !'epublicaine et le retrait des troupes
nee~landaises devront se faire sous reserve des
exigences normales de la securite publique et de
la sauvegarde des vies humaines et des biens, et
sous le cOlltr6le cl!: la Commission. Mais pour
satisfaisant que cela paraisse en theorie, si 1'011
essaie d'imaginer ce que cela signifierait en pratique, il est evident qt:.e ces belles phrases conduiraient, en fa~t, a un chaos complet. Ni le Conseil
de securite, ni sa Commission en Il1d::mesie ne
disposent des moyens suffisants pour garantir
l'observation reelle de ces conditions', cela signifie
que, comme l'administration republicaine, ils devruient hire confiance ou bien ~H1}Ctrot:pes nt~er~
landaises, Ot.: hien aux forces que la Republique
pourrait reconstituer.
DartS le premier cas il en reaulterait ulle ·situation anomlale: l'Organisation des Nations Unies
prendrait certaines decisions, mais ce seraient
les forces neerlandaises qui auraiellt la respol1sabilite de la situation decQulant de ces decisions.
Da.~s le deuxieme cas l'Organisation des Nations
Unies dcvrait faire confiance aux forces republicaines reconstituees et, dans les drconstances
act:1elles, ce serait, plus que jamais, la terreur, les
represailles et la revanche. Il n'y a, peur autant
que je sache, aucune autre so:ution a mains que
l'un des auteurs de la resolution ne veuille fournir
lui-meme des troupes pour mainten:r l'ordre
public.
Dans l'une ou I'autre des situations qu'entrai·
ileraiL inevi~blelllent l'exccution du projet de
resolution, il y aurait une separation er-tre, Cl'une
part, l'autorite et, d'autre part, la responsabilite,
ce qui est contraire aux principes eJementaires
d\:ne bonne administration. La l'esponsabilite
appartiendrait aux Pays~B.as, personnc ne le
conteste, alers que l'autorite serait exercee, soit
par la Republique, soit, en dernier ressort, par
le Conseil de securite.
A ce propos, je d~;;ire dilt: un mot des conclusions du rawort de la Commission de bons offices
du 24 janvier 1949 [Sj1223].Ces conclusions
sont fondees sur l'ofinion personnelle des observateurs militaires, opinion qui, d'apres les experts
militaires neerlandai~, n'est pas justifiee par les
faits reels, car la situation dans les regions interessees est aussi satisfaisante qu'on peut l'esperer
apres un mois. Ces experts refutent unanitnement
l'affirm~tion grntuite selon laquelle il n'y aurait
pas assez de troupes neerlandaises pour proteger
la population civile.
Si, en l'envisageant sous eet aspect, 1'on juge
la resolution avec mesure et avcc le sens des realites, l'on constate qu'elle est absolt1mc;lt inapplicable et que son seul effet serait d'aggraver encore
la situation. Le COnseil de securite a-t~il oublie
toutes 1es preuves, etablies par des documents,
dc l'infjJtration et des actes de violence deliberement con~tls et ex:ecutes par la Repu~ylique? La
Commission de bons offices n'a pas pu ntettre £n
aces activites: existe~t-il une garantie quelc03que que la Commission envisagee soit plus
efficace cet egard? Dois~je rappeler au.conseilles
cou~s

a

a

15
agai:J. against the Indonesiar.s of Chinese origin?
Has the proposed COlT.mission at its disposal my
effective means Df prcventinS" the recurrence of
such eventtlalities? Have not representatives of
large areas like Asaha.n and Tapanoeli already
affinned their will never to return under a Re~
publican administration which fer them means
only misery, lni3fule and corruption? Is it the
intention of the Council that the Netherlands
Govemme:1t now has to take the responsibility
of forcing these area, back into the Republican
fold against the expressed desires of their papu~
lation?

atrocites coomises de lllal1iere repetee contre les
Indonesiens d'origine chilloise? La CommisSlon
eltv;~age", disp(l~e~t-ell(' des moyells effectifs d'em·
pecher que pareils faits Se reproduisent? Les l-epre.
sentants de ,astes regions com:l.le ceUes d'Asahan
et de Tapanoeli n'ont-ils pas deja affirllle leur
volonte de J.e janais retoun:er sous l'administratior, republicaine, qni pour mx ne sigllifie que
~nisere, mauvaise administration et cOlTuption?
Le Conseil a+i1l':ntention de demander .all Gou~
vernement des Pays-Bas de prendre aujourd'htli
la responsabilite de contraindre ces regions a
retourner sous la domin~tion republicaine contre
le desir expres de Icurs populations?

But apart from all these grave dangers to the
life and property of many Indonesians which will
result inevitably from the present proposals, how
does the Council suppose that in the confusion
of reorganizing a Republican administration effec~
tive and appropriate economic measures can be
taken, cvcn if cnly to ensure provision of {non
and other necessities for the population? I n:ust
repeat that in our view the Security Council
asst:mes a very heavy respcnsibility if, it decides
ta adopt tiJese proposals, Moreover, I believe that
these provisions are superftuolls for achieving
tlle aims of the Council, which are to give the
Republic a fair chance and to ensure the with~
drawal of Netherlands troO?s.

Mais en dehors de toutes cesgraves menaces
contre la vie et les biens de nombreux Indo:1e"iiens
qui remlteront inevitablement de l'app!ica(on des
propositions actuellement a l'etude, comment le
Consei! peme~,t~il que, dans la confusionentrainee
par la reorganisation d'tme admini~tratior. republicai ne. ]'on pt1i~"e: prendre les mtsures econo·
miques utiles et necessaires, meme s'it nes.'agit
que'd'assurer la distribution des vivre·s et d'autres
produ:ts de premiere necessitea la popula.tion?
]e repete que, a nDtre avis, le Conse] de securite
prendra une tn':,s lDurde responsabilite s'il decide
d'adopter ces propositions. En outre, je crois
que ces dispositions nepwnettraient pas a'atteindre le5 bllts dn Coriseil lJui sont dedonrter a la
Republique des possibilites de tiussite et ii'assu're:
le retrait des troupes neerlandaises.
Ces dispositions sont inutiles, tOllt d'abol-d parce
Que les poputations des regiDns inh~ressees, con·
formement au quatrieme principe des principes
complementaires de l'Accord du Re1wille [5/649,
annex/! VllI] auront entiere liberte, au cours des
electtons qui se tiendront dans le troisieme trimestre de cette annee sous le controle 'de I'Organisationdes Nations Unies, de se prononcer en
faveur de :a. Re.publique. Er detlxieme lieu, il
taut rappc:ler que, des' que le gouvernement federal
provisoire disposcra de troupes suffisantes pocr
maint~nir de sa propreautorite I'ordre pu')lic, Les
troupes des Pays-Bas se retireront
Outre le retabEsscment des conditions l1e te:·
reur et de ,-iolenee qui exista:ent avant le 18 decembre, l'adoption de cette resolution aurait un
autre effet regrettable, de nature psychologique,
sur la bonne execution du prcgramme visant.a la
creation des Etats-Unis d'lndonesie, Durant cesdernihes annees, le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas,
par de constantes negociations awc les federalistes, a etabli de maniere progressive un programme concret et cletaille destine a assurer l'autonomie. La rea:isation de ce progran:me est
deja tres avancee. Dans le present projet de reso·
lution, le Conseil essaie d'elaborer un piograOlnle
qui, sur certains points, notamment en ce q:li
concerne les dates, suit le programme des PaysBas mais qui s'e:} separe entierernent sur cl'all·
tres points tres importants. La confusion que
pourrait creer dans l'esprit de la population et de
certains de ses chefs, l'adoption par le Conseil
d'un programme si different, risque de para1yser
ou de retarder la prompte realisation de tout
progres politique.

They are superfluous, in the fint place, because
the populttion of the affected areas itself will, in
accordance with the fourtn of the additional
Relwille princi?les [5/649, Appendix VIII),
have full opportunity in the elections to be held
in the third quarter of this year, under observation of t~.e United l\ations, to pronounce itself
in favour of the Rf':pllblic, In the second place it
sho:lld be kept in mind that as soon as the federal
interim Government disposes of sufficient fo~ces
to mainta:n law and order on its own authority,
the Dutch troops will be withdrawn.
Apart from restoring the same conditions of
terror and violence which prevailed before 18
December, ado:Jtion of this resolution would
have another a'dvene effect of a psythological
nature t1}:on the smooth carryinf out of a pro~
gra:nllle for the creation of'the United States of
Indonesia, The Netherlands Government has, in
the course of the last years, in constant negctia~
tior.s with the Feder3ltsts, gradually developed a
concrete and detailed programme leading up to
the achievement of statehood. The execution of
this programme is far adv::.nced. In the pre8ent
draft resolutior:, the Council attempt5 to draw
up a programme of its own, which in some
pohts, particularly with regard to the timetable,
follows tl~e Netherlands programme, but in other
very imfortant respects entirely departs from
it. The confusion which the adoption by the
Council of such a divergent programme might
cau~e in the r::1inds of the population and of
some of its leaders may well have a ?aralysing
anc retarding effect on the speedy achievement
of any political progre::;::; at all,
There can be no doubt that this action of the
CO:mcil has the effect of widening the gap be·
tween the Netherlands and certain prominent
Republican leaders instead of bridging the re·

11 n'y a aucun dOllte que cette decision du
Consei1 aurait pour effet d'elargir le fosse entre
les Pays-Bas et certains des principaux chefs
republicains, au lieu de cOllcilier les differem:es

16
mammg differences. I am sure that the Council
does not desire this, but I must warn the Council
that this is jtlst what t,he result of the resolution
will be.
Recapitulating this part of my speech, I have
tried up to now to prove to the Council that it
would be extremely difficult for my Government
to accept the draft resolution before it; in the
first place, because it in fact requires the Netherlands Government during the interim period to
renounce certain fundamental rights of sove·
reignty; in the second place, because it constitutes
an unprecedented interference in the internal
affairs oT a State, thus violating the fundamental
principle of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the
Charter; in the third place, because it is abso"
lutely impractlcable and would create an even
more untenable situation than the one which was
the cause of .111 the trouble, and in the fourth
place, because it duplicates; and yet partly deviates from, the detailed programme and timetable worked out jointly by the Netherlands
Government and the Federalists, which would
have a confusing and paralysing effect on the
work of political reconstruction.

r"

I mus! emphasize that if, notwithsta.'lding all
theseseriotls objections, the Council should adopt
this draft resolution, it would create a most unfort'lnate situation between itself and the Netherlands Government, for which the Council would
have to bear the full responsibility.
If the Council should now adopt a resolution
requiring us to abandon part of our responsibility
in the interim period, it would only have itself
lo blame for the almost unbridgeable gap which
it wotdd create,
We have ttp to now, notwithstanding our conviction that the Indonesian question w'as outside
the Council's competence, tried to keep the
Council informed as fully as possible and to
meet its desires as far as possible. My Govern~
ment has given ample proof that it does not ,want
to take a merely negative attitude with regard to
the Council's wishes and proposals and has, therefore, in different forms, put forward constructive suggestions. The latest proof of this is
that, .at che 400th meeting of 14- January, in
response to the request of several members, I
gave the Council the detailed programme of the
Netherlands Government for the steps leading
to the creation of the United States of Indonesia.

qui subsistent. Je suis certain que tel n'est pas le
desir du Conseil, mais je dois avertir le Conseil
que tel serait precisement le resultat de cette
resolution.
Pour me resumer, j'ai essayc jusqu'a present
de montrer au Conseil qu'il sera extremement
difficile pour mon Gouvernement d'accepter le
projet de resolutior. qui nous est soumis; en pre·
mier lieu parce qu'it demande en fait au Gouvernement des Pays-nas, pendant une periode provisoire, de renO:J.cer a certains des droits for.:da~
mentaux de sa souverainete; en deuxif.,me lieu
parce qu'il constitue une ingerence sans precedent
dans les affaires interieures d'un Etat, violant
ainsi le prineipe essentiel de l'Article 2, paragraphe 7, de la Charte; to troisieme lieu parce
que ce projet est absolument inappl~cable et
creerait une situation encore plus lntolerable que
ccUe qui a ete la cause de tous les troubles; enfin,
parce que ce projet fait double emploi, tout en
differant sur certains points, avec le programme
detaille et le plan elabore en comtnun par le
Gouvernement des Pays-Bas et les federalistes,
ce qui aurait pour cffet d'entrainer la confusion
et de paralyseI' I'ceuvre de reconstruction politique.
Je dois souligner que si, malgre toutes ces
graves objections, le Conseil adoptait ce projet
de resolution, cela creerait une situation des plus
regrettables entre le Conseil et le Gouvernement
neerlandais, situation dont le Conseil aurait it.
porter .toute la responsabi1ite.
Si le Conseil adoptait aujourd'hlli une resolution nous demandant d'abandonner une partie
de notre responsabilite pendant la periode interi_.
maire, it porterait la responsabilite entiere d'avoir
creuse un fosse quasi-iniranchissable.
En depit de notre ferme ~onviction que la ques·
tion indonesienne n'est pas de la competence du
Conseil, nous avons essaye, jusqu'a present, de
tenir leConseil au courant aussi completement
que pOssible et de repondre a ses desirs dans la
mesure du possible. M{m Gouvernement a amplement donne la preuve qu'il n'entend pas prendre
l'attitude purement negative a l'egard des desirs
du Conseil ainsi que de ses decisions, et it a
de differentes manieres fait des propositions cons·
tructives. La preuve en a ete donnec, tout der·
nierement encore, lorsqu'au cours de la seance
du 14 janvier [400cmB seance], j'ai communique
au Conseil, a la demande de plusieurs membres,
le programme detaille du Gouvernement.des PaysBas en ce qui concerne les mesures qui doivent
conduire a la creation des Etats-Unis d'Indonesie.

Last week we again circulated among some
members of the Conncil a tentative draft resolution, as proof of Ollr will to make a positive and
constructive contriblltion toward a resolution.
We could not, and did not, expect the Council to
adopt that resolution unchanged, but we believed
that it contained constr:1ctive elements which
might have been useful in combination with other
elements.

La semaine derniere, notis nvons de nouveau
communique a certains membres du Conseil un
projet de resolution qui prouve que nous voulons
~ontribuer de fa~on concrete et constructive a.
l'elaboration d'une resolution. Nous ne pouvions
pas nOllS attendre, et nous ne nous attendions
pas, a ce que le Conseil adopte tel que! ce projet
de resolution, mais nous pensions qu'i[ contenait
certains elemen~s constructifs qui, joints a d'autres, eussent pu presenter quelque utilite.

The main constructive suggestions contained
in it were the following: the detailed programme
and timetable leading to the creation of an inde.·
pendent United States of Indonesia, united with
the Netherlands in a Netherlands-Indonesian
Union; the proposal that the United Nations

Les prineipales suggestions constructlves que
contenait ce projet etaient les suivantes: un programme detaille, avec dates cl'execution, en vue
de la creation des Etats-Unis d'Indonesie independants, associes aux Pays-Bas dans une union
Pays-Bas-Indonesie; nne proposition tendant a

17

arrange for the observation of the elections to be
held. this year in lh~ a:ffecte~ areas; and the SllggestlO~ that. the Umte~ Nat:on s appoin t a plenipotenti ary In Indonesia with certain specified
powers.

ee que I'Organisalion des Nations Unies prenllC
~es lTi~sures pour 11: contrale d'eJections qui se
b,en?ralent cette ann~e dans les regions dOnt it
s ag~t, et la. suggestIon que l'Ol'ganisation des
NatlO~s. Umes envoie .en Indochine un pleniP?te~tlalre ayant certalns pOl1voirs clairemellt
defillls.

. The dra.ft resolution, however, proceeds along
(hfferent hnes on very many points. I have it
clear that we have fundam ental objecti ons to the
basic princip~e~ cOlltained in certain paragra phs
of tl;e. draft JOln~ resolution. The paragra phs or
provISions to which we have tllOse fundamental
objections are:

"Le projet C0ll1111Un de resolution cliffere du
notre sur bien des points. J'ai nettement declare
que nous opposons des objections fonrlarnentales
aux principes sur lesque1s Sont fondes certains
paragra phes du projet COlUmUn de resolution. Les
paragraphes ou les di.spositions contre lesquelles
nous soulcvons ces objections sont les suivants:

1. Paragra pll 2, which provide s for the re-

installation of the Go\'ern ment of tlle Republic
of Indone sia in Jogjak arta;

1. Le p~ra~rap.he 2 du dispositif, qui prevait
le retour a DJokJakarta du Gouvernement de la
Republill"ue d'Indonesie;

2. The final sub-pa ragraph of paragra ph 3,
which empowers the Commission and the Council
to deal with the establishment of a federal interim
government, the holding of electio ns and the
transfe r 0 [ soverei gnty;

.~. Le ~ernier alinea du paragraphe 3 du dispo~
Slhf, ~U1 charge la Commission et le Conseil
d'etabh r un' gOllvernerilent federal provLsoire de
procMe r des elections et d'operer le trans'fert
,
de souverainete;

3, The last sentence of sub-pa ragraph 4 Ca),
laying down the majori ty rule for decisions of
the Commission;

3. La derniere phrase de l'alinea 4 a) du dispositif, d'apres laquel1e ks decisions de la Commission seront prises a la majorite des voix;

4. Sub-pa ragraph 4 (f), which empowers the
Commission to make recomm endatio ns to the
Council for the return of certaill areas to the
Republican Government and for the withdrawal
of Nether lands troops, and which implicitly
authorizes the Council to make decisions on these
points.

4. L'alinea 4 f) du dispositif, qui donne a 11;,
Commission le pouvoir de transmettre au Consell
des recomlllandations sur le retour de certaines
regions sous la juridiction du Gouvememenl republicain et sur le retrait des troupes neerlandaises,
et qui autorise implicitement le Conseil a prendre
des decisions stir ces differeuts points.

These are the four points in the draft resolution to which wc have fundam ental objections.
In addition to these, there are a numbe r of other
aspects of t',le text to which we have objections
of a less fundamental nature, but r do not think
it would serve any useful purpos e if I commented, paragraph by paragra ph and word by
word, upon the text of the draft. It is the basic
principles contained in the paragr aphs I have
mentioned to which our main objections are
directed.

Te1s sont les quatre points du projet de f(~SO­
l~ltion contre lesquels nous s9l11evons des objectlOns fondamentales. 11 existe en outre un certain
nombrc de passages contre lesquels nous elevons
des objections qui n'ont pas un caraclere essentiel, mais je ne pense pas qu'il soit utile que }e
critiquc paragraphe par paragraphe et mot par
mot le tcxte de ce projet. C'est cootre les principes sur lesquels sout fondes les paragniphes que
j'ai cites que nous elevans nos objections prineipales.

There are finally, many other paragraphs
wl,ich we accept as they are, even though on
some po;nts we should have preferr ed the language to be somew hat clearer, I should like to
mention two such points, in order to avoid any
possible misunderstanding.

Il existe enfm quantite d'autres paragraphes
que nous acceptons tds que!s, bien que, sur Certains points, nOus eus~ions pre£ere une redaction
un peu plus precise . .le voudrais mentionner deux
de ces points afin d'eviter tout malentendu.

In the first place, the seventh pnragr aph of the
preamble of the draft, which takes note of the
plans of the NetherlandB Govern ment for the
transfe r of sovereignty, does not mention the
establishment of the Nether lands-I ndones ian
Union, which forms part of the programme
agreed upon in the Reltvil!e principles. Yet, since
the R mville Agreement is express ly mentioned in
the sixth paragra ph and under paragra ph 3 oj
the operative part, we take it that it is sufficiently
implied in the presen t text.

En premier lieu, le septieme paragraphe d'J
preambule qui prend note des inlentions du Gauverncment des Pays-Bas relativement au transfert de souverainete, ne fait pas allusion a la
creation d'une union Pays-Bas-lndoncsie, 1aquelle
fait pal"tie intl!grante du programme etabli par
l'Accord du Renville. Pourtant, comOle cet Accord
est expressement cite au si::deme p.aro1graphe du
preambule et au paragraphe 3 dll dispositif, nous'
cOllsiderons que, de fa~on imp1icite, le texte actuel
en tient suffisammcn\ compte.

Furthe rmore, sub-pa ragraph 4 (d) provides
for the participation in the negotiations of repre·
sentatives of the federal areas; this point has
been clarified by one of the amendm ents submitted by the sponsors [5/123 0], and, as I ex-

En outre, l'alinea 4 d) dll dispositif pl'evolt la
participation aux negociations de representants
des regions qui ne font pas partie de la Republique; ce point a ete precise dans I'un des amendements preBenteS par les auteurs du projet

a

18

plalned berore, I am sure that the FederaEsts
will fully appreciate this provision, although they
feel that. as the largest interested party, they are
by right entitled to such participation.

This does not, of course, imply that the task
of the United Na:ions Commission would be
extended to the whole of Indonesia. The Committee of Good Offices was o:iginatly instituted to
of.er its good offices for the settlement of the
pc1itical dispute between the Netherlands and the
Republic of Indonesia. The Federalists have not,
ar.d never have had, any displlte with the Net~.er­
lands Government and have never asked for the
intervention of the United Nations. It would
seem evident, therefore, that the resolution does
not extend the Commission's competence to the
whole of Indonesia, and this is confirmed by what
was s:l.id ye~tcrday by the n:pre5enlative of
Canada.
'In connexion with Mr. Pa1ar's statement
[404th meeting] that "the majority of the pcpuIf.tion in N etherlnnds-occup:ed territory has not
relinquished its ideals as embodied in the Repl1blic of Indonesia", I should like to point out
that this. declaration is co:ltrary to the facts.
There is 3.$mall rp:UDrity il1 the Fe:deralist area!'!
which sympathizes with the Republican National·
ists" and tHs fact my Government has never t:ied
to conceal. But this very ~act also proves ':hat
in the Fec.eral areas, freedom of speech anc of
opinion have beer: effectively guaranteed and
tnat the elections held in those areas were really
free and democratic. May I ask: Wbere and
when in t~f' past have thf're heen elections in the
fonner Republican areas? To my knowledge,
6ey never were held, although the provisional
Parliament of the RepUblic repeatedly asked for
them.

[5)1230] et, comOle je l'ai explique prec:edemment, je suis certain que les f~deralistes appre~
deroilt ceUe disposition a sa juste valeur, bien
qu'ils puissent penser que, comllle ils i:onstituer.t
la ?artie interessee la plus importante, ils ont
droit a cette participation.
Cela ne veut evidemment pas dire que la COmmission de Dons offic~s doive etendre son activite
la totalite de l'IndQnesie. La Commission a ete
instituee i :'origine pour offrir ses bons offices
en vue de regler le cl)nflit politique qui oppose les
Pays-Bas la Republique d'!ndonesie. Les federalistes ne sant pas et n'ont Jamais ete en conflit
avec le Gouvernemen: des Pays-Bas et :ls n'ont jalAAis demande !'intervention de l'Organisation des
Nations Un:es. I1 semble done evident que la resolution n'etend pas la competence de la Commissj('n
i la totalite de l'Indonesie, et le representant eu
Canada l'a confirme dans sa declaration d'hier.

a

a

En ce qtli conceme la declaration de M. Pa1ar
[404eme seance], d'apres l<lquelle "la majorit6
de La population des territoires occupes par les
I'ideal que repfl~~
Hollandais n'a pas renonce.
secte la Republique d'lndonesie", je voudr<lis
souligner que cette declaration est contraire aux
fails. 11 I:xiste, dans ks regions qui ne font pas
partie de la Republique, une petite minorite qui
sympa.thise avec les nationalistes repub1icains, et
inonGouvernement n'a jamais essaye de nier ce
fait. Mais ce fait n:eme prouve auss: que, dans
les regions qui ne for.t pas partie de la :lepublique,
la liberte de parole et d'opinion a ete effectivement
garantie et que, dans ces regions, les elections ont
ete effertuep$ d;:tns des r:onriitionsveritablement
lib~es et Mmocratiques. Puis~je poser une question: ou et quand O:1.t eu lieu des elections clans
les regions anciennement soumises au contrale
repulJlicain? A ma connaissar:ce, il n'y en a jamais
eu, bien que le Parlement pnwisoire de [a Republique les ait reclan:ees a maintes reprises.

a

To summarize, we mUst object fundamentally
En resume, nous formulons des obji'ctions fcnto paragraph 2, the final sub-paragrnph of para- da:ncntalcs Contrc le paragraphe 2, le dernier all_
graph 3, the last se:ltence of sub-paragraph 4 (a), nea du paragraphe 3, de la dernihe phrase de
and sub-pilragraph 4 (f), because these sections I'.alinea 4 .a) et contre l'alin~b 4 f) du dispositif
require the Netherlands to surrender certain du projet de resolution Car, par ces textes, I'on
vital rights in Indonesia during the interim de:nande a,1X Pays-Bas d'abandonner en 1n10period. We must appeal to the Council not to nesie, pen cant la periode interiOlaire, certuns
ask from us any such sacrifice, which it has uroits cssentiels. Nous adjurons le Conseil ~e ne
never before asked from any Member of the pa3 nous demnnder un pareil sacrifice, sacrifice
. United N.1tions, which it is not entitled to ask que l'on n'a iamais demande auparavant aucun
under the Charter and which no Member of the Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
United Nations could be expected to concede. que, d'apres la Charte, l'on n'est pas fOlIde
These paragraphs, in fact, would pu: the Nether- , demander et que I'on ne peut s'attendre a voir
lands under the guardianship of the United consentir par aucun Membre de l'Organisation.
Nations. The Government and the people of the En fait, ces paragraphes placeraient les Pays-Bas
Netherlands have not merited this treatment. SOLlS la tt:telle de l'Organisation Cl'S Nations
The Dutch have not guided the development of , Unies. Le GOtlvernement et le peuple des Payslndonesia for three hundred and fifty years to Bas n'ont pas merite un p3feil traitement. Les
surrenuer their respoIlsi1.Jility at the last llIinutt: Hallandals n'ont pa3 dirige \'evolution de l'Indo1:.efore the final consumma~lon of that deve1op- nesie pendant trois cent cinquante ans pour aban.nent: the achievement of statehood for bdo- donner leurs responsabilites cl la derniere minute,
r:esia.
juste avant que ceUe evolution ne s'acheve par
la creation d'un Etat en Indonesie.
]n the rest of the resolution, there are man}'
Le reste de la resolution contient de nombreux
things which are difficult for us to accept and elements qu'il nous est diffici1e d'accepter et de
nany whkh we should like to see changed. But nombreux elements que 1:0US voudrions voir
we realize that each party must make sacriflces, modifier. Mais nots nous rendons compte que
and we shall therefore formulate :10 objections cr.aque partie dait faire des sacrifices et noUS ne
to the rest of the resolution. My Government fcrnllllerons done pas d'objections contre le reste

a

a

19
will carry out this resolution, if it is adopted
by the Security Council, to the extent to which
it is compatible with the responsibility of the
Nethe~lands for the mainten<ll1cc ef real freedom
and order in Indonesia, a responsibility which at
ihis rr,oment no one else can take over from us.

du projet de resolution. Si ce projet est adopte
par le Conseil, mOll GotJ\'ernement en observera
les dispositions dans la mesure ou elles sero:!.t
compatibles avec la responsabilite qu'assument les
Pays-Bas en ce qui concerne le maintien en lndonesie de la liberte veritable et de l'ordre respol1sa~ilite que personne, actuellement, ne P~llt nous
rehrer.

The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council h.::lve
heard the important statement presented by the
representative of the Netherlands. Unless I hear
any request to speak from a member of the
Council, or from any of the representatives
seated at this t<.ble, I shall take it that members
of the Council wish to proceed to c. vote on the
draft resolution,

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Les rnembres du Conseil ont entendu I'importante declaration du representant des Pays-Bas. Si aucnn
membre du Conseil ou aucun representant siegeant
a cette table ne demande la parole, je considererai
que les membres du Cor.seiI desirent passer au
vote ~ur le projet de resolution.

Mr. MENON (India): I do not wish, at this
M. MENON (Ind!::) (traduit de l'angM-is):
dosing- stage of the discussion of the Indonesian Je ne :veux pas, a ce stade final du debat sur la
question and when we are about to vote on the question indonesienne et au moment OU nons
draft resolution, to take up the time of :he allons voter sur le projet de resolution, abuser du
Council. However, I would request pennission 'temps dout dispose le Consei\. Cependant, je
to make an observation with reference to the voudra.is demander la pennission de faire nne
statement of the representative of the Nether- observation sur la decla:,ation du representant
lands in regard to Hyderabad.
des Pays-Bas relative a Haiderabad.
First of all, the Nizam of Hyderabad was
En premier lieu, le NizaID d'Haiderabad n'a
never placed in detention by the Government of jamais ete interne par le Gouvemement de l'Inde
India. and is today ns free to go about in any et it est aujourd'hui aussi libre de se rendre dans
part of the world as the Prime Minister of India. n'importe quelle partie du monde que le Premier
Ministre de 1'Inde.
I go further and claim that the Nizam of
Je vais plus loin et j'affirme que, en n~a1ite, le
Hyderabad was a virutal prisoner in the hands Nizam d'Haiderabad avaif efe fait prisonnier
of a militant and unscrupulous millority grcup, par une minorite active et sans scrupules et q:.le
and it was the Indian forces which actmlly re- ce sont les forces indiennes qui lui ont rendu une
stored him to complete freedom. Not only the complete Jiberte d'action. Non seuJement le Nizam,
Nizam of Hyderabad, but the people of Hyder- mais aussi le peuple d'Haiderabad etaient terroabad, were. terrorized and suppressed by :his rises et domines par cette minorite. L'annee
minority. The Indian Army was an army of indienne a He lme armee liberatrice qui a Son.uve
freedom which rescued the Nizam l:md his people le Nizam et son peuple de la tyralmie d'une
clique.
from the tyranny of a junta.
Il est egalement inexact de declarer que la cenAgain it is untrue to say that there is any
censorship in Hyderabad. Observers from any , sure existe en Haiderabad. Les observateurs de
part of the world are free to visit Hyderabad n'importe quelle partie du monde ont toute liberte
and to see. for themselves the actual state of pour venir en Haiderabud et se rendre com?te
affairs there. I would sincerely reqt:est the repre- par eux-memes de la veritable situation. Je
sentative of the Netherlands to accord, at least demande sincerement au representant des Paysto the milital'"Y ooservers assigned by the Corn· Bas d'accorder aux observateurs militaires desimittee of Good Offices of this august body, the gnes par la Commission de bons offices de cette
same facilities which observers and visitors to auguste assemblee, les memes faeilites que le
Hyderabad are given by the Government of Gouvernement de l'Inde accorde al1X observatetJrs
et aux visiteurs qui se rendent en Halderabad.
India.
En ce qui conceme les allegations relatives au
As to the rest of the allegations about the
massacres and looting of Muslims and Muslim massacre des musulmans et au pillage de biens
property in Hyderabad, I sincerely sympa6ize musulmans en Haiderabad, je sympathise since
with the pathetic position of the representative of rement' avec le representant des Pays-Bas qui se
the Netherlancs, who has to faH 'Jack on mali- trouve dans une situation dramatiqm, car it a
cious untruths coming from someone who is recours aux contre-verites malveil!antes qui lui
living hundreds of miles away from Hyderabad. sont communiquees par quelqu'nn vivant a des
I would invite the representative of the Nether- centaines de milles d'Haiderabad. J'invite le reprelands, and the people of his way of thinking, to sentant des Pays~Bas et les gem qui pefh.~nt
comme lui venir en Haiderabad et se rendr!';
visit Hyderabad and see things for themselves.
compte par eux-memes de l'Etat a:tuel du p.ays.
R

a

The PRESIDENT: As there are no further
speakers, we shall proceed to the vote.
In view of the remarks of the representative
of Arg~tina, and because the representative of
the USSR has submitted a specific amendment
which is set forth in docnment 5/1233, I pro::JOse
to put the dra:t joint resolution (5(1219] to the

a

Le PRESIDENT (lraduit de l'ang!ais): Comme
personne d'autre ne demande a prendre la parole,
nous allons proceder au vote.
A la suite des observations du representant de
l'Argentine, et comme le representant de l'URSS a
presente 11n amendement coI:ltepu da;ts le document
5/1223, je propose ?e proced,er a .un vote par
division sur le projet de resolution commun

20
vote in parts; the preamble first, then the amendment to paragraph 1 of the operative part as set
forth in document 5/1233, then paragraph 1,
and so on, except when any member may indicate
a sUb-paragraph on which he would wish a vote
to be taken separately.

[5/1219] ; le scrutin portera en premier lieu sur
lE" pn~amhu]e, puis sur l'amendement au paragraphe premier tel qu'il figure au document
5/1233, p~lis sur le paragrap:le premier et aittsi
de suite, sauf dans le cas ou un membre desirerait
que 1'on vote separement sur un alinea.

Mr. VAN ROI}EN (Netherlands): Might I
suggest a separate vote on the sub-paragraphs?
As an inten:::;ted puty and not being a. member
of the Security Council, I do not h.ll0W whether
I have the right to propose this, but I should
very greatly appreciate it if the Council could
see its way clear to accept this proposal.

M. VAN ROIJEN (Pays-Bas) (traduit de l'at$glais): Puis-je proposer que 1'0n vote sur cbaque
alinea sepuement? En tant que parrie inreressee
et n'et:J.nt pas membre du Conseil de securite, je
ne sais si j'ai le droit de faire cette proposition,
mais je serais tres hetireux que le Conseil veuille
hien I'accepter.

The PRESIOE~T: I should be very happy te
accept the suggestion of the representative of
the Netherlanus. We shall vote on the various
:sub-paragraphs.

Le PRESlDENT (traduiJ de l'atlglai.r): J'accepte
tt'es yolon~iers la suggestion du representant des
Pays-Bas. Nous votE"wns SlIr chacnn des alineas.

Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (~ra-n.slaled from Russian): I should like
to ask that the text of the resolution from the
preamble to operative paragraph 2 inclusive,
should be put to the vote in parts; and I also
reserve the right to ask that the separate paragraphs also be put to the vote in parts.

1[, MALIK (Union des Republiqces socialistes
sovietiques) (trcduit dj~ russe): PoUt' ma part,
je .voudrais demander que le projet de resolution
soit mis aux voix paragraphe par paragraphe
depuis le pre.ambule et jusqu'au paragraphe 2 da
dispositif inclu.sivemE"n:. Je me reserve, cl'autre
part, le droit de demander un vote par division
Sur chacun de ces paragraphes,

The PRESIDEN"T:' Do I understand the representative of the USSR to say tha,t be wishes each
separate part of the preamble to be voted upon
separately?

Le Pd:SiDENT (lrciduil de l'anglais): Dois-je
comprendre que le representant de I'URSS desir!!
la division clu "Vote sur chaque paragraphe du
preambule?

Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) : Yes.

M. MALlK (Union des Republiques sodalistes
sovietiques) (traduit de l'anqlais): Qui.

The PRESIDENT: I call the attention of the
members of the Sect:rity Council to the document dated 28 January which has been distributed by the Secretariat. This doc;:ument gives
effect to the decision tak~n at the 405th meeting
to embody in the original draft resolution the
amendments which we accepted yestercay and
which were agreed to by the sponsors of the
draft resolution. In consequence of tbis, we have
this one working paper dated 28 January, and
also document S/1233.

L~ PRESIDENT (lraduit de l'anglais): J'attire
l'attention des membr!!s du Conseil de securite sur
le document en date du 28 janvier que le Secretariat a fait distribuer. Ce document applique la
decision prise hier [405cme .seance J de comprendre, dans le projet de resolution original, les
amendements que nous avons adoptes hier et que:
les nllteurs du projet de resolution ont approuves.
Par consequent, nous disposons de ce document
de travail., en date du 28 janvier, ainsi quedu
document 5/1233.

Mt". MALlK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (tramlated .from Russilln): I suggest
that the first paragraph of the preamble should
be put to the vote as follows:
"Tlte Securi~y Coutldl.

M. MAUIt (Union des Republiql.les socialistes
sovietiques) (trcdttit du ru.rs~·): le voudrais que
le premier considerant du preambule soit mis aux
voix dans la redaction aitivante:

The P:RESIDENT: In view of the request of the
representative of the USSR. the first paragraph
of the draft resolution will be ..oted in three
parts. The first part to be voted is:

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Par suite
de la demande iormu:ee par le re?resentant de
l'URSS, i1 sera proced€: au vote s:lr le premier
considerant en trois parties s~parees.'La premiere
partie est la suivante:

'The it~J.i(.'izffi word, are in Engli"j; in the Russian

'Les mots en italique figurent en anglais dans le:
compte re:r.dust~nographique rune.

"The Security Council,
"Recalling its resolution of 1 August 1947
"Recalling its resolution of 1 August 1947
[S/459J . . . "1; then omit the words ". . . 2S [3/459J ...", en omettant ensuite lesmots "25 aout
August 1947 [S,I525] and 1 November 1947 1947 [5/525] et ler novembre 1947 [S/597]" et
[5/597] ... "; and then continue to the end of en votant ensuite sur la fin de ce paragraphe,
the paragraph, that is, ", .. with respect to the c'est-a.-dire les. mots "with respect to the Indo~
Indonesian qttestion"l.
nesian question l ".
I propose that the words "25 August 1947 and.
le voudrais ell effet que le membre de phrase
I November 1947" should be put to the vote "25 aotit 1947 et 1er novembre 1947" fasse robjet
separately in view of the fact that the delegation d'un vote separe car en son temps la delegation
of 'the Fnion of Soviet Socialist Republics did de t'URSS n'a pas vote en faveur de ces deux;
not vote for these two resolutions J1.t the time. It resolutions. Par contre, eIle va voter en faveur
will, however, vote for the rest of the paragraph. du reste de ee considerant.

....erbatim record.

21
"Tile Security Council,
"Recclling its resolution of 1 August 1947."
Mr. PAR.ODI (France) (rranslated from
Fumch;; The request just made by the repre-

"Le Conseil de securite,
"Rappela1lt sa resolution du ler aout 2947."

M. ~ARODI (France): La demande qui vient
d'i\tre faite par le representant de l'Union soyiesentative uf the Soviet Union seems to me to give tique me p;J.rait soulever noe question de prorise to a question of procedure. I do not con- cedure. ]e ne trois pas que la solution envisagee
sker the proposed solution satisfactory. I think soit satisfaisante. I1 me parait difficile de morit would be difficult to cut the text up to that , celer un texte a ce point et, a tOllt le mains, nOllS
extent; and, in any case, we ca:t do so only if ne pouvons le faire qtte si. un motif tout a fajt
a very "ood reason is given. The fact that the, valable est donne. Mais le fait que l'Union sovieSoviet Union did not vote in favour of some; tique n'a pa~ vote certaines resolutions n't:illpech~
resolutions cannot prevent the Council from re- . pa.s le Conseil de les rappeler. Par consequent,
calling: :hem. It seems to me, therefore, that' the' it me semble que le motif donne n'est paS suffireason given does not sufficiently justify dividing: sant pour justifier une division qui, en elle-meme,
the text in a way which strikes me as somewhat' me parait un peu anorm.ale.
ur.t15ual.
Mr. MALllC (Union of Sovi7t SoCialist Re- ; M. MALIK (Union des Repttbliques socialistes
rU.l<re): Je ne propose
pt:bltcs) (trcmswled from RUSSla1I): I am not '; sovi~tiques) (trooui/
proposi"1g that the words '25 August 1947 and pas d'eJiminer les mots "25 aout" et "ler no~
1 November 1948" should be omitted, only that vembre". Je propose seulement qu'on 'les metie
they sholllrl be put to the vote separately. In the aux v-oix separernent. II existe, dans la procedure
Security Council's voting experience, there have de vote du Conseil-de securite, des .precedents'ou
been cases when the votir.g On separate para- les paragraphes ant ete mis aux YOtx phrase par
graphs occurred sentence by sentence, and even p:,rase ou meme mot par -mot. II en a 6te ainsi,
word by word, for exam?le, in the Palestine par exemple, poce la question palestinienne..Ma
qllestion. It is nothing new, and in no way via- requete ne presente .dell de nouveau et .ne c:onshites the IUleS of procedure.
tittte aUCUflement Une violation du reglement
I interiellr.

at,

The Pll.l;:SIDENT: The President of th~ Security
Council is bound in this matter by the provisions
of rule 32 which reads, in' its second paragraph,
as folluw5;
"Parts of a motion or of a draft resolutio:l
shalt be voted on separately at the request of any
repr,esentath'e, unless the origina: mover objects."
Accordingly, I propose to proceed as I have
indicated, and I would appeal at this time to the
members of the Security Council to facilitate the
procedure of the Council.
A vote will now be taken on the wores
"Recal!i1Ig its res<Jlution' of 1 A:.lgust 1947".

Le Pd:SIDENT (trGdj4it d~ l'anglais) : Le President du Conseil de securite est, en cette matiere.
lie par ies dispositions de I'artide 32 du regie'ment interieur dont le second paragraphe est
ainsi Jibetle:
"La division est de droit si elle est demandee,
amoins que l'auteur de la proposition ou du projet
de resolution ne s'y oppose."
C'est pourquoi je propose. de suivre la procedure
que j'ai indiquee et je demande aux membres du
Conseil de securite de faciliter cette procedure.
Nous allons mainlenant proceder au vote sur
les mats "Rappelanl sa resolution du 1er aotit

1947".
A Vole U\1S taken byslww of hands, as follow.r:
In favour .. Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,

Egypt, Norway, tn<rainian Soviet Socialist Repllblic,. Union (If Soviet Socialist Republics,
United KIngdom, United States of America.
Abstai,Jing: France.
The 'Words were adopted by 10 votes lu nom,
with 1 abstmt-ioll,

11 est procidi au vote d main levee.
Votent pour: Argentine, Cmada, Chine, Cuba,

Egypte, Norvege, Republique socialis:e sovi~tique
G'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Ame~
rique.
S'abstient: la France.
Par 10 voi:( (ontre zero, avec line abstention,
ces mots son/ adnptis.

with 3 abstmtiotls.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'a.f:glais) : Le second
vote portera. sur les mots "25 aotit 194.7 et ler novembre 1947",
Il est procide an vote d main levee.
Votm! pOllr: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egyple, Norvege, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.
S'aostilmnent: Fr,,'Uce, Republique socialiste
sovietique d'Ukraine. Union des Republiques
socialistes sovle~iqtlf'..~.
Par 8 voi:c contre zero, avec 3 abltentiolls, ces
mots sont adoptis.

The PRESIDENT: A vote will now be taken on
the words "with respect to the Indonesian qurs·
tion".

Le PRESlDENT (tradl~it de l'angl.a.iJ): It 'la etre
procede au vote sur les mats "relatives a la question indonesienne".

The PREsIDENT: The second vote will be on
the words "25 August 1947, and 1 November

1947".
A vote 'was taken b)' Sh01~ of hands, as follows:

In favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States
of America.
Abstainillg: France, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Cnion of Soviet Socialist Republics.

The words were adoptl!ri by 8 votes to none,

22
A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:

In favollr; Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt. Norway, Llkrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

Il est procede au vote d m.ain levee,
Votent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egypte, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socia~

listes

sovietiques,

Royaume-Uni,

Etats-Unis

d'Amerique.
Abstaining: France.

Sabstient: la France.

The words were adopted by 10 votes to none,
with 1 abstention.

Par 10 voix contre zero, avec une abstention,
ces mots sont adoptes.

The PRESIDENT: The paragraph is adopted.

Le PREsIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le considerant est adopte.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs):
The second paragraph of the preamble Teads:

du Departement juridique) (traduit de l'anglais):

"Taking noie with approval of the reports submitted to the Security Council by its Committee
of Good Offices for Indonesia."

"Prenattt favorablement acte des rapports presentes au Conseil de securite par sa Commission
de bans offices pour I'Indonesie;"

A '/.'ote was taken by show of hands, as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
Le deuxieme considerant est redige comme suit:

Il est procerJr. au vote a main levee.

Votent pour: Argentine, Canada, aline, Cuful,
In favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba, '
Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States Egypte, Norvege, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.
of America.
Abstaining: France, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

5'abstiennent: France, Republique socialiste.
sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques
socialistes so,'ietiques.

The paragraph was adopted by 8 votes to none,
with 3 abstentions.

Par 8 V01·.1: contre zero, avec 3 abstentions, le
COllsiderant est adopte.

Mr. KERNo (Assistant Secretary~General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs):
The third paragraph of the preamble reads:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (traduit de I'angla;s):
Le troisieme considerant est redige comme suit:

"Considering that its resolutions of 24 December 1948 [5/1150) and 28 December 1948
[5/1164 and S/116S] have not been fully carried
out ;"

"ConsUJerant que Bes resolutions des 24[5/1150J et 28 decembre 1948 [5/1164 et
S/1165] n'ont pas ete integralement observees;"

A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:
In favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. Union of Sovi.et Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

Abstaining: France.

II est pro cede au vote d main levee.

Volent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egypte, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
$'abstient: la France,

The paragraph was adopted by 10 VotCl to
notle, with 1 abstention.

Par 10 voix contre zero, a'lJec une abstention,
le com'iderant est adopte.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs): The
fourth paragraph of the preamble reads:

M. KERNO (S'ecretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (traduit dl! l'anglais):
Le quatrieme considerant est rb::Hge comme suit:

"Considering that continued occupation of the
territory of the Repubtic of Indonesia by the
armed forces of the Netherlands is incompatible
with the restoration of good relations between the
parties and with the final achievement of a just
and lasting settlement of the Indonesian dispute;"

"Considerallt que le maintien des forces armees
des Pays-Bas en oc.cupation SUr le territoire de la
Republique indonesienne est incompatible avec: le
retablissement de bonnes relations entre les parties
et avec un reglement final, equitable et durable du
differend d'Indonesie;"

A vote was taken by shOil! of hands, as follows:
III favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of 'America.

Abstaining: France.
The paragraph was adopted by 10 votes to
none, with 1 abstention.

11 est proeM; au vate d main levee.
Votent pOltr: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egypte, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques sodalistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats~Unis d'Ame~
rique.
5'abstient: la France.
Par 10 voi.x CO/ltre zero, avoc line abstentiOn..
le conJiderant est adopte.

23
Mr. KERNo (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs): The
fifth paragraph of the preamble reads:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (traduit de l'anglais):
Le cinquieme consirlerant est redige comme suit:

"CollsiderJHg that the establishment and
maintenance of law and order throughout Indow
nesia is a neoccssary condition to the achivement
of the expressed objectives and desires of both
[Jarties ;"

"Considerant que l'imtauration et le maintien
de l'orclre public en Indonesie constituent une
conditio'1 nece.~_c;aire [Jour atteilldre les objectifs
reconnus et realiser Ies souhaits exprinl(~s par les
deux parties;"

A vote was taken b:y show of hands, as follows:

Il est procede au vote a main levee.

In favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, TJnitl'rl Kingdom, United States
of America.

Votent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
ERYPte, Norvege, Royaume~Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Alllerique.

Abstaining: France, Ukrainian Soviet So:ialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,

S'absliemu'1~t: France, Republique sociati.!te
sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republique!l
socialistes sovietiques.
'

The paragraph was adopted b~)' 8 votes to nmle,
with 3 abstentions.

Par 8 voi:r contre zero, avte 3 abstentions,le
c01fsicUrant est aduptd.

Mr. KERNo (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs): The
sixth paragraph of the preamble reads:

M. KERNO (S'ecretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridiq"e) (tradltiJ de I'ang/ais):
Le sixieme considerant ~st rMige comme suit:

"Noting with satisfaction that the parties con"N otant avec satisfaction que lesparties sont
tinue to adllere tu the principles of the Rem.-i.lle toujouro fideles aux pdncipes de l'Accord du
Agreement [5/649, Appendices XIII and VIll] Rentlille [S/649, annexes XIII et VIII] et conand agree that free and democratic elections: viennent qu'il y aurait lieu de proceder clans I'enshould be held throughout Indonesia for the pur- semble du territoire d'Indonesie a des eJections
pose of establishing a constituent assembly at the libres et democratiques en vue de designer dans le
earliest practicable date, and further agree that plus bref deJai possible une assemblee constituante;
the Security Council shclUld arrange for the ob- qu'elles conviennent en outre que le Conseil de
servation of S11ch elections by an appropriate sectlrite devrait prendre des dispositions pour
agency of the United Nations; and that the qu'un organe competent des Nations Unies exerce
re[Jresentative of the Netherlands has expressed un controle de ces elections; et que le representant
his Government's desire to have such elections des Pays-Bas a fait savoir que SOn Gouvernement
souhaitait vair tenir ces ejections le le;, octobre
held not later than I Octouer 1949;"
1949 au plus tard;"
It est procide au vate d. main levee.
A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:
Volent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
11, favollr: Argentina, Canada, Olina, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States Egypte, Norvege, Royaume-Uni, Etats~Uni!
of America.
d'Amerique,
Abstaining: France, Ukrainian Smiet Socialist
S'ab.rtfennellt: Frtmce, Republique socialiste
sovietique d'Ukraine. Union des Republiques
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
socialistes sovietiques,
The paragraph was adopted by 8 votes to nmu,
'With 3 abstentions.

Par 8 voix contre zero, avec 3 abstentions, It
considerant est adopt~.

Mr. KERNo (Assistant Secretary-General in
seventh paragraph of the preamble reads:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (tradujJ de i'anglais):
Void le septieme considerant:

"Noting also with :>atisfaction that the Government of the Netherlands plans to transfer sovereignty to the United States of Indonesia by
1 January 1950, if possible, and, in any case,
du~ing the year 1950;"

"Notant egalement avec satisfaction que le
Gouvemement des Pays·Bas se propose de transferer sa souverainete aux Etats-Unis d'Indonesie,
si possible le ler janner 1950, et en tout cas
au coms de I'annee 1950;"

cha~ge of the Department of Legal Affairs): The

A vote was taken by show of h<Jnds, as follows.'

Jl est procUe au VOle d main levoe.

In favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States
of America.

Votent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egypte, Norvege, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

Abstaining: France, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union. of Soviet Socialist Republics.

S'absticnnmi: France, Repllbliquc ~ocia.liste
sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des RepubJiques socialistes sovietiques.

The paragraph zoos adapted by 8 votes to none,
with 3 abstentions.

Par 8 vaix cont-re z;ro, avec 3 abstenJions, le
cansiderant est adopte.

Mr. MRNO (Assistant St.:c~etary-(;eneral in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs): The
eighth paragraph of the preamble fI;ads:

M. KERNO (Secretaire g-eneral adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (traduit de l'angllJis) :
Le huitieme comiderant est reclige comme suit:

24
"Conscious of its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and
'security, and in order that the rights, claims and
:l'osition of the parties may not be prejudiced by
the use of force;"

A vote was taken by shaw of hallds, as follows:
In favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republics, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America.
Abstaining: France.

"Conscient du fait que la responsabilite pr~n:
cipale clu maintien de la paix et de la secu nte
internationales lui incombe, et afin d'eviter que
les parties ne se voient, par recours a la force,
lesees dans leurs droits, revendications et position ;"
II est procede au voJe d main levee.
Votent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egypte, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiqucs sodalistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis cl' AtTlerique.

S'abSl1tmt: la France.

The pa1'ag1'apl~ was adopted by 10 votes to
none, with 1 abstention.

Par 10 voi;t' contre zero, avec une (J.bsfe1"~tion.
le cOllsiderant est adopte.

The PRESIDENT: We now pass to the amendment submitted to the first numbered paragraph,
paragraph 1, by the representative of the USSR
[S/1233]. The Assistant Secretary-General will
'read the amendment.

Le PRESIDENT (tradllit de l'ang1ais): Nous
allons passer maintenant ill'amendement au
paragraphe premier du dispositif, amendernent
,propose par le representant de l'URSS [S/1233].
Le Secretaire general adjoint va en donner lecture.

Mr. KERN"O (Assistant Secretary~General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs) : The
-amendment is to replace the first paragraph of
the operative part of the draft resolution by the
.following text:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) Uraduit de J'anglais) :
L'il.mcndement en question vise a remplacer le
paragraphe premier du dispositif du projet de
resolution par le texte suivant:

If The Netherlands troops shall be immediately
withdrawn to the positions provided for by the
Renville Truce Agreement [S/649, Appendix
XI]."

"Les troupes neerlandaises seront immediate-'ment retinfes sur les positions prevues par l'Acco rd
de treve signe sur le Renville [5/649, a1'lnc_ve
XI] .

.A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:

II est procede au vo.te d main leT/h.

It: favour: Cuba, Egypt, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of' Soviet Socialist
Republics.

Volent pOllr: C;uhil, Egypte, Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques
sodalistes sovietiques.

Abstaining: Argentina, Ca1).ada, China, France,
Norway, United Kingdom, United States of
America.

S'abstiemunt: Argentine, Canada, Chine,
France, Norvege, Royaume~Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

The rwdt of Ihe vote was 4 in favdur, none
against, and 7 abstentions. The amendment was
not adopted, having failed to obtain the affirmaHVf? .vote of seven mtmbers.

fly a 4 'voir pOllr,et 7 abstentions. N'ayant pas
able"" le vote affirmat·if de sept mernbres, l'anlendemnlt fl'est pas adopte.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant' Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs):
Paragraph 1 reads as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (tradtlit de J'01Ig1uis) :
Le paragraphe premier du dispositif est redige
comme suit:

"Calls upon the Government of the Netherlands to insure the immediate discontinuance of
all military operations, calls upon the Government of the Republic simultaneously to order its
armed adherents to cease guerrilla warfare, and
calls upon both parties to co-operate in the
restoration of peace and the maintenance of law
and order throughout the area affected;"

"Invite le Gouvernement des Pays~Bas a faire
cesser-immMiatement toutes operations militaires,
invite le GOllvernement de la Republique il ordo n _
ner enmeme temps a. ses partisans armes de
mettre fin aux operations de guerilla, et invite
les <let1X parties a collaborer au retahlissetnent
de la- paix et au maintien de I'ordre public dans
toute la region interessee;"

A vote was taken by show of hands, as fDllou.'s:

II est pro cede au vo.te a main {eve'!.

In favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States
of America.

Votent pour:. Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba
Egypte, Norve-ge, Royaume-Uni, Etats-"(J ni~
d'Amerique.

Abstaining: France, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

S'arstiennent: France, Republique socialiste
sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

Tlte paragraph was adapted by 8 v'otes to none,
w#h 3 abstell/ions.

Par 8 vo,ir contre zero, avec 3 abstentions..
paragraplJe est (Uiopte.

le

2S
Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet SociGlist Republics) (translated from Russian): I suggest
that par<l.graph 2 should be put to the vote in
parts, I should like the following phrase to be
put to the vote: "Calls upon the Government of
the Netherlands to release immediately and unconditio:1al1yall political {:risoners ..." down to
the words ". . . fu:t free<'lom", deleting from
that sentence the words "cnder paragraph I".
III view at the fact that the delegation of the
USSR abstained from voting. on paragraph 1, I
shOLl1d like to ask that the firs: phrase should be
put to the vote in its present form, but without
the words "under paragraph 1".

~: .MALJI( (Union des Repu!J.1iques sodalistes
sovletlques) (traduit DU russe): Je demande un
vote par diYision en ce qui conceme le para~
graphe 2. Je votlcrais que "on l:1ette aux voix la
phrase suivante: "Invite ~e Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas it remettre immediatement et sans condi_
~ion en liberte tous les prisonniers politiques etc."
Jusqu'au mot "Iibrement" en omettant les'mots
" con f ormement
.
au pa:agraphe prem:er".

Mr. JESSUP (United States of America): It
seems to me' that the elimination of the words
"under paragraph 1" changes the sense of the
text and therefore constitutes an amendment to
the tex:. I would find it difficult to undertake
that particular sepantion.

:M. JESSU? (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais): I1 me semble qu'en eliminant :e~
mots "conformement au paragraphe premier",
on c?ange le sens du texte, ce qui oonsti~ue par
conseqllent un ornendement au texte. 11 me parait
difficite de faire :ette suppression.

Mr. MAUK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from. Russian) : I cannot see
any significant change in the substance of the
propos~1. It is merely It question of reference to
paragraph 1. Those who wis~ to vote for it will
do so; and those who do not wish to vote for
-that I."eierence, in view of the fact that they had
not voted for paragraph' I, will not vote for it.
The substance of the proposal is unaffected. It
is a purely procedural matter.

M. MALIK (Union des Repu'Jliques socialisles
sovietiqlles) (fraduit du 1'usse): Je ne crois pas
que la proposition se trouve modifiee quant au
fond. 11 ne s'agit que de la rHereoce all paragraphe premier. Ceux qui entendent voter en
faveur de cette reference le feront et ceux qui ne
le veulent pas, parce qu':ls n'ont pas \'ote en
faveur du paragraphe premier, s'en abstiendro!11,
C'est line simp~e question de procedure G,ui
n'affecte pas la proposition (j'c:ant au fond.

The PRESIDENT: Rule 32 is brought into play,
as an original mover of bis resolution has

Le PRESIDE.NT (traduit de l'iutglais) : Du fait
qu'un des promoteurs de Cette resollltion s'est
nppo!ie. a la division, l'articIe 32 du reglement
interieur en:re en jeu. C'est pourquoi je demande
all Secretaire general adjoint de donner lect'Jre
de l'enscmble du paragraphe 2.

objected to the parts being separated. Therefore,

1 shaU request the Assistant Secretary-General
to read the whole of paragraph 2.

Etant donne que la delegation de l'URSS n'a
pas vote en faveur du paragraphe premier, je
dernande que l'on mette .lux voix la premi~re
phrase dans la red~ction proposee, mais - en
exc1u.ant les mots "conformement all paragraphe
premIer".
.

Mr. KEI!!'{O (Assistant Secretary-Gener~l in
charge of the Department of Leglll Affairs);
Paragraph 2 reads:

M. KElI.NO (Secrelaire gene:al adjoint charge
du Departement juridiqueJ (tradllit ie l'atlglais):
Voici le texte du paragraphe 2:

"Calls upon the Government of the Netherlands to release immedia:ely and uncClnditionally
all political prisoners arrested by them since
17 December 1948 in the Republic of Indonesia;
and to facilitate the immediate return of officials
of the Government of the Republic of Indonesia
to Jogjakana in order that they may discharge
their responsibilities under ?aragrapb 1 above
and in order to exercise their appropriate functions in full freedom, inc1udir.g administration of
the J ogj akarta area, which shall incl ude the city
of Jogjakarta and its immediate environs. The
Netherlands authorities shall afford to the Government of the Republic of Indonesia such facilities as may reasonably be required by the Govern~
ment for its efff'ctjve function in the Jogjakarta'
area and for communication and consultation with
all persons in Indonesia."

"I1l't:ite le Gouvernelllent des Pays-Bas
remettre immediatement et sans condition en liberte
tous les prisonniers politiques arretes par lui dans
la ReiCublique dTndonesie depuis le 17 cecerr.bre
1948, et a fadllter le retour immEdiat a Djokjakarta des fonctionnaires du Gouvernement de
la Repllbliqlli" d'Tnflonesie, de maniere ace q'J'i1s
puissent s'acquitter des taches qui leur sont imparties conformement au paragraphe pranier cidessus et exercer lihrement les charges qui leur
incombent, notamment l'administration de la region de Djokjakarta, qui s'entend de la ville ne
Djokjakarta et de ses environs intlnediats. Les
autorites .neerla:ldaises donneront au Gouverneroent de la Re?ublique indonesienne toutes les
fad/itts que cehi-ci pourra raisonr.ablement exiger pour s'acquitter emcacement de ses fonctions
dans la region de Djokjakarta, ansi que pour
communiquer ou se concerter avec quiconque en
Indonesie. "

Mr, MALll<: (Union of Soviet SociaEst Republics) (translated from Rt';ssian): Taking into
account the fact that this point deals with the
question of the release of pDlitical prisoners and
the granting of permissil'Il to the 11ldor.csian Government to exercise its functions "in full freedom", the delegation of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Rept..1.blics will vote for this point, even
thoug~ it considers it to be inadequate as the

M. MALIK (Union des Republis.ue~ soci.alistes
soviet~ques) (tradui! du rnsse): Etant donne que

a

ce paragraphe traite de la liberation des detenus
[Jolitiqlles et propose de donner au Gouvemement
d'Indonesip toute la liberte qui lui est necessaire
pour remplir ses fonctions, la delegation de
I'URSS votera en sa faveur, bien qu'elte considere que <:es dispositions soient insuffisantes car,
en juger par les explications fournies hier, les

a

26
authors, jlldging by the explanations they gave atlteurs de cette proposltlon Supposent que cette
yesterday, assume that this "freedom" of the "libre aetivite:" du GOllverneffient va se potlrGovernment's will be exercised under an occU M suivre dans le cadre du regime d'occupation. La
pat ion regime. The USSR delegation., which, delegation de l'URSS qui, des le debut de la
ever since the discussion of the IndoneSian ques- discussion de la qUEstion indonesienne, a demande
tion was opened, has stood for the immediate la liberation immediate des detenus politiques, va
release of political prisoners, will vote for this voter en fave:ur de ce paragraphe avec ceUe
point with the reservation that it will abstain as reserve qu'elle s'abstiendra de voter sur les mots
regards the words "under paragraph 1" con- "conformement au paragraphe premier".
tained in that sentence.
Mr. TARAS1;:NKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): The delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
will also vote for this point with the same reservation as that made by the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

M. T ARASSENKO (Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine) (traduit du russe): La dele·
gation de la RSS d'Ukraine va egalement voter
en faveur de ce paragraphe avec la reserve que
vient de faire le representant de la delegation de
l'URSS.

The PRESIDENT: The reservations as explained
by the representatives of the USSR and the
Ukrainian SSR have bt,en noted.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de anglais) : Il est pris
bonne note des reserves formulees par les representants de l'Union des Republiques socialistes
sovi~tiques et de la Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine.

r

We shall now vote on paragraph 2.

Nous allons passer au vote sur le paragraphe 2.

A vote was taken by show of Jwnds, as follours:

Il est procede au v04e d main levee.

hI favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist ReM
public, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America.
Abstaining: Franc\".

The paragraph was adopted by 10 votes to
n0118, with 1 ab.r.tention.

Votent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuha,
Egypte, Norvege, RSS d'Ukrainc, Union des
Republiques socialistes sQviHiques, Royaume-Uni,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

S'abstient: la France.
Par 10 voix contre zero, evec tnw abstention,
le paragraphe est adopte.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs):
Paragraph 3, down to sl1b~paragraph (a), reads:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridiCJ.lle) (frqau.it de l'angJa·il,,):
Le pamgraphe 3, jusqll'a l'aJinea a), est redige
comme suit:

"Recommends that, in the interest of carrying
out the expressed objective.~ and desires of both
parties to estab1ish a federal, independent, and
sovereign United States of Indonesia, at the earliest possible date, negotiation, be undertaken as
soon as possible by representatives of the Government of the Netherlands and representatives
of the Republic of Indonesia with the assistance
of the Commission referred to in paragraph 4
below on the basis of the principles set forth in
the Linggadjati and ReI/villa Agreement and
taking advantage of the extent of agre~ment
reached between the parties regarding the proposals submittd to them by the United States
representative on the Committee of Good Offices
on .10 September 1948; and in particular, on the
basls that:"

"Recommande, afin d'atteindr~ les objectifs
reconnns et realiser les s01:haits exprimes par
les deux p::lrties, a savoir 1::1 constitution, dans le
plus bref delai possible, des Etats-Unis federaux,
independants et souverains d'Indonesie, que les
representants dn Gouvernement des Pays-Bas et
ceux de la Republique indonesienne ouvrent des
qu'ils le poulTont des negociations avec le concours
de la Commission mentionnee au paragraphe 4
ci-apres, en s'inspirant des principes enonces dans
les Accords de Linggadjati et du Renvilla, en
tirant profit de I'accord pat·tiel realise par les par M
ties sur les propositions qui leur ont ete soumises
le 10 septembre 1948 par le representant des
Etats-Unis a la Commission de bons offices et en
tenant compte notamment de ce que:"

Mr. MAUl< (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (traJulated from Russian): The President put to the vote the first and second sentences
of parag-raph 2 together. Before the vote I had
asked that the two sentences should be put to
the vote separately. I should like to ask that the
second sentence should be put to a separate vote.

M. MALlK (Union des Republiques soeialistes
sovietiql1es) (traduit d1' russe): Vous avez mis
aux voix ensemble la premiere et la deuxibne
phrase du deuxieme paragraphe. Avant le vote,
j'avai, demande que ces phrases fussent mises
aux voix sepnrement. le voudrais demander un
vote separe sur la deuxieme phrase.

The PRESIDENT: I shoLt1d like to draw the attention of the representative of the USSR to
the fact that I specifically said that we were
voting on the whole of paragraph 2 and that
that entire paragraph was read out in English
by the Assistant Secretary-General and interpreted into French, the other working language.
The paragraph has been voted on. I might reeal!

Le PRESlDR:-<T (t·radttit de l'anglais): Je tiens a
attirer I'attention du representant de I'URSS sur
le fait que j'ai bien specific que notre vote concernait I'ensemble du paragraphe 2, et qu'il a ete
donne lecture de tout ce paragraphe en anglais
par le Seeretaire general <tdjoint et que le para·
graphe a ete ensuite interprHe en fram;ais, la
deuxieme langue de travail. Un vote a eu lieu

27
to the representative of the USSR that the vote
was ton in favour ;md none agair.5t, with one
abstertion. The paragraph has therefore been
adopted.

sur ee paragraph~. Je p~lis rappeler a'.l representant de I'URSS que le :esu!tat a ete de 10 voix
pour, sans opposition, avec uoe abstention. Le
paragraphe a done et~ aUoIJte.

Mr, MALE (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Rj~ssian); ]n that case
I shott1d like to oake a reservation. I had asked
tr.at the first sentence should be put to the vote
separately, ar:d consequently I voted fo: the first
sentence of the paragraph 2. In the case of the
second sentence of that paragr~pl1, I abstain.

M. MALIK (Ur.ion des Re;mbliques sQcialistes
sovietiqu('s) (!taduit riu tllsse) : Oans ces conditions je veux fnire noe n~>lerve. J'avais detr.ande
que I'on mett!' aux voix tout d'abord la premiere;
phrase et j'ai vote pour cette premiere phrase du
paragraphe 2. Sur la deuxieme phrase de Cl" paragraphc, je m'abst:ens.

Mr. T ARASENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
RepuiliC;' (tmustatd from Russia'1): The repsentative of the USSR asked that the vote should
be taken in t'.V0 parts and that further, the refere:lce to paragraph 1 should be put to a se?arE.te
vote. There wen~ no objections to that proposal.
I understood th.. t paragrapi 2 was being void
on in two parts, and voted accordingly, If, on
the cont~ary, t11e President considers that the;
vote was taken on paragraph 2 as a whole, then
I must l':1ake the same reservation, I voted for
be first part of paragraph 2 and abstain on the
seCond part of that paragraph.

::\-1. TARASSENKO (Republique soc:aliste SQvietique d'Ukraille) Uraduit at/, yusse; ; Le re:pre'-sentan~ de l'URSS avait demande de diviser le
vote en de1x, puis de vater i part sur la reference
au paragraphe premie~. Cette demande; n'avait pas
sou1eve d'objectian, J'avc.is compris que le vote
sur le paragraphc 2 Se fais~it ell deux part:ef; et
j 'ai vote en cOnsequence. Si vous estimet, au
contra;re, que le paragraphe 2 a ete mis aux voix
dans son ensemble, je seral amene a faire la
meme reserve. .T'ai vD1e pOUT la premiere partie
dn pa~agr;1phf: 2 et je m'abstiens e;n ce; qui concerne la dwxieme partie.

The PREs:nENT: The re.presentative of Egypt
has asked for 'Jermissiol1 to gpeak but before
granting it I sh·ollld like to remind him that if
he intends to discuss paragraph 2 he; would not
be in order, sir-cl" the discussion of that pa~a­
graph is complete. I would take this oppo:tunity
to s<.y to the representatives of the USSR and
of the Ukrainian S$R that their reservations and
explanations have been luny recardeJ in lbe l11inntes of this meeting. and that I propose now to
pass to paragmj,lh 3.

Le PRESIDENt' (traduit de ranglais) : Le repre~
sentant de l'Egypte a dernande la pal'ole, ma:s
1ui rappe1er
avant de la lui a~corder, je tiens
que, s'il avait l'it~ten\ion de diseutcr le paragraphe 2, i1 contr€siendrait ;1n d:glement, la discussion Cl" 'c'e; paragraphe etant terminee. Je
voudrais profiter de cette occassiol1 pollr assurer
les re;presentant de 1TRSS et de la RSS d'Ukraiu~
que lcurs reserves et explications ont ete dument
enreg:str6:s au praces-verbal de ceLte seance; j e
propose Le passer maintenant au paragraphe 3,

Mahmoud FA\YZI Bey (Egypt): I do net want
:1nd1l1y to delay the work of the Council. I
merely wished to say a word in connexion with
:he; ~e.se:vations raise;d by the rep:ese~tatives of
the USSR and the Ukrainian SSR. If I am
allowed to do se,. I shall p,raceed very briefly..

Mahmoud FAWZI Bev (Egypte;) (trad'Uit de
l'(21/glais): Je ne veux pas retarder indument le's
travail x du Conseil. }t desirais settlement dire
que1ques mats
propas des reserves formulees
par les represen:ants de l'URSS et de la RSS
d'Ukraine. Si j'y suis aL:tarise. je serai tres btef.

T:tc PRE5IlJE:'T: I am very 'gl"d to h:l.Ve the
assurance 0: the representative of Egypt that his
remarks wi:l be brief, and I cal] upon him to
make H.em.

Le PRftSIDENT (tradllit de l'anglais); le suis
heureux d'avoir l'assurance du representant de
l'Egypte que ses observ,tiolls seront breves et je
l'invi:e a Ies presenter.

Mr. :MALIK (Union of Soviet SociaEst Republics) (translated fro'l1l- Rlwian:' : I reserve the
right to ma:"e a statement. depending upon what
the representative of Egypt will say.

M. MALll{ (Union de-s Republiques socia1istes
sovietiques) (tY-cduit ill, ru.tse): Je me reserve le
droit de. prendre la parole, s'il y n lieu, seIon Cl"
que contiendra 111 declaration que va faire le representant de I'Egypte.

Mahmoud F.AWZI Del' (Egypt): I could nullify
the reserva:ion just made by the representa~ive
of the USSR by 110t making any observations
myself, hut I shall neve.tt:e1ess proceed. My intention was to express my doubts as to the
validity of the reservations both of the represe:Jta~
tive of the; USSR and of the re[Jre~entatiyc of
the Ulcainian SSR. I said "my doubts". I am
not sure they are riKhl; I am not sure they are
wrcng. However, I should like to point out that
we might be creating a bad prectdent. I tal{e it
that wl:at wc He doin~ now-if we shOl'.1d contintle; in this way-will not I~e;cessarily create a
precedent to be followed in the future.

M.ahll1oud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'angtais): La reserve que vient de faire le representant de l'URSS pocrra:t devenir sans objet
si je decidais de ne pas presenter mon observation;
je la presenterai neanmoins. J'avais l'intention
d'exprimef :nes dOllies quant a la validite des
reserves bites. lint par le I"fpl'eSentant de rURSS
qne par le rep~ese::ttant de la RSS d"Ckraine.
J'ai dit "lUe;s doutes". Je ne suis pas sur de leur
bien-fonde; je ne suis pas sur nO:1 plus du
contraire. Nean:noins, je tiel15
faire remarquer
que nOltS creerions peut-etre un precedent facheux.
j'espere que ce que nOU5 jaisons ma:ntenan! si DOUS continuons de la sorte - ne creera pas
necessairemtnt un precedent pour l'avenir.

Mr. MAUK (Union 01 Soviet Socittlist Republics) (translated from Russian): I bdie:ve
the aprrehel1sions vf the representative ef Egypt

M. MALIK CJnion des Republiques soeialistes
soviCtiques) (t1'O.dllit d!t rllssf!) : A mon avis les
craintes du rep:ese:ttant de l'Egypte ne sont pas

a

a

a

28
are unfounded. No special precedent is being
creaetd here. I stated my position with regard to
paragraph 2 and made a proposal-before, and
not after the note had been taken-that the sentences should be put to the vote separately. I
voted accordingly. As my request was not taken
into consideration and the paragraph was put to
the vote as a whole, I made a reservation in that
regard. No precedent or violation of the rules of
procedures is involved. The Egyptian representative's fears are consequently completed unfounded.

fondees. L'on n'etablit id aucun precedent particulier. J'ai expose ici mon attitude a 1'egard
du paragraphe 2 et j'ai propose - avant et non
apres le vote - de mettre ce paragraphe aux
voix phrase par phrase. J'ai vote en consequence.'
Etant donne qu'il n'a pas ete tenu compte de ma
requete et que le paragraphe a ete mis aux voix
dans son ensemble, j'ai formuJe une reserve a
ce sujet. I1 n'y a ill. aucun precedent, aucune
infraction au reglement interieur. Ansst les
craintes du representant de l'Egypte sont-el1es
tout a fait sans fondement.

The PRESIDENT: As there was evident misunderstanding in the minds of the representatives of
the Ukrainian SSR and the USSR in reference
to what 'we had actually done in voting on paragraph 2, I permitted their explanations to be
made. I think that is an act of courtesy to the
two representatives in question which the Council
would have wished to accord under the circumstances.
However, it is desirable that we should adhere
to our rules; namely, that, when we have taken
decision by a vote on a particular paragraph,
the discussion should not be reopened. I hope
that in the, future conduct of this debate members
will abide by that rule.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Etant
donne que, de toute evidence, i1 y a eu un malehtendu dans l'esprit des representants de la RSS
d'Ukraine et de l'URSS, quant au sens exact de
notre vote sur le paragraphe 2, je leur ai permis
de s'expliquer. Je ne vois la qu'un aete de cour~
toisie envers les deux representants en question
et je suis certain que le Conseil m'approuvera sut
ee point:
Toutefois, it importe que nous nous en tenions
a notre reglement interieur; c'est-a-dire que nous
evitions de rouvrir la discussion apres avoir, par
un vote, pris tine decision sur un paragraphe deter~
mine. J'espere que les membres du Conseil voudront bien s'en tenir a cette regie au cours des
debats ulterieurs.

Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (tratlSlated from Russian): It is an
established practice in the Council.that explanations of a vote can be given by representatives
before and after the vote is taken. I assume that
we are not going to violate this established practice.

M, MALIK (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (trad~it du russe): Conformement
a l'usage qui s'est etabH au Conseil de securite,
les explications de vote peuvent etre fournies
avant aussi bien qu'apn!~s le scrutin. Je ne crois
pasqu'il soit bon d'aller
l'encontre de cette
pratique.

. The PRESIDENT: Paragraph 3 has been read
down to and including the words, " and in particular, on the basis that". We shalt now vote on
this part of the paragraph.

Le PRESIDENT (trMuit de J' ringJeMs); I l a ete
donne lecture du paragraphe 3 jusqu'a et y corn""
prig- "et en tenant compte notamment de ce que".
Je mets maintenant cette partie du paragraphe
aux voix.
ll'est proeide au vole dmain levee.
Volent pour:' Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egypte, Norvege, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d!Amerique.
S'abstiennent: France, Republiqu·e socialiste
sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des RepubHques
socialistes sovietiques.
Par 8 voi% contre zero, avee, 3 abstentions,
.
cette partie du paragraphs est adoptee.

a

A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:'
in fmlollt': Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States
of America.
Abstaining: France, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The pari of Ihe paragraph was adopted by 8
'Votes to none, with 3 abstentions.

.' Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs):
Sub-paragraph 3 (a) reads as follows:
"The establishment of the interim federal Gov~rnment which is to be granted the powers of
!nter~al g,?vernment in Indonesia during the
mterlm penod before the transfer of sovereignty,
shall be the result of the above negotiations and
shall take place not later than 15 March 1949,"
,
A vote was taken by show of handsl as follows:
In favour: Argoentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States
of America.
Abstaining: France, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist R,epublics.

a

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (traduit de l'anglct1.s);
Void le texte de l'alinea 3 G) ;
"La conclusion des negociations susmention~
nees devra aboutir a la constitution du gouverne·
ment federal provisoire, qui se vena conferer le
pouvoir d'exercer la gestion des affaires natio·
nales de l'Indonesie au cours de la periode transitoire precedant le transfert de souverainete et
cela avant le 15 mars 1949 au plus -tard;"
11 est proeUe au vl}te d main levee.
Volent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egypte, Norvege, Royawne-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.
S'abstiennent.' France, Republique socialiste
sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques so~
dalistes sovietiques.

29
The mb-paragraph was adopted by 8 'Votes to
no'}J~, with 3 abstentions.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Department c-f legal Affairs):
Sub-paragraph 3 (b) reads as follows:
"The elections which fire :0 be beld for the
pur:Jos€ of choosing representatives to an Indo~e::;ian conslitllent assembly should be completed
by 1 October 1.949 i"
A vote u.'as taken bj' show of hands, as follows:
In favour: Argentina, Canada, Otina, (uba,
Egypt. Norway, United Kingdom, United S:ates
of America.
Abstai1~ing: Fra:1ce, Ukrainian So-viet Soc!alist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Repuhlics.
The s1~b-paraYl'dph 'U>aJ adopted by 8 volu to

none. 'with 3 abstm#ons.

Mr. KERNO (Assi5tant Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs):
Sub'parngrnph 3 Cc) read.~:1.5 follows:
"The transier of sovereignty over Indonesia
by the Government of the Netherlands to the
United States. of Indonesia shodd take place at
the earliest possible d.1te a.nd in <1tIy case not later
than 1 July 1950;"
A vole 'Was taken by show of hands, as follow!:

. In favour: Argemina, Canaca, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States
of America.
Abstailting: France, Ukrabian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The sub.paragraph was adopted by 8 .votes io
none, wit!t 3 abstentions.

Pa·r 8 voix contre zero, avec 3 abstentions,
l'alitl~a. ut adopU.

M. K'i:IUm (Secreta:re general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (trad1tit de l'anglai:r):

Voici le texte de I'alinea 3 l7) :
"Les el.ections qui auront lieu en vue de cholsir.
les l"epresentants it une assemblee constituanh:,
d'Indonesie devron: Hre terminees le ler octobre

1949;"
Il est pro cede nu vote d- main levee.
Votent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,'
Egypte, Korvege, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.
S'~bstiemlent: France, Republique socialiste
sovietiqLle d'Ukra:ne, Union des Republiques!
socialistes sovietiques.
Par 8 'f-I1iJ: cn,:tre zero, G-vec 3 ahstentioHS,
E'alinea est adopte,
M. KERIW (Secretaire general adjoint charg~~
du Departement juridique) (traduit de l'angla-ils) :
Voi::i le texte de la premiere par tie de .J'aHnea3c):
"Le transfert aux Etats-Unis d'Indonesiede·
la souverainete sur FIndonesie par le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas devra s'effectuer le plus tot
possibfe et en tout cas le 1er juillet 1950 au plus
tard ;"

It est prDcede alL vote a ma.1n levee.
VotCJl.t POll"-: Argentine, Canac.a, Chine, Cuba,'
Egypte, No..,;ege, Royaume~Uni, Etats-Uni~,
d'Amerique.
S'(1b.s(iennent: Fra:lce, Re.publique soc:ialiste
sovie.tique d'Ukrlline, Union des Repub[ques
socialistes sovietiques,
Par 8 voi~ contra dro, aver 3 abstentions.
l'aJinea esl M[!ptl.

Mr. KElmo (Assistant. Se'cretary·General in
charge of the Depart:nent of Legal Affairs) :'The
last part of paragraph 3 reads ~s follow;

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint c:,arge'·
dl.1 DeIlartement jur~d:que) (!raduil ae l'cmgiails) :
Vbid' le tl"xte cle la derniere partie du para~
graphe 3:

; "Provided that if no agreement :s reached by
one month prior to the respective dates rererred
to in snb-12aragraph (a), (b), and (c) above,
the CommIssion referred to in sub-paragraph
4 (a) below or such other United Nations agency
as may be established in accordance with subparagraph 4 (c) below, shall iomediately report
to the Securi,y Council with its recommendations
for a solution of the difficulties;"

"Etant.entendu gue si-aucun accord n'intervie:lt
entre les parties 110 rnois au mains avant les dates.
mentionnees respectiveUlent aux alineas. 4), 11)
t:t c) ci-dessll.'1, lC!. Commission viser p:l.r le para-grnphe 4, alinea a) d~apres, all tout autre organe
des Kations Unies qui pourra etre constitue
confonnement aux dispositions du paragraphe 4,
alinea c) ci-apre5, adressera immediatement au
Conseil de secl1rite un rapport accompagne de
re<XImmandations en vue de resoudre les difficultes ;"

A vote was taken by show of hands, cs follows:

It est proctdl alt vote a mnin levh.

In faVD~t,..: Canada, China, Otba, Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States of America.

Votent pour: Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
NOl'Vegc, Royaume-Uni, Etats~Unis d'Amerique.

Abslaiwing: Argentina, France, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,

S'abstiennent: Argentine, France, Repllblique
socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Repu·
bliques socialistes sovietlques.

. The sub-paragraph was c:doptcd by 7 vales to
none, with 4 abstentions.

Par 7 voi.r C01ltre zero, avec 4 abstentious,
la dernib-e partie du paragmphe est adopUe.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
chaq;c of the Department of Legal Ahirs):
Sub-pangraph 4 (a) reads as follows:

M. KrcRNO (SecrHaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridiqt:e) (tnwuit de fan'Jlails):
L'aHnea 4 a) est rtdige c()mmc suit:

30
"The ComJJittee of Good Offices shalt henceforth be known as the United Nations Commission for Indonesia. The Commission shall act us
the representative of the Security Council in
Indonesia and shall have all of the functions as·
signed to the Committee 0: Good Offices by the
Security Council since .18 December, and t~e
functions CO:J.ferred on lt by the terms of thIS
resolution. The Commission shall act by majority
vote, but its reports and recommendations to the
Security Coundl shall present both majority and
minority views if there is a difference of opinion
among the members of the Commission."

.".La ,Commission de bO:ls offi~es. sera desormais
deslgnee SO~lS le nom de Comm1Ss~on des Nations
Ulli~s ponr l'Indoncsic,. El1e a~ra en qUlIlite de
re,P:eselltant du Cousel! de securite en Indo_
neSle et exc~ccra t~ute~ )e~ fonctions confiees
par le Consell de secunte a k Comnission de
bons offices depuis le 18 decembre, ainsi cue
les fouctions qui lui sont imparties aux termes
de la presentc l-esolutio:1. Ses decisions seront
pri;;t;; a la lllajodtc des voix, llHli;;, si des diver.
gences d'opinion se font jOllr au scin de ses mem_
bres, elk exposera, dans ses rapports et recom_
mandations au Conseil de securite, le point de vue
de la minor:te auss! bien que celui de la majoriti;"
Jl est procede Clt vote d main levee.

A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:
In fO'l.'our: Canada, China, Cuba, Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, UIUku States of America.
Abstaining: Argentina, France, Uhainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The sub-paragraph was adoptea' by 7 votes to
none, with 4 abstentions.

Par 7 VOl.'!: contra ::£ro" av~c 4 abstentions,
l'alinea est adoplf:.

Mr. KER;/O (Assista.nt Secretary-G!neraJ if:
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs):
Sub-paragraph 4 (b) read3 as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (tradllit de l'allgl(1~):
L'aEnea 4 b) est redige comme suit:

"The Consular Commission i5 reqllested to
facilitate the work of the United Nations Commission for Indoneaia by providing military ob·
servers and other staff and faci:ities to enable
the Commission to carry out its duties Ilnder the
Council's resoh1tiollS of 24 and 28 December 1948
as well as under the preser.t resolution, and shall
temporarily suspend other activities;"

"La COlr.llli!".sion con.<;\l]nire est pri& :le faciJiter
la tiich~ de la Commission des Nations Unies pour
l'Indonesie en meltant sa disp:lsition des ob5er·
vateurs militaires, tout autre personnel et toutes
facilites autre1l1tllt rcquisf':s, pour lui plOrmettre de
s'acquitter des t[\dleS qui lui ~olll confiees par les
resolutions elu CCllseil en date des 24 et 28 decem)re 1948 ainsi que par la presente resolution,
La Commission consu1aire. sllspendra provisoirement toule autre activite;"
11 es/ procede all vole d. maitl levee,

V'J!en( pour: Cana~a, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
NOI'Yege, Royaumc-Um, Etats-Unis d'Ameriquc.
S'abstiemlent: Argentine, France, Republique
socidiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

a

A 'Vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:
hI favour: Canada, China, Cuba, Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States of America.
Abstaining: Argentina, France, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of So-riet Socialist Rept:blics.
The sub-para.graph Wa.f adopted by 7 vof£s to
nOllf, with 4 abstentions.

S'absliC1I1IclIl: Argentinc, France, Republique
socialist" sovietiquc d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiqllf':s.
Par 7 'fJoix ceJ1ltre :;~:ro., avec 4 abstentions,
l'alillea ~st adopt;.

Mr. K"F1.RNO (A3sistant Secretary~Genera1 in
charge of the De:nlrtment of Legal Affairs):
Sub-paragraph 4 (c) reads as fellows:

M. KE:R~O (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Dcparlement i tlrid iquc) (tradm:t de l'GlIglr;i.r) :
L'alinea 4 c) C>it redige comme suit:

. "The Cor~mission shall assist the parties in the
lmpleme~tatlon of this resolution, and shall assist
the parties in the ::Jegotiations to be undertaken
under paragraph 3 above and is al1thorized to
make ~ecommendat:ons to them or to the Security
CounCil on matters within its competence. Upon
agreen:en.t being reached in such lleg-otiations, th~
CommlsslOn shall make recommendations to the
Secur.ity COllncil as to the nature, powers, and
functlons o~ t?e United Natiom agency which
should remaln In Indonesia to assist in the implementation of the provisions of such agreement
until so.vereig-nty is transferred by the GovernIIl~nt ut th~ Netherlands to the Ul1ited States of
Indonesia ;"

":~a Commission pretcra son concours aux
parties en vue de l'application cle la present: resolution, ain5i que clans les lH~gcciations qUI s'ou·
vrirol1t confonncmo;;nt aux dispositions du para~
graphe 3 ci-dessus; die est autorisee ~ ~dres~er
des recommanda:ions t.ux [J,ll-ties, atnSl q\! au
Cor.seil de sccllri:e, en Cl": qui wncerne les q~l":s·
tions relevant de sa competence. Lorsque les neg ociations susmentiollnces auront abouti un accord,
la Commis,ion adrcssera au Conseil de securitedes
recoml1lamlatiol1s relatives au cJraeter~, nux RO uvoirs et aux fonctions de I'organe ~cs Nat:o~s
Unies qui devra dell1cnrer en Indonesle pour pr:~
ter son conconrs
I'ex.ecutiun des clauses dudlt
accord, cn attendant que le Gotlvernement d~s
Pays-TIas ait efIectlle le transfcrt de sa sOuyeralnete aux Etats-Unis d'Indonesie;"

A vote was ta1wn by show of hands, as follows:

Il cst procedJ aH vote d main levee.
Volent pour: C:wad.t, Chine, Cubn, E;qpte,

In tav.ollr: c;al1ada, Chi~a, Cuba, Egypt, Nor-

way, Umted Kmgdom, Un:ted St~tes ot America.

Volent pOllr: Canada,

Chin~,

Cuba, Egypte,

NOl'vegc, Royaumc-Uni, Eto.ts-Unis d'Amerj(!u~.

a

a

Norvegc, Royallr:le-Uni, Etnts-Unis c'.'Amenque.

31
Ab.flailling· Argentina, France. 1Jkrainian
Soviet Socialist Re;lUblie, Union 0: Soviet Socialist Republics.

S'abstier.nsl:t: Argentine, France, Republique
sodaliste sovietiqae d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socia1i3tes sovietiques.

The .fHb-poragra-Ph was adopted by 7 votes to
none.. with 4 ab.teIlIiOlls.

Par' 7 V01X contre tJerc, avec 4 abstentiotts,
l'alinea est adopte.

Mr. K£RNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge oi the Department u£ Legal J\Eairs):
Sub-paragraph 4 (d) reads as follows:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Deparlement jmidique) (traduit de l'r:mglaiJ;) :
L'a1inea 4 d) est redige con1!11e $u:t:

"The Commission s~.all have authority to con-

"La Commission sera habilitee a consul~er les
regions de l'Indones.e qui ne
font pas partie de la Republique, et les represel1t<mts de ces regions pOl1rrollt etre a"1torises
prendre part aux negociations mentionnees au
paragraphe 3 ci·dessus;"

sult with re9resentaliycs of areas in Indonl!sia

other than tl-:e Republic, and to invite representatives of such areas to participate ir. the negotiations referred to in paragraph 3 above;"
A vote was taJen by show of I,ands, as follows:

reprp.senb.nt~ des

a

Il e.st procede all. vot~ d main levee.

In Favour: Canada, China, Cuba, Egypt, Norw"y, United Kingdom, United States of America.

N orvege, Royallme~Uni, Etats:'Unis d'Amerique

AbJtainil1g.o Argentina, France, Ukrainian
Sovic: Socidist Rep,lblic, CniOfi Ot Soviet Socialist Repllhlic&.

S'abstiennent.o Argentine, France, Rept:blique
socialiste :;ovietique d'Ukraine, Union des R~u­
bliqnes socialistes sovietiques.

The sub~pa,ragraph was adopted by 7 votes to
non!', with 4 ahten!iC17S.

l'aUnea est adoptt.

Mr. KER?'I"D (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs):
Sub-paragraph 4 (e) reaJs <Ill follows;

M, KEI:l'fO (Secret<J.ire general ac)omt cha,ge
du Departement juridique) (tradm:t de l'anghris):
L'a1inea 4 e) e.~t redige comme suit:

"The Commission or such other United Nations
agency as may be established in accordance with
its recommendation l-lIder sub-paragrapr. 4 (c)
above, is authorized to observe on hehali of the
·Cnited Nat:ons the elections to be held thro~gh­
O".'lt Indonesia and is further '\l1thorized, it: respect of tr.e territories of Java, Madura and
SumMra, to make recommendations regarding the
conditions necessary (a) to ensure that the elections are free and rlernorratiz, and (b) to ~llaran­
tee freedom of assembly, speech and pllhiication
at at times, provided that such guarantee is not
construed so as to ir_elude the advocacy of vio~
lence or reprisals;"

"La Commission, Oll tout autre organe des
Nations Unies qL1i pourr.a etre constitue sur sa
reoon1m:l.ndation conformement aux dispositions
du paragraphe 4, alinea c) ci-dessus, est autor:see
a exercer, au nom des Nations Unies, le cont,Ole
des elections qui se tie:1dront da:1s l'ememble du
territoin: de. l'Indonesie et, en Olltr-", a tnrmaler
en ce qui concer:Je les territoi:'es de Java, M<ldura
et Su~atra, des recommandations relatives aux
conditions necessaires tJ) pour ganmtir la liberte
et le caractere democratique des election.'; et b)
pour garantir, en tout temps, In. liberte de reunion,
de parole et de publlcation, etant entendu que cette
garantil' ne s'appllque pas a la liberte de provocation at:X actes de violence ou de represailles;"
Il est pr{):M.~ au vote d main levee.

A vote was taken by show of hands, a.; foliows.o

In favour: Canada, China, Cuba, Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States of America.
Abstaining: Argentina, France, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist RepubEc, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Tile .rub-paragraph was ado,bted by 7 voles to
flMlt.. 1tlith 4 absJent!1J1u.
Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary·General in
charge of the DepErtment of LegaL Affairs):
Suu-varagraph 4 (f) reads as follows:
"The Commission should assist in achieving-.
the eadies: possible restoration of the civJ ad~
min:stration of the Repub1ic. To this end it shall,
af!er conS:l1tation with th~ parl:es, recommend
the extent to which, consiste:Jt with reasonable
require:nents of plblic security 'l.ud the protectii)n
of life and propecy, areas controlled by the
ReFublic cnder the RemtWe Agreement (outside
of the Jogjalmrta area) shou~d be progressively
returned to the administration of the Government of the Republic of Indonesia, and shall
supervise stlch transfers. The recommendations
of the Comnission may include provision for

Votenl {Jour: Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,

Par 7 vaiJ( contre zero., avec 4 abstentions,

Votellt pour· Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
Norvege, R()ya:tme-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

S'abstiellntmt.o Argenthe. France, Republiql:e
socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Repu.
bliques socialistes sov:etiques.
Par 7 vdX' cot'.tre zCro, wec 4 abstentions,
}'ali'J'/ia est adoptc.
M. KrRNo (Secretaire general adjDint charge
du Departef:1ent juridique) (traduit de l'anglais) :
T:alinea 4 f) est redig-e comme suit:
"La Commission pretera son ccncours en vue
de r~tablir le plus tot possible I'administration
civile de la Republique. A ceUe fin, dIe indiquera,
par voie de reccmmandation et ilIJre.s <lYOil' consu:tc
les part:es, dans queUe meSllre, sous reserve ces
e..-cigences normalcs de la securite p11hlique et de la
sanveg<lrde des vies humaines et des biens, :es
regions (honds la ville de Djokjakarta) contr6lees par la Republiqne en vertu de rAceord
du Renville devrcnt ;>rogressi ..·ement etre a nouveau confiecs a l'administr.ation du Gouvernement
de la Republique indonesienne, et elle controlera
l'execution de ce t:ansfert. La Commission pourra

32
such economic measures as are required for the indure clans ses recommandations des dispositions.
proper functioning of the administration :lnd for visant, sur le plan economique, au bien~etre de -la·
the economic well-being of the population of the population des regions interessees. La Commis'~'
areas involved in such transfers. The Commis· . sion indiqllera, le .cas echeant, par voie de recomsion shall, after consultation with the parties, mandation et apres avoir consulte les parties,.
recommend which if any Netherlands forces shall quelles forces neerlandaises devror.t temporai're'be retained temporarily in any area (outside of 'ment etre maintenues dans une region donnee
the Jogjakarta area) in order to assist in the en vue de contribuer au maintlen de l'ordre public.
maintenance of law and order. If either of the Si l'une des parties vient a r.e pas accepter les
parties fails to accept the recorrunendations of recommandations de la Corn:nission visees par le
the Commission mentioned in this sub·paragraph, , present paragraphe, la Commission adressera it'nthe Commission shall report immediately to the mediatement au Couseil de securite un rapport
Security Council with its further recommenda- accompagne de nouve!les recomrnandations en
vue de resoudre les difficultes;"
tions for a solution of the difficulties;"
A vote was taken by show of hands, III follows;

11 at procede al. vote d main levee.

/n favour: Canada, China, Cuba, Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom, United States of America.

Votent pOllr: Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
Norvege, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Dnis d'Amerique.

, Abstainitlg;. Argentina, France, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet So·
cialist Republics.

S'abstiennent: Argentine, France, Republique
sodaliste sovietique d 'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiqlles.

The paragraph was adopted by 7 votes to n011e,
with 4 abstlmtions.

Par 7 voix contre J:ero, avec 4 abstentions,
l'alinea est adopte.

Mr. KRRNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Ltgal Affairs):
Sub-paragraph 4 (g) reads:

M. K'ERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (traduit de l'angla';,s) :
L'alinea 4 g) est redige camme suit:

"The Commission shall render periodic reports
to .the Council, and special reports whenever the
Commission deems necessary;"

"La Commis.sion adressera au Conseil de securite des rapport!; periodiques completes par des
rapports sp6ciaux toutes les fois qu'elle le jugera
necessaire ;"

A vole was taken by show of hallds, as follows:

It est procide Ott vate d main levee.

In favour: Canada, China, Cuba, Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom and United States of
America.

Fotent p014r; Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte.
Norvege, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Abstaining: Argentina, France, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic: and Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.

S'abstie1lneltt: Argentine, France, Republique
sodaliste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Repu~
bliques socialistes sovietiques.

The sub~paragraph was adopted by 7 votes to
none, with 4 abstentio.u.

Par 7 vo/x contre zero., avu 4 abstentions,
t'alinea est adopt/:.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary~General in
charge of the Department of Legal Affairs);
Sub~paragraph 4 (h) reads:

M. KRRNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (traduit de l'ang/m) :
L'alinea 4 h) est redige comme suit:

''The Commission shaH employ' such observers,
officers and other persons as it deems necessary."

"La Commission lltilisera, dans la mesure bu
elle le jugera necessaire, les services d'observateurs, de fonctiol1naires et d'autres personnes."

A ;-,ofe was taken by show of hallds, a.s follows:

Il est procede au vote a nwin levee.

hI favour: Canada, China, Cuoa, Egypt, Norway, United Kingdom and United States of
America.

Votent pOllr: Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte.
Norvege, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Abstainillg: Argentina, France, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic and Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.

S'oostiennent: Argentine, France, Repllbliqu"e
socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques.

The sub-paragraph was adopted by 7 votes to
no1'lC, with 4 abstelltions.

Par 7 voix contre zero" avec 4 abstentions,
l'alinea est adopte.

Mr. REliNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Legal Aff,drs):
Paragraph 5 reads:
"Requnts the Secretary-General to make available to the Commission such staff, funds and
other facilities as are required by the Commission
for the discharge of its functions."

M. KERNQ (SeCT/haire general adjoint charge
du Departement juddique) (truduit de l'anglaiJs) :
Le paragraphe 5 est redige comme suit:

A vote was taken by show of lLDJlds, as follows:

"Prie le Secretaire general de mettre a la disposition de la Commission le personnel, les credits
et autres faeiJites clont la Commission pourrait
avoir besoin dans l'exercice de ses fonctions."
Il est procMe au vo,le d main levee:.

33

In fa't'om: Canada, China, Cuha, Egypt, Kor.
way, U:tited Kingdom anc United States of
America,

Votent pour: Cana&., Chine, Cuba, Egypte.
Norvege, Royaume·Uni, Etats-Unis d'AIll6rique.

Ah.daining: Argentina, France, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic and Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.

S'abstiermeM: At:gentine, France, Republique
socialiste ~ovi~tjque d'Ukraine, Union des Repu.
~1iG.ues soeialistes sovi6nques,

Tire paragraph was adopted by 7 vote! to none,
,with 4 abstentums.

Par 7 voix C01ltre .z£ro\ avec 4 abttel1tions,
le partGgraphc ust adopte.

Mr. K€RNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
chargf' of the Department· of Legal Affairs);
Par<lgraph 6 reads:

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
du Departement juridique) (tradllit dt fang/iN):
Le paragraph:: 6 est rcdigc ccmme suit:

"Call! ltp011 the Government of the Netherlands and the Republic of Indor.esia to co-operate
fully in giying effect to the provisions of this
-resolution. "

"Invite le Gouvernemen~ des Pays-Bas et la
Repub:ique d'Inconesie a collaborer sans re~erve
a l'appJicatton des dispositions de 111 presellte resolution."

A vote W(l.S taken by show of hcmds, as [OUM!,!S:
in favour: Canada, Chin~, Cuba, Egypt, Nor·

Il est ,procede lm !'ote d maill let,ct!.

Vni:ed States of

Votent pour: Canada, Chine, CUDa, Egypte,
Norvege, Royaume~:;ni, Etats·Unis d'Ameriquc:.

Abstaini1lg: Argentir::a, France, Ukrainia:l
Sov':et Sacl<.llist Republic and Ur:ion of Soviet
Socialist Republics.

S'abstiennent: Argen:ine, Fr-anrf', RkJublique
sodaliste .wvi6ti<;ue cl'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques,

way, "Cnited Kingdom and

America.

Tile paragraph was adopted by 7 tiDies to notlt,

Pa,. 7 voi$ amtre 2cro, avec 4 abstentiotlS,

witl; 4 abslentions.

le paragrapht est adopte.

The PRESIDENj': Each section of the resolu·
tion has now been before the Council and has
been voted upon and accepted. Consequently, the
whole resolution has been accepted by :lle Council.

(trad1tit de l'anglais) : Chaque
ete soumi.<; a. l'examen du Conseil, mis aux voix et adopte. Par
cons&:uer.t, l'ensemble de la resolutio:1 a ete
adopt~ par le Conseil.

Unless there are any objections, I propose nQW
to adjourn this meeting.

S'il n'y a pas d'objection, je propose de lever
la seance.

The meeting rose (}t 6.20 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT

paragl"aphe de la rcsotutioll a

La seance est laver

n 18 h. 20,
