S/PRST/2004/16

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 May 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4970th meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 May 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “United Nations
peacekeeping operations”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and reaffirms its commitment
to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular, of the political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all States in conducting all peacekeeping and peace-building activities and
the need for States to comply with their obligations under international law.
“The Security Council recognizes that, as experience confirms, United
Nations peacekeeping operations play a critical role in the maintenance of
international peace and security, preventing and containing conflicts,
promoting compliance with international norms and Security Council
decisions, and building peace in post-conflict situations.
“It further notes that United Nations peacekeeping missions are charged
with increasingly difficult and complex mandates assigned to them by the
Security Council and recognizes in this regard the need for a continued review
of UN Peacekeeping.
“The Security Council notes that, in addition to the existing 14 United
Nations peacekeeping operations, there has been a recent surge in demand for
new peacekeeping operations. It is cognizant of the challenges this represents
for the United Nations system in terms of generating necessary resources,
personnel and other capabilities to meet the increased demand.
“The Security Council calls upon Member States to ensure that the
United Nations is provided with full political and financial support to meet
these challenges effectively, keeping in view the specific requirements of each
mission and bearing in mind the human and financial resource implications for
the United Nations. The Council also stresses that it is also important to ensure
that, while meeting demand for new peacekeeping operations, the resources
available for, and effective management of, the existing operations, are not
adversely affected. At the same time it underscores the need for efficient and
effective management of resources.

04-35380 (E) 170504

*0435380*

S/PRST/2004/16

“The Security Council calls upon Member States to contribute sufficient
levels of trained troops, police and civilian personnel, including those with
specialized capabilities and skills, bearing in mind the need for an increased
percentage of female personnel at all decision-making levels as well as
mobilization of logistic and administrative support, to allow the multiple
operations to start optimally and fulfil their respective mandates in an effective
manner. Enhancing the Secretariat’s capacities and using them in a rational and
efficient manner will constitute a crucial element of this response.
“The Security Council stresses also the need for improved integrated
mission planning as well as enhanced capacity for rapid deployment of
personnel and materiel to ensure efficient start-up of peacekeeping operations.
The timely and adequate replenishment of strategic deployment stocks is
essential to meet current and future demands.
“The Security Council recognizes the need to work, as appropriate, with
regional and sub regional organizations and multinational arrangements in
peacekeeping operations in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations to ensure complementary capacities and approaches before and
during the deployment and after the withdrawal of UN peacekeeping missions.
“The Security Council recognizes its responsibility to provide clear,
realistic and achievable mandates for peacekeeping missions. The Security
Council values, in this regard, the assessments and recommendations provided
by the Secretariat for informed decisions on the scope and composition of new
peacekeeping operations as well as their mandates, concept of operations and
force levels and structures.
“The Security Council believes that there is need to strengthen the
relationship between those who plan, mandate and manage Peacekeeping
Operations, and those who implement the mandates for these operations. Troop
contributing countries, through their experience and expertise, can greatly
contribute to the planning process and can assist the Security Council in taking
appropriate, effective and timely decisions on peacekeeping operations. The
Council recognizes, in this regard, that the meetings and mechanisms
established by its resolution 1353 serve to facilitate the consultations process.
“The Security Council recognizes that in peacekeeping operations there
are contributors, other than troop contributing countries, whose views should
also be taken into account as appropriate.
“The Security Council stresses that, in challenging environments, United
Nations peacekeepers may need to be provided with sufficiently robust rules of
engagement and the necessary military resources to enable them to fulfil their
mandate and, if necessary, to defend themselves. In all cases, the Security
Council considers the safety and security of all United Nations personnel to be
a priority. It stresses, in this context, the importance of enhanced capacity to
gather and manage information in the field.
“The Security Council takes notes of recent efforts to increase
coordination between missions in adjacent countries and encourages SRSGs to
explore synergies to ensure effective management of peacekeeping missions in
the same regions or sub-regions.

2

S/PRST/2004/16

“The Security Council stresses the need to regularly assess the size,
mandate and structure of peacekeeping operations with a view to making the
necessary adjustments, including downsizing, where appropriate, according to
progress achieved. It also encourages the continued commitment of the
international community to consolidate and sustain the peace on the ground
during and beyond the life of the mission.
“The Security Council further recognizes the importance of a gender
perspective, including gender training for peacekeepers, in Peacekeeping
Operations, in accordance with Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000) and
the importance of protection of children in armed conflict in accordance with
Security Council Resolution 1379 (2001).
“The Council recognizes the increased risk of the spread of
communicable diseases and certain criminal activities in post-conflict areas.
The Council welcomes efforts by the Secretariat to sensitize peacekeeping
personnel in the prevention of HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases in
compliance with Security Council Resolution 1308, and encourages the
Secretariat to continue implementing its guidelines on prostitution and
trafficking.
“The Security Council recognizes that effective peacekeeping operations
should be part of an overall strategy to consolidate and sustain peace. In this
regard, it stresses the need to ensure from the outset the coordination,
coherence and continuity between the different parts of this overall strategy, in
particular between peacekeeping and on the one hand and peace-building on
the other hand. To this end, the Security Council encourages closer cooperation
between all relevant UN agencies, funds and programmes and international
financial institutions, regional and sub-regional organizations and the private
sector. Ensuring lasting peace in the aftermath of conflict may require
sustained support from the UN and its humanitarian and development partners.
“The Security Council notes that training is increasingly becoming a
critical element in peacekeeping operations and recognizes the need to utilize
the expertise of experienced troop contributing countries. It encourages
international cooperation and support for the establishment of peacekeeping
training centres which could provide a wide range of training opportunities to
new and emerging troop contributors.
“The Security Council recognizes that meeting the demands of an
increasing number of UN peacekeeping missions will require the concerted
efforts of the Security Council, the General Assembly, the Member States of
the United Nations and the Secretary-General so as to ensure the necessary
resources and operational support are provided. The Council encourages
follow-up consultations on the surge in demand and invites the SecretaryGeneral to provide regularly in a timely manner to member States assessments
of evolving needs and shortfalls in UN peacekeeping, in order to identify
critical gaps and unmet requirements as well as steps required to meet these.
“The Security Council underscores the useful role of its Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations in the consultation process at different stages of
peacekeeping operations. It encourages the Working Group to pay special

3

S/PRST/2004/16

attention to matters relating to the surge in demand in UN peacekeeping over
the coming year and, as necessary, to report to the Council.
“The Security Council pays high tribute to all the men and women who
have served and continue to serve in United Nations peacekeeping operations
for their high level of professionalism, dedication and courage. It honours the
memory of those who lost their lives in the service of the United Nations and
the noble cause of peace.”

4
