S/PV.7966

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7966th meeting

Tuesday, 13 June 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Amendola
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Carrión

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Comprehensive approach to mine action and explosive hazard threat mitigation

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-16689 (E)
*1716689*

S/PV.7966

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency
Mr. Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann
The President (spoke in Spanish): It is my sad duty
to announce the passing on 8 June of Father Miguel
d’Escoto Brockman, President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-third session. Miguel d’Escoto was a man of
God who fought for peace in his country and region,
including through our Organization.
I now invite Council members to rise to observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
Mr. D’Escoto Brockman.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Comprehensive approach to mine action and
explosive hazard threat mitigation
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate in
this meeting: Mr. Alexander Zuev, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Rule of Law and Security Institutions of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations; and
Ms. Nathalie Ochoa Niño, of the United Nations Mine
Action Service in Colombia.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zuev.
Mr. Zuev (spoke in Spanish): The Security Council
deploys peace operations in increasingly complex
and asymmetric environments. The threats posed by
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices aggravate humanitarian crises and
hamper emergency responses. Explosive hazards injure
and kill civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers, and their presence undermines the prospects
for long-term sustainable peace.
(spoke in English)
Echoing the words of the Secretary-General,
peace without mine action is incomplete peace.
2/19

13/06/2017

Mine action achieves results in the most difficult
operating environments. As an integrated component
of peacekeeping and special political missions, mine
action is critical to the safety, security and mobility of
mission personnel and to effective and efficient mandate
implementation. It is also of critical importance to the
protection of civilian populations, especially children
and women. I will present only a few impressive
examples of how this challenge is addressed by United
Nations peacekeepers.
In Mali, training for peacekeepers enhances their
capacity to mitigate the threat posed by improvised
explosive devices and saves their lives. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, clearing explosive
remnants of war and other explosive hazards enables
safe movement for conflict-affected communities.
In South Sudan, the use of explosives detection dogs
ensures that protection-of-civilian sites are free
from explosive hazards. In Iraq, vast risk education
campaigns and humanitarian clearance of improvised
explosive devices allow for the safe return of displaced
populations and the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
In Colombia, mine action was one of the first items
parties negotiating peace agreed and acted upon.
(spoke in French)
Today’s debate reminds us that it is important to take
account of mine action in the formulation of mandates
and in renewing them. The Secretary-General’s vision
for the reform of the peace and security architecture
is structured around a continuum from prevention to
conflict resolution and from to peacebuilding and
sustainable development, with strong partnerships
playing a central role. Through partnerships with States,
regional agreements such as the one we have with the
African Union, and with civil society, mine action is
able to demonstrate its operational effectiveness and its
capacity for implementation through a wide range of
the Organization’s priorities.
With regard to conflict prevention, the depollution
and destruction of anti-personnel mines, explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices
make it impossible to access explosive materials that
could be recycled and used to construct new improvised
explosive devices. Reintegrating demobilized soldiers
and employing individuals from affected communities
in the area of mine action play a role in creating
conditions conducive to peace.
17-16689

13/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

(spoke in Russian)
As we have observed in peace processes, such as in
Colombia, mine action is an effective tool that allows
for the rapid and early strengthening of confidence
and peace in very complex and politically sensitive
environments. The strong leadership and coordination
role of the United Nations Mine Action Service
(UNMAS) supports and promotes those achievements,
as has been recognized by Member States. The role of
UNMAS in the field in coordinating the work of the
mine-action sector, including in complex operational
environments such as in Iraq, provides a coherent,
focused response, increased efficiency and costeffective delivery.
The doctrine developed by UNMAS, through broad
and comprehensive negotiations includes guidelines for
reducing the threat posed to peacekeepers by the use of
improvised explosive devices, which provides direction
for a consistent response within the affected mission,
and also includes international mine action standards
used by all operators to provide safe and effective
operations on a global scale.
(spoke in English)
In response to the call by the Secretary-General
in his report on countering the threat posed by
improvised explosive devices (А/71/187), UNMAS is
also using its expertise to coordinate the development
of standards for the United Nations on the disposal of
improvised explosive devices. The standards, expected
to be completed by the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly, will ensure conformity in training,
equipment and operations. UNМAS is also taking steps
to identify the building blocks for a whole-of-United
Nations response to improvised explosive device
threat mitigation. That has been a key area of concern,
especially for troop-contributing countries.
The Security Council expects to be kept informed
about threats and efforts to mitigate the threats posed
by explosive hazards. I wish to assure the Council of
the strong commitment of UNMAS to support the
Secretary-General and the work of the Council in
advancing the peace and security agenda in general.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Zuev
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ochoa Niño.

S/PV.7966

Ms. Ochoa Niño (spoke in Spanish): I am grateful,
Mr. President, for the invitation to address the Security
Council. It is an almost indescribable experience to
have the honour to be here before members to make
this statement.
I have been working in mine action in Colombia
for the past seven years, first with a civil-society group
and now as an official of the United Nations Mine
Action Service (UNMAS). UNMAS in Colombia
plays the critical role of technical adviser to the
national mine action authority, at a moment when
the negotiation, design and implementation of the
Final Peace Agreement between the Government of
Colombia and Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejército Popular (FARC-EP) necessitates
a functional, efficient, and effective Mine Action
sector. Since 2002, the national authority — the
Directorate for Integrated Action against Mines — has
been leading the development of the mine action sector
and the introduction of civilian humanitarian demining
in Colombia.
I have seen first-hand the enormous impact and
consequences that landmine and explosive remnants of
war contamination have had on the lives of my fellow
Colombians and on the development of my country.
For that reason, it has been incredibly gratifying
for me to be working with UNMAS to support the
process of removing the threat posed by landmines
and explosive remnants of war. Seven years ago, the
mine action sector in Colombia was at an early stage of
development and facing the daunting task of tackling
an enormous problem. Allow me to mention a few facts
from that time.
Colombia ranked second worldwide in the number
of victims caused by landmines and explosive remnants
of war. In more recent years, Colombia has recorded
fewer victims, but remains in the top five. Seven
years ago, more than 50 per cent of Colombia’s 32
departments recorded contamination — predominantly
then, as now, in the most remote and underdeveloped
rural areas. In those places, landmines serve to deny
access to services, restrict mobility and prevent the
use of productive land, thereby leaving little hope to
them recover from poverty. Moreover, the south of the
country is home to indigenous communities, who in the
past were trapped and cut off due to the presence of
landmines, which meant they could not walk in or out
of their territory; the humanitarian aid they needed was
completely blocked.

17-166893/19

S/PV.7966

Maintenance of international peace and security

My initial assignment took me to one of the most
affected districts in my country at the time. I trained
the first 50 of Colombia’s civilian deminers. We set
up groups under my supervision that were made up of
victims of the conflict, former military personnel and
ex-combatants. I saw them all working together with a
common goal, that is, to clear landmines and explosive
remnants and thereby help communities: a genuine
example of reconciliation.
Day by day, I learned that humanitarian mine action
was, in so many areas of my country, key to initiating
the socioeconomic reconstruction of communities.
That has never been more clear than in the context of a
peace process, as we in Colombia have seen.
In 2014, after many years of negotiations, the
peace process was at a difficult stage and confidence
levels between the Government and the FARC were
at a low point. Many even feared that the process
might collapse altogether. Given the circumstances,
the FARC-EP agreed to participate in the Gestures of
Peace process. Humanitarian demining, along with,
for example, the release of child soldiers, was chosen
as one of those Gestures. In that particular context,
the additional benefit of the humanitarian demining
initiative was that it enabled the Government and the
FARC-EP to demonstrate their commitment to peace
and to pursuing coexistence and reconciliation. As a
result, the Colombian army and the FARC-EP began to
work in cooperation, a significant milestone on the path
to peace.
For more than a year, the humanitarian demining
activities under the Gestures of Peace initiative
constituted the sole concrete action jointly implemented
by the negotiating parties. As a member of UNMAS, I
had the good fortune to be invited to participate in the
initiative. I was able to observe that, despite starting
from a point of mistrust, along the road both the FARC
representatives and the army were able to define shared
terms and goals and establish coordination mechanisms
to enable them to deal jointly with the challenges that
arose. Ultimately, humanitarian demining as a Gesture
of Peace succeeded in making mine action a key issue
in the eventual Final Peace Agreement.
Anti-personnel mines and explosive remnants of
war remain an enduring legacy of any conflict, whether
or not a peace agreement has been signed. Their presence
continues to have socioeconomic consequences for the
people affected and is an obstacle to the large-scale
4/19

13/06/2017

delivery of humanitarian assistance and development
in many areas of a country. Dealing with the problem
means not just eliminating the physical threat in the
soil but also setting up structures and processes that
can help individuals and communities recover from the
impact of mines.
In the case of Colombia, various provisions of the
Peace Agreement took specific steps and defined the
roles that mine action could play in that context. First,
it recognizes humanitarian demining as a precondition
for implementing other public policies, including those
related to replacing illicit crops and the collective return
of internally displaced persons. It is also fundamental
to development plans. Secondly, former combatants’
participation in the humanitarian-demining process
can be explicitly accepted as a form of punishment
within the transitional justice framework outlined in the
Agreement. Thirdly, their participation is considered
to be an act of reparation for the damage caused by
the conflict and as a way to help to reverse its effects.
Lastly, mine action is seen as a way to provide former
combatants with options for economic and social
reintegration and employment opportunities. It also
represents a unique opportunity for the United Nations
to maintain its support for affected communities, such
as those in Colombia, in particular because mine-action
initiatives help to promote efforts to achieve sustainable
peace. This is a process that UNMAS has had an
opportunity to initiate. Various kinds of demining
action, for example, might contribute to disarmament
activities being carried out under the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia.
UNMAS is supporting the relevant national
authority in its development of national demining plans
and in prioritizing the country’s worst-affected areas.
In addition, as a guarantor of international standards,
UNMAS has been working on the adoption of national
standards that will enable Colombia to improve the
efficiency of its operations and will ensure a faster
response in the communities where it is needed. We
have recently had the privilege of starting to train
former combatants, which will lead to the creation of a
civilian humanitarian demining organization that will
enable Colombia to achieve its goal of reintegrating
20 per cent of demobilized combatants.
There is a monumental challenge ahead for
Colombia — the consolidation of peace in the wake
of the signing of the Peace Agreement. Humanitarian
mine action will be a crucial activity in helping to put a
17-16689

13/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

definitive end to the violence and establish a foundation
for peacebuilding and development activities for all
Colombians. The Security Council has a vital role to
play in ensuring that demining can contribute in other
areas to improving the lives of communities affected
by mines and that it can result in the benefits that are
so evident in my country. I am proud to be here and
working for UNMAS, as an agent for change and for
strengthening mine action in Colombia. I hope that the
Council will continue to ensure that Colombians can
count on its support in dealing with the challenges that
they face. I am grateful for the enormous opportunity
to address the Council today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Ochoa Niño for her testimony and the information
she has given us.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia thanks Mr. Alexander Zuev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Operations, for his briefing, and Ms. Nathalie Ochoa
Niño for her briefing and for the work she is doing. We
are also grateful to Mr. Vincenzo Amendola, UnderSecretary of State for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Italy, and we would like to take this
opportunity to acknowledge and commend Italy and its
leadership for their mine action efforts.
“I was walking normally and I stood on a rock that
began to wobble. Just as I was about to jump off
it so as not to fall over, the mine that was there
exploded. It hurled me a distance of about 20 metres
and I hit a post as I fell. I fell into that hole, looked
down and realized that I had lost a leg and that the
other one was hanging by a single tendon. At that
moment I felt no pain. I now feel as if that pain will
never go away.”
That is the testimony of a 12-year-old boy who was
blown up by a landmine on 7 August 2010.
“Suddenly something exploded. I felt nothing,
but I fell to the ground and saw that my brother
had too. There was dust everywhere. I could not
walk, and I saw that my right foot was bleeding.
It has now been amputated because of a landmine.
Like everyone else, I was told later that this was a
residential neighbourhood that had been abandoned
because it was contaminated with landmines.”

S/PV.7966

That is the testimony of a 27-year-old university
student named Raed.
Civilians are the chief victims of contamination
by explosive hazards, particularly in post-conflict
situations. Landmines, explosive remnants of war
and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) continue
to take the lives of thousands of people and to leave
many others mutilated and disabled. Contamination by
such weapons continues to have severe humanitarian
consequences in many countries throughout the world.
For example, according to data from the Monitor
organization, the number of victims of landmines and
explosive remnants of war went from 9,220 in 1999
to 3,678 in 2014, that is, from an average of almost
25 victims per day, or more than a victim an hour, to
10 a day in 2014.
Despite that decrease, however, the number of
victims remains extremely high. The most concerning
issue relating to these more than 3,600 victims of
landmines and explosive remnants of war is that 79 per
cent of them are civilians. I repeat, 79 per cent are
civilian victims, innocent people who have nothing
to do with the conflict, and 39 per cent of those are
children, boys and girls; again, 39 per cent are children.
In 2014, in Somalia 81 per cent of the victims of
mines were children, and in South Sudan the number
stood at 60 per cent. It is clear that the use of such
weapons is far from having been eliminated. In addition,
from 1999 to 2014, more than 1,600 humanitarian
deminers were killed or injured, 53 of them in 2014.
The number of victims is extremely worrying,
and so is the proliferation of such explosives. In 2014,
there were victims in 54 countries around the world:
18 in sub-Saharan Africa, two in the Americas, 11 in
the East and South Asia and the Pacific, two in Europe
and Central Asia, and 11 in North Africa and the
Middle East. Likewise, in 2014 there were 57 countries
with areas contaminated by landmines and explosive
remnants of war: 12 in sub-Saharan Africa, 6 in the
Americas, 12 in East and South Asia and the Pacific, 14
in Europe and Central Asia, and 13 in North Africa and
the Middle East.
Although it is very difficult to calculate exactly
the extent of the contamination, in 2014 alone more
than 200 square kilometres were cleared of mines and
explosive remnants of war.

17-166895/19

S/PV.7966

Maintenance of international peace and security

Another consequence of this phenomenon
is the contamination of entire areas in which the
civilian population used to live and carry out their
daily activities. As a result, many populations find
their access to basic services such as water and land
restricted. Land becomes unusable and access to it, and
its use for agriculture, becomes impossible, including
after conflicts have ended, slowing peace processes and
paralysing development efforts. For this reason, people
often have no other option than to flee their homes
for long periods of time and to live in very precarious
circumstances as a direct result of the threat posed
by such explosives, swelling the number of internally
displaced persons and refugees and further complicating
their return once the conflict has ended. The harm and
destruction caused to civilian infrastructure such as
water-delivery and sanitation systems increases the
risk of the spread of disease.
Although the civilian population is the chief victim
of landmines, explosive remnants of war and IEDs,
humanitarian staff, both of the United Nations and of
other organizations, and peacekeepers are also victims
of these devices. In 2015 alone, we recorded 38 direct
attacks using IEDs against civilian humanitarian staff
and United Nations peacekeepers. This means that such
personnel are not only exposed to this threat but also
prevented from being deployed effectively so that they
can discharge their mandate.
Mine action does not, therefore, have just a
humanitarian aspect; it is also crucial for the forging
of a lasting and sustainable peace. It is not possible to
achieve effective piece without including mine action
in the mandates that require it. It is on the basis of this
understanding that we wish to underscore the work of
and the role played by the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) in the coordination of demining
efforts in the 18 peacekeeping operations and special
political missions in which it is operating. The work it
carries out in terms of mine clearance, education and
victim assistance is key for the building of lasting and
sustainable peace processes. Here I would reiterate
that in any conflict in which landmines were used
and explosive remnants of war remain, it will not be
possible to achieve a sustainable and lasting peace
without mine action.
Bolivia is a pacifist State that does not manufacture,
stockpile or use landmines. We have signed and
ratified the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
6/19

13/06/2017

Mines and on Their Destruction and the Convention on
Cluster Munitions. We call upon all States that have not
yet signed these Conventions to accede to them, and
we appeal to all States parties to the Treaty fulfil their
commitments thereunder.
It is against this backdrop that two weeks ago
Bolivia submitted a draft resolution that is currently
being negotiated. We would like to thank all delegations
for their positive input to the draft, and we hope to
continue to work towards an eventual adoption thereof
in the coming days. Bolivia firmly believes that this
draft resolution, once adopted, will set a very positive
precedent recognizing the threat posed by landmines,
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices, as well as the importance of mine action for
peacekeeping and for international peace and security.
I would like to conclude my statement by quoting
the preamble to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction,
popularly known as the Ottawa Convention. A total of
162 States are party to it; it is one of the cornerstones of
mine action around the world and of future treaties in
the same area. The preamble states:
“The States Parties,
“Determined to put an end to the suffering and
casualties caused by anti-personnel mines, that kill
or maim hundreds of people every week, mostly
innocent and defenceless civilians and especially
children, obstruct economic development and
reconstruction, inhibit the repatriation of refugees
and internally displaced persons, and have other
severe consequences for years after emplacement”
(General Assembly resolution 52/38).
This is one
Security Council.

of

the

responsibilities

of

the

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Amendola (Italy): At the outset, let me thank
Bolivia for bringing this important topic to the attention
of the Council. We look forward to the discussion on
the draft resolution, which will provide a possible
outcome for our debate. As has been mentioned,
the indiscriminate harm caused to civilians as well
as to peace and security by anti-personnel mines
17-16689

13/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and explosive remnants of war remains a matter of
great concern.
In this regard, I would like to thank Mr. Alexander
Zuev and Ms. Ochoa Niño for their reports, which
give us a complete and comprehensive overview of the
situation. Indeed, while mine action has been crucial in
helping communities recover from conflicts or receive
humanitarian assistance during conflicts, ongoing
events are generating new areas of contamination that
may deny civilians access to their basic requirements.
In that respect, let me recall that countries affected by
mines are mostly middle- and low-income countries.
Most of the victims are innocent civilians and often
children, which is our primary concern.
We are looking at the expanding range of the threats
to civilian populations. I am referring, for instance, to
the increasing use of new devices, such as improvised
explosive devices, particular by non-State armed groups,
as well as to the risks posed by unsecured weapons
and ammunition stockpiles located in populated areas.
As Mr. Zuev mentioned in reference to Iraq, and as I
personally saw with the Carabinieri, there are certain
implications of fighting those new devices in order to
rid the country of threats. Similarly, we are seriously
concerned about the recent indication that the number
of people killed or injured by mines and other explosive
remnants has been on the rise. Unfortunately, that trend
has been accompanied by signs of decreasing funding
devoted to mine action.
Against that background, we shall remain vigilant,
even within and through this Council. In that regard,
we commend the United Nations Mine Action Service
and the other United Nations entities involved in mine
action for their remarkable and professional work in
an increasingly complex environment. Their work is
also open to the involvement of civil society, which, of
course, is creating cooperation between our entities and
the civil mobilization through that process. We value
the coordinating efforts deployed by UNMAS and the
progress made on the Strategy of the United Nations on
Mine Action 2013-2018. Italy will continue to support
such efforts through our current chairmanship of the
Mine Action Support Group.
We will maintain our commitment to mine action
with regard to each of its five pillars — demining and
clearance, risk education, victim assistance, stockpile
destruction and advocacy, inter alia, against the use of
antipersonnel mines and cluster munitions. As party

S/PV.7966

to all the legally binding instruments relevant to mine
action, including the Oslo Convention, the Ottawa
Convention, the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons and the Convention on the Rights of People
with Disabilities, Italy strongly encourages all States to
join them. Those instruments set high standards for mine
action and they will universally mark clear progress.
To conclude, I would like to add my voice in
acknowledging that mine action is an essential step for an
effective humanitarian response, a precondition for the
safe return of internally displaced persons and refugees
to their homes and a prerequisite for reconstruction and
development, including for the achievement of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. For the reasons I
just listed, we stand ready to do our part.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to express my
appreciation for the Bolivian Presidency for organizing
today’s debate on mitigating the threats posed by
landmines and other explosive hazards.
As it has been more than a decade since the Security
Council pronounced itself on the issue, we welcome the
discussion, as well as the draft resolution put forth by
Bolivia on a comprehensive approach to mine action. It
is indeed fitting that today’s meeting is taking place at
a time when the twentiethth anniversary of the United
Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), the leading
United Nations entity that coordinates and implements
all aspects linked to the mitigation of the threats arising
from mines and explosive remnants of war, is being
celebrated. We thank Assistant Secretary-General for
Rule of Law and Security Institutions in the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alexander Zuev, and
Ms. Natalie Ochoa Niño for their respective briefings.
International humanitarian law puts limits on parties
to an armed conflict when their means and methods
of warfare that could cause unnecessary suffering.
Only acts that are proportional to the lawful objective
of a military operation and necessary to achieve that
objective are allowed. International humanitarian
law also requires parties to an armed conflict to take
necessary precautions when using landmines. That is
aimed at minimizing their indiscriminate effects in
armed conflicts. As such, parties must record their
placement of landmines as well as they possibly can,
as well as remove or otherwise render them harmless
to civilians or facilitate their removal of the end of
active hostilities.

17-166897/19

S/PV.7966

Maintenance of international peace and security

That notwithstanding, the continued use of
anti-personnel mines and improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), as well as the number of civilian casualties
from the use of such weapons with indiscriminate
impacts and explosive remnants of war, are indeed
sources of concern. As a country that has suffered from
the impact of landmines and other explosive devices
for several decades, Ethiopia attaches great importance
to mitigating the impact of landmines accordingly.
Ethiopia has ratified the relevant international legal
instruments and has been actively engaged in mine
action and clearance.
The need for a comprehensive and coordinated
approach aimed at addressing the threat and impact
of mines and unexploded ordnance has long been
recognized by the Security Council, since its
presidential statement S/PRST/2003/22, adopted in
2003, which could help integrate stockpile destruction,
mine clearance, victim assistance, awareness creation,
as well as the need to work towards the eventual
elimination of anti-personnel landmines. The
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and
on their Destruction certainly provides an important
international framework for addressing the problem of
landmines. In addition, we believe that the resolution
just adopted sends a strong signal regarding the need
to mitigate the threats posed by landmines and other
explosive hazards and promote peacebuilding and
stabilization. It will also reinforce the implementation
of existing to international legal instruments and
enhance cooperation between and among Member
States, including through the sharing of knowledge and
experience in mine action.
Peacekeepers continue to play a critical role in
mine action, particularly in demining-related activities.
As a major troop-contributing country, the use of IEDs
in recent years against peacekeepers by armed groups
in asymmetrical warfare is a source of great concern
to us. Strengthening the responding capacities of
peacekeepers to the threat posed by mines, IEDs and
explosive remnants of war would require the Security
Council to renew its commitment to mine action and
enhance the capacity of peacekeepers to address
the threats arising from mines, IEDs and explosive
remnants of war through the provision of adequate
and sustained support, including when authorizing the
deployment of missions and renewing their mandates.
8/19

13/06/2017

In conclusion, I would like to end my statement
by affirming our commitment to work towards a
comprehensive approach that could enable us to prevent
or limit the damage and suffering caused by mines,
IEDs and explosive remnants of war.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay thanks the Bolivian Presidency for having
organized today’s informative meeting, as well as for
circulating the concept note and putting forth today’s
draft resolution. Due to today’s meeting being on a
topic of particular importance for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it requires our attention.
We would also like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for the Rule of Law and Security Institutions
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alexander Zuev, for his briefing, and Ms. Nathalie
Ochoa Niño of the United Nations Mine Action Service
in Colombia. I would like to congratulate her for the
work she is doing and for her very eloquent briefing.
Uruguay, commensurate with its long-standing
pacifist philosophy, is a country deeply committed
to the disarmament and non-proliferation regime and
advocates for strengthening multilateralism as part of its
efforts to promote universal and complete disarmament.
In line with the this, Uruguay has signed and ratified
the relevant existing regional and international treaties
for such purposes.
We all know that anti-personnel mines and explosive
remnants of war are responsible for countless victims
in various conflicts, many of which continue to rage.
Every year, these weapons kill or injure thousands of
people, without making a distinction between civilians
and combatants, and imperil the lives of those living
in the affected areas and limit the local populations’
access to basic services. A large number of civilians
die or suffer injuries from these weapons, even long
after the end of armed conflict. Of particular note is
the risk of unexploded remnants of war explosives
to children, who are the most vulnerable victims in
conflict situations.
In the light of the foregoing, it is essential that
we strengthen the regulatory framework prohibiting
the use of anti-personnel mines and spare no effort
to universalize the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction. In that
regard, Uruguay would urge States that have not signed
the Convention to accede to it as soon as possible, in
17-16689

13/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

particular those States that currently manufacture and
sell such weapons. Similarly, Uruguay encourages all
Member States to comply fully with their international
obligations and uphold their existing commitments
under international law pertaining to disarmament and
non-proliferation.
The regulation of the arms trade and the
implementation of existing instruments are crucial if
we are to avoid the consequences suffered by civilian
victims of armed violence and if we are to promote
international peace and security. As the SecretaryGeneral points out in his most recent report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2017/414),
commitment to conflict prevention compels us to
address the illicit and irresponsible transfer of weapons
as such transfers make armed conflict possible and
jeopardize efforts to protect and build peace. For
that reason, the ratification of, and accession to,
international instruments intended to protect civilians,
such as the historic Arms Trade Treaty, will make a
major contribution to protecting civilians from harm.
With regard to mine action within peacekeeping
operations, Uruguay wishes to acknowledge the
assistance provided by the United Nations in affected
areas. We also wish to convey our gratitude and
appreciation to the agents and institutions that work to
clear out landmines and remnants of war explosives and
to mitigate the impact of these arms on people’s lives.
Finally, we would like to emphasize that, if we are
to end the suffering of thousands of people caused by
these weapons, we must secure the commitment and
determination of the entire international community
to eliminate them, because the use of anti-personnel
mines by any actor is unacceptable.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Bolivian presidency of the Security
Council for convening today’s important debate and for
its resolution on mine action, in which France is actively
participating. I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zuev and Ms. Nathalie Ochoa Niño
for their very illuminating briefings.
The threats posed by anti-personnel mines and
explosive remnants of war, as well as the ongoing use
of cluster munitions, are a serious and major concern in
today’s world. That is further compounded by numerous
challenges posed by the growing use of improvised
explosive devices with an ever-increasing death toll.
Recent news of incidents in Mali, where we have all

S/PV.7966

already been hard hit, has been particularly notable.
But this worrisome observation applies in fact wherever
civilians, local forces and troop-contributing countries
are confronting this scourge of modern conflict on a
daily basis. These weapons can kill and maim right
away or at a later date, randomly striking long after
they have been laid. They make no distinction between
civilians and troops.
Given this extremely acute threat, we have moral
and legal obligations — not just an obligation related
to security concerns — with respect to the populations
we must protect, the personnel we deploy, and the host
States with which we collaborate. I am also thinking of
the first teams on the ground — the civil and military
mine-clearance experts. I would like to pay tribute to
them for their ongoing and unstinting commitment as
they risk their lives. What they do is key because it
saves lives every day, not only by protecting civilians
from these weapons, but also by creating the security
conditions for Blue Helmets to be deployed and
humanitarian personnel to reach populations in need.
Anti-personnel mines, explosive remnants of war
and improvised explosive devices form a complex whole.
The presence of mines in residential and cultural areas,
the spread of unexploded ordnance, and entrapment by
improvised explosive devices are particular challenges.
To address them, we must garner specific expertise and
resources. As in many other fields, there can be no one
single response, but rather a series of tailored, distinct
but complementary measures whose consistency must
be maintained and strengthened.
We should first provide actors on the ground, be
they troops or deployed forces, with the operational
means necessary for their action. Specialized
non-governmental organizations should also be
supported, as they work tirelessly in extremely
dangerous areas. New technologies must play a role in
foreseeing and mitigating threats. Accordingly, I would
like to commend all of the Secretariat’s innovative
initiatives in this area. I would also like to pay tribute
to the outstanding work of the United Nations Mine
Action Service, under the particularly effective and
dynamic leadership of Agnès Marcaillou, together with
other United Nations bodies.
We also have a major responsibility in terms
of assistance, particularly in the areas of training
and awareness-raising. It is indeed important to let
susceptible countries to build their own know-how,

17-166899/19

S/PV.7966

Maintenance of international peace and security

so that they do not have to depend on that of others.
That also means stepping up our education efforts to
improve local populations’ understanding of risks. Such
prevention efforts are an essential part of our work and
should be part of the clearing and security programmes
undertaken to protect the civilian populations.
In that context, France’s efforts focus in particular
on supporting the security sector reform in various
partner States. We support the training of national
bodies and provide assistance to non-governmental
organizations deployed in relevant countries. Like
Handicap International, these non-governmental
organizations are doing an admirable job. In order
to ensure stability, France, working in an essentially
humanitarian framework, supports specialized training
in a number of post-crisis countries. We also support
demining programmes, particularly in the Middle East
and Africa, in close cooperation with our partners. For
example, we support such regional initiatives as the
Development Centre for Post-Conflict Operations in
Mine Clearance and Decontamination in Benin.
However, operational activities cannot simply be
the sum of individual efforts. The complexity of the
threat requires multiple stakeholders engaging in a
coordinated response, based on the diversity of expertise
and respective means. The Mine Action Support Group,
currently chaired by Italy, is an excellent example of this.
France also works closely with the European Union and
the main non-governmental organizations involved.
Bolstering our resources on the ground will finally
be coupled with the need to ensure the universalization
and the full implementation of the legal tools at our
disposal. The Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction comes to mind as a
reference instrument for combating anti-personnel
mines, as does the Convention on Cluster Munitions,
signed in Oslo, which bans cluster munitions. Many
countries today share the same objectives as those
conventions, even if they are not yet signatories. And
some are considering becoming signatories, which we
must encourage and facilitate.
In the face of ever-increasing casualties due
to such weapons, time is short. We are duty-bound
morally, politically and legally to intensify our efforts
and strengthen their coherence so as to minimize the
bloodshed caused by those deadly devices. I pledge
France’s full support.
10/19

13/06/2017

Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Mr. Zuev and Ms. Ochoa Niño for their vivid briefings.
I want to thank you in particular, Mr. President, for
bringing this issue before the whole of the Security
Council. It is an issue that we seldom discuss, but one
that has an impact on conflict after conflict ever since
the United Nations came into existence. Sadly, that
impact is still being felt in too many places today.
To simply treat this issue as any other on our
agenda would be a mistake. Anti-personnel landmines
are nothing short of indiscriminate killers. They do
not recognize sides in conflict; they recognize no age
or affiliation.
I am proud to represent a country that wants to
see an anti-personnel-mine-free world. In 1995 our
predecessors sat around this table and unanimously
adopted resolution 1005 (1995), which recognized the
global threat posed by those devices. At the time we
focused on Rwanda and a select group of countries. Two
years later, Princess Diana walked the streets of Cuito,
Angola, greeting children affected by the scourge of
landmines. She spoke with the survivors and saw the
human face of an epidemic, a man-made epidemic,
that took the form of a 100 million mines scattered
throughout more than 70 countries. Twenty years ago,
landmines claimed a new victim every 20 minutes.
That was the state to play two decades ago. In the
face of what seemed to be insurmountable odds, we
collectively said then that this must end. Later that year,
we came together as Governments, civil society and
survivors from around the world to channel momentum
and agree to a treaty banning antipersonnel mines.
Twenty years later, we have undoubtedly come a
long way, but 2015 showed what is at stake if we take
our foot off the accelerator. That year saw a 75 per cent
increase in casualties compared to 2014, and it was the
most deadly year on record since 2006. That marked
increased was largely due to the increase in the use of
improvised anti-personnel mines by non-State armed
groups in the Middle East. What is worse is that of the
6,461 people killed or injured that year, more than one
in three was a child.
The thousands who lost life and limb do not tell the
full story. Millions more are forced to live alongside land
littered with anti-personnel mines, cluster munitions
and other explosive remnants of war. By virtue of
their very existence, livelihoods are put at risk. They
prevent children from attending school; they prevent
17-16689

13/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

farmers from growing crops to feed their communities;
they prevent humanitarian aid from reaching those
in need; and they make the journey home impossible
for refugees.
It is for all those reasons that the United Kingdom
announced in April that we would be increasing our
support for anti-mine action. We announced more
than $125 million for the United Kingdom Global
Mine Action Programme over the next three years.
Those funds build on the existing $38 million that
our Department for International Development has
already pledged. They will be used to clear 150 square
kilometres of lands of mines, cluster munitions and
other explosive remnants of war
Because of those projects, 800,000 people will no
longer live under the threat of landmines, and 100,000
people will receive education on the dangers they
pose. The United Kingdom is also making significant
progress towards meeting its obligations under the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines
and on Their Destruction in order to demine the
Falkland Islands after we announced a new $25 million
programme phase in September last year, which we are
implementing now.
We are focusing our efforts on the countries where
we can make the biggest impact, where the greatest
number of people live in the shadow of explosive
remnants of war. By the end of the three years,
Afghanistan, Somalia and South Sudan, will be among
the countries that have benefited from this United
Kingdom-sponsored project.
Sadly, this will not be enough. Sixty countries and
four territories are still contaminated with landmines.
Nearly a dozen of those have more than 100 square
kilometres that have been forfeited to mines. Landmines
are still destroying opportunity and hope. If we are to
restore that hope, we must come together again as we
did 20 years ago. Ending mines will require money,
education and survivor assistance. We call on each
and every Government that will speak in the Chamber
today to play that part.
As conflicts subside today, the explosive remnants
of war do not. Landmines respect no ceasefire; they
respect no peace agreement. In any given week, the
Council discusses the need to end violence, conflict
and war in some part of the world. If we do not tackle

S/PV.7966

the global scourge of landmines, we are putting those
who have emerge from conflicts even further behind.
Twenty years ago, we showed the collective action
was possible. Now it is time to finish the job.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Against the
backdrop of the proliferation of asymmetric conflicts,
Senegal commends the Bolivian presidency for holding
a briefing on a topic that is so important to international
peace and security — demining.
I would like to thank our briefers today,
Mr. Alexander Zuev, Assistant Secretary-General for
Rule of Law and Security Institutions of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Nathalie Ochoa
Niño, of the United Nations Mine Action Service in
Colombia, for their instructive briefings.
Ms. Ochoa Niño explained why humanitarian
demining was a precondition for peace, reconciliation
and development and a real turning point for the
Colombian Final Peace Agreement, which her
country signed.
Since the adoption, 20 years ago, of the the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and
on Their Destruction, otherwise known as the Ottawa
Convention, significant efforts have been made to
combat anti-personnel mines — as evidenced by the
accession of 162 Member States to that Convention.
Senegal is one such State. Despite the mobilization of
the international community, those explosive devices
continue to be a genuine threat to international peace
and security, in particular in a context of a growing
number of non-State actors, such as terrorist groups.
Even more concerning, as mines get cheaper
because they are easy to produce, their removal
becomes exponentially more expensive — with a
devastating impact on the socioeconomic development
of contaminated areas. Since Senegal incorporated
the Ottawa Convention into its domestic laws and
implemented relevant institutional mechanisms, it
subsequently destroyed its stockpile of anti-personnel
mines between 2000 and 2004. Since then, my
country has continued to ask countries that produce
such weapons to demonstrate greater political will in
limiting their manufacture in line with the goal of the
total destruction of such weapons and explosives. With
the support of its bilateral and multilateral partners,
a humanitarian demining programme has been

17-1668911/19

S/PV.7966

Maintenance of international peace and security

launched in southern Senegal with a view to removing
landmines from the entire area in order to ensure the
effective return of the population to the area and the
resumption of economic activities in a region with vast
economic potential.
From 2008 to date, thanks to the Senegalese
National Mine Action Centre, an area of more than
1.8 million square metres spanning four communities
has been completely demined. Similarly, Senegal
focuses all the required attention on other important
aspects of humanitarian demining that are elements
of mine action, including risk-reduction education,
advocacy, assistance to victims and the destruction of
stockpiled mines. With regard to the astronomical costs
of demining efforts, the Government of Senegal has
decided to earmark a portion of its budget every year
to that important endeavour. It will not be sufficient,
however, and that is why we require the support of our
partners in order to remove all anti-personnel mines
by 2021.
Since its entry into force in August 2010 with 101
States parties and 18 State signatories, the Convention
on Cluster Munitions has enjoyed the growing support
of the international community, which has fully taken
note of its legal and moral accountability in attaining
a world free of cluster munitions. It should be recalled
that those weapons have reprehensible traumatic and
psychological effects on civilian populations. We are
pleased to state that, in the same spirit that inspired the
parties to the Ottawa Convention, African countries,
including my own, play a key role in the implementation
of this international legal instrument. In that regard,
Senegal, which does not possess such weapons and is
committed to honouring its obligations, along with its
international partners, will continue to raise awareness
among other States in order to make the Convention
on Cluster Munitions universal, as it is essential to
international peace and security, and in particular the
protection and dignity of civilians.
As a major contributor of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Senegal commends the
attention paid to the threats posed by landmines, the
explosive remnants of war, improvised explosive devices
and cluster munitions in the context of discharging
mission mandates. Similarly, my country commends the
fact that this dimension is under consideration by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. The
use of such weapons, in particular by non-State actors,
such as terrorist groups, in a volatile and unpredictable
12/19

13/06/2017

environment similar to that in which the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali operates, is an additional challenge to
peace soldiers.
We take this opportunity to commend the tireless
efforts of the United Nations, and in particular of
the United Nations Mine Action Service, through
cooperation, capacity-building and technical assistance
to achieve a world free of such explosive devices, which
are responsible for the indiscriminate killing of children
and adults, civilians and military personnel.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its readiness
to work with the other members of the Security Council
to make a positive contribution to the relevant draft
resolution that your country, Sir, has submitted for
its consideration.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my deepest sympathies to all the innocent
civilians who have been killed or maimed by explosive
hazards. I would also like to applaud all those working
towards demining, including today’s excellent briefers,
for their courage and professionalism.
Twenty years ago, in 1997, the momentous Ottawa
Convention was opened for signature. Since then,
we have seen significant advancements, including
the steady destruction of stockpiles and progressive
decreases of minefields in most of the affected countries.
However, as we face global crises, such as the rise in
violent extremism and terrorism, the threat of explosive
hazards is far from declining. According to Landmine
Monitor, the number of landmine victims jumped from
3,700 in 2014 to 6,500 in 2015, and the United Nations
is calling for a 50 per cent increase in funding for mine
action from $347 million in 2016 to $511 million in
2017. The needs are greatest in active conflict zones,
such as those in the Middle East and it must be our
shared concern. The fundamental challenge here is how
to implement concrete actions in conflict situations.
Humanitarian actions cannot be undertaken
without mine action, nor can displaced people return to
their homes. Mine action is therefore a prerequisite for
peace and security. In parallel with the peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations, strengthening the
national capacities of affected countries should be our
primary target. In addition to demining, providing
victim assistance and risk-reduction education to
affected communities is critical to making peace and
stability sustainable. Based on those ideas, Japan
17-16689

13/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

keeps contributing to the Voluntary Trust Fund of the
United Nations Mine Action Service. We believe that it
improves the humanitarian situation around the world,
especially in the Middle East region, including Syria,
Iraq and Afghanistan, and enhances the resilience of
local communities.
Japan has long made assistance to mine action one
of its priorities, and we are proud to be the secondlargest contributing country, with total cumulative
contributions from 2011 to 2015 amounting to
$263 million. I should like to take this opportunity to
share several lessons learned from our own experiences,
which might be useful in terms of mine action.
First, we recognize that triangular cooperation
deserves to be promoted. Assistance to Cambodia
has been our longest commitment in that field. Based
on the knowledge and experience yielded from such
cooperation, Japan and Cambodia are now expanding
triangular technical cooperation with Colombia, Angola
and Laos through the Cambodian Mine Action Centre.
Secondly, a wide range of partnerships is of great
importance. Japanese private companies and civil
society organizations are involved in collective efforts.
For example, a high-tech clearance machine, produced
by a Japanese company, is capable of crushing cluster
munitions with its specialized bucket, and that company
lends machines to a non-governmental organization for
its activities in Laos.
Thirdly, gender mainstreaming should be
highlighted. There is no question that women’s
participation enhances the quality of those activities.
That is particularly true when it comes to approaches
to women, children and victim assistance strategies.
Ms. Nathalie Ochoa Niño’s accomplishments are a
perfect testimony to it.
In 2014, we set a political goal to realize a
landmine-free world by 2025 under the framework of
the Ottawa Treaty. To achieve this goal, the international
community still has a lot to do. Japan will continue to
play an active role in mine action in collaboration with
the United Nations, Member States, private companies
and civil society organizations.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zuev and Ms. Ochoa
Niño for their very informative briefings today. We,
too, would like to extend our appreciation to those
brave individuals and organizations that put their

S/PV.7966

lives on the line to mitigate landmines, improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) and unexploded ordnance in
conflict-ridden areas. We hope that today’s discussion
will help us continue to highlight the importance of
humanitarian mine action, countering the threat of
improvised explosive devices and mitigating the danger
of explosive remnants of war.
The United States has been the world’s single largest
financial supporter of such efforts. We have provided
more than $2.8 billion in such aid since 1993 in more
than 99 countries for conventional weapons destruction,
which includes the clearance of my landmines and
unexploded ordnance, including in Colombia where
we are the largest donor in the sector. We urge other
Member States to join us in a robust international
partnership to reduce the humanitarian impact of
landmines, unexploded ordnance and improvised
explosive devices on vulnerable communities around
the world.
Today public and private sector organizations
are playing a vital role in clearing IEDs and other
explosive devices often before conflict and violence
have completely ceased. These partners will continue
to provide essential support to ease the safe return of
civilians in areas where fighting has taken place.
Nowhere are these challenges more prevalent than
in our ongoing efforts to defeat the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). Many of the areas that have
been liberated or are in the process of being liberated
from ISIS are severely contaminated with landmines
and IEDs. Some of these explosive devices operate
as booby traps meant to spread terror even after ISIS
fighters have departed. An important part of defeating
ISIS involves clearing these landmines, IEDs and
unexploded ordnance so internally displaced persons
and refugees can return to their homes. This also
involves ensuring key infrastructure points are free
of landmines and IEDs so that water service can be
restored and sanitation services resumed.
However, there remains the potential for confusion
about the role of humanitarian mine action implementers
and military and security personnel who are operating
in evolving conflict areas to mitigate IEDs. In order
to best protect mine action personnel, it is important
that Member States not conflate IED clearance with
military counter-IED activities. Affected States,
donors, the United Nations and humanitarian mine
action implementers should work together to make sure

17-1668913/19

S/PV.7966

Maintenance of international peace and security

that all personnel searching for and disposing of IEDs
have the appropriate skills to do the job. The aim should
be to ensure the safe, effective and efficient disposal
of IEDs.
The United States will continue to support the
efforts of the United Nations and others to mitigate the
humanitarian consequences of landmines, unexploded
ordnance and IEDs.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting. We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Zuev and Ms. Ochoa Niño for their briefings.
In recent years, thanks to the joint efforts of the
international community, progress has been made in
the area of international mine action. The harrowing
problem of landmines has been mitigated in some
countries and regions. China appreciates the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations in this area.
At present, the international and regional security
situation is undergoing complex and profound changes.
In many countries and regions affected by war or armed
conflict, landmines and explosive remnants of war pose
a serious threat to civilian lives and property and impede
economic development and social reconstruction.
In recent years, improvised explosive devices have
become a means for terrorists and extremists to carry
out their acts of terrorism and violence.
Strengthening
international
assistance
and
cooperation in mine action and effectively reducing the
threat of landmines and other explosives to civilians and
peacekeepers is an important task. China believes that
to effectively address the humanitarian concern arising
from landmines and other explosives, the international
community should observe the following principles.
First, we must adhere to the principle of ownership
by Member States. It is imperative to fully take into
account the national conditions and needs of the
landmine-affected countries and continuously improve
the capacity and level of the affected countries
participating in demining in order to fully leverage
their role.
Secondly, we must uphold the principle of balanced
treatment. It is important to respect the differences
among countries in terms of security environments
and military strength by both properly addressing the
humanitarian concerns and fully taking into account
the legitimate national military and security needs.
14/19

13/06/2017

Thirdly, we must uphold the principle of resultsorientation. It is important to focus on improving the
practical results of demining assistance and cooperation,
improving the capacity-building of recipient States and
promoting a transition from their reliance on external
assistance to self-reliance as to the mainstay.
China has always paid great attention to the
humanitarian concerns associated with landmines and
actively supported international legal instruments,
including the Geneva Convention and the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects
(CCW). China is a full member of CCW and its five
additional protocols. We faithfully fulfil our obligations
under those instruments.
For many years, China has maintained close
exchanges and cooperation with the contracting
parties of Ottawa Convention on Landmines and has
participated as an observer in the Meetings of States
parties and its review conferences. It also participated
in the actual Conference of the Convention. China is
actively committed to the international humanitarian
demining assistance cause and has, to the best of its
ability, provided assistance to the affected countries
and victims. Since 1998, the Chinese Government has
provided assistance in the forms of demining equipment
and technology training, as well as donations. It has
also provided humanitarian assistance worth more than
¥90 million to nearly 40 countries in Asia, Africa and
Latin America. It has trained nearly 500 professional
demining technicians.
In
September
2015,
Chinese
President
Mr. Xi Jinping announced at the Leaders’ Summit
on Peacekeeping, during the seventieth session of the
General Assembly, that China would in the next five
years launch 10 demining assistance programmes. At
present China, is actively honouring this commitment
and implementing the related programmes.
China attaches great importance to the humanitarian
concerns arising from
the abuse of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) by non-State actors. We
support the discussion of IEDs within the framework
of the amended landmine protocol to CCW. We are
ready for a useful exchange of views with the parties
concerned. Chinese experts and the United Nations,
among others, jointly formulated the United Nations
17-16689

13/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

IED disposal standards and co-hosted the first Meeting
of the Group off Experts last March in Beijing.
China fully understands the aspirations of
landmine-affected countries and peoples for security
and development. We are ready to fulfil our international
obligations, as always, and provide assistance to the
best of our ability. We are ready to join the international
community in addressing the humanitarian concerns
arising from landmines and other explosive devices.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We appreciate Assistant Secretary-General
Alexander Zuev’s first but nonetheless substantive and
multilingual briefing, and listened attentively to the
statement by Ms. Nathalie Ochoa Niño, United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS) staffer in Colombia.
With the increasing numbers of hotbeds of
tension and local conflicts, it is not just the problem
of finding political settlements for them that is
becoming particularly acute, but also the importance
of intensifying the international community’s efforts to
deal with their most immediate consequences, such as
unexploded mines, improvised explosive devices and
explosive remnants of war. This is a global issue, one
of the most significant obstacles not only to returning
refugees and temporarily displaced persons to their
homes but also to restoring the overall infrastructure
and economy of post-conflict regions. It also represents
a serious threat to United Nations peacekeeping forces,
which just since 2014 have lost 21 personnel killed and
105 injured as a result of incidents involving explosive
objects. In that regard, we fully share the opinion of
Secretary-General Guterres that peace without mine
action is an inferior peace.
The Russian Federation considers coordinating role
of UNMAS in the United Nations system very important.
We intend to continue supporting its efforts to develop
standards, best practices and recommendations for
mine action and are ready to participate in the third
expert meeting on the development of standards for
the disposal of improvised explosive devices. Just as
important as the theoretical efforts of UNMAS is its
applied work, which is done within the framework of
existing United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions. We also attach importance
to the help it provides to requesting States, on a
voluntary basis, in order to achieve qualitative
improvements in their national demining capacities.
It is ultimately Governments that have to bear the

S/PV.7966

primary responsibility for ensuring their peoples’
safety, including from terrorist attacks. In 2014, under
the auspices of its Ministry of Defence, the Russian
Federation created an international mine action centre
as its national contribution to international mine action.
Its work is guided by international United Nations
standards as well as national ones, on the basis ofwhich
it trains specialists in humanitarian mine clearance.
I would also like to draw attention to the urgent need
for the international community to step up demining
efforts in Syria, representing a pledge to return refugees
and temporarily displaced persons to their homes as
quickly as possible. The Russian Federation recently
initiated efforts to form a broad international coalition
for mine action in Syria, and Russian servicemen are
already working actively on demining the country’s
territory. We hope that our partners will be able to
contribute to the best of their ability to solving this
humanitarian problem.
The Russian Federation is ready to work
productively on the draft resolution proposed by the
Bolivian delegation, which we believe has the potential
to provide UNMAS with practical help in fulfilling
its mandate.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): I would like to begin by thanking
Bolivia for putting mine action on the Council’s agenda
today. I would also like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Alexander Zuev for his useful briefing and,
especially, Ms. Nathalie Ochoa Niño for her passionate
and inspiring statement this morning.
The terrible legacy of landmines and explosive
remnants of war in the communities where they are
found cannot be overstated. Families returning from the
displacement caused by conflict find that the land that
once sustained them has now turned against them. The
presence of landmines undermines returnees’ ability to
grow and harvest crops for food or sale, undermining
health and livelihoods, and holds an even worse threat,
that of death or injury.
In the 20 years since the Ottawa Convention was
drawn up, impressive progress has been made in
the fight to end the use of landmines. It is a positive
development that casualties from landmines have fallen
in the past few years, in a reflection of the almost total
elimination of the use of anti-personnel mines, thanks
to the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention, as well
as progress in efforts to make previously mined areas
safe for use. However, that work is far from finished.

17-1668915/19

S/PV.7966

Maintenance of international peace and security

The number of casualties of improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) has risen sharply, a development that
is largely attributable to the use of IEDs in conflict
and post-conflict areas, particularly by non-State
actors. Every effort must be made to mitigate the threat
that IEDs pose to individuals and communities. We
welcome the ongoing work within the framework of the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and its
Amended Protocol II that is designed to enable us to
share experiences regarding the humanitarian problems
posed by IEDs and to learn about national, regional and
international efforts to prevent their use.
Sweden fully shares the concerns that have been
expressed about the serious humanitarian problems
caused by landmines and explosive remnants of war
in post-conflict areas. We must step up our efforts
to minimize the occurrence, effects and risks of this
threat. Children are particularly vulnerable. The
landmark Graça Machel report (A/51/306), which led
ultimately to the United Nations mandate on children
in armed conflict, noted that landmines represent an
insidious and persistent danger to children. Children,
who are naturally curious, are likely to pick up strange
objects and, deplorably, some landmines have even
been designed to be toy-like. Children are also far
more likely than adults to die from mine injuries.
Their needs should therefore always be at the forefront
when mine-awareness and physical-rehabilitation
programmes are being designed.
The task of clearing the explosive remnants of war
is often dangerous and painfully slow, but the effects
of humanitarian mine clearance on communities can
be transformative, as we heard this morning from
Ms. Ochoa Niño. It is therefore important to ensure
that support for mine action, including through funding
and expertise, is maintained. Sweden has contributed
more than $100 million to mine action worldwide over
the past decade. In addition to financing, technical
assistance is also an important aspect of mine action.
Sweden’s Civil Contingencies Agency is a partner
of UNMAS and the International Committee of the
Red Cross and conducts humanitarian mine action
worldwide. Through UNMAS, for example, we recently
supported mine-action activities in Somalia aimed at
minimizing the impact of explosive hazards, building
national explosive management capacity and enabling
the African Union Mission in Somalia to fulfil its
mandate with greater safety and freedom of movement.
16/19

13/06/2017

More broadly, Sweden believes in an approach
to disarmament and international security that puts
human beings at the centre of our policy. Sweden is a
State party to all conventions relevant to the banning
or regulation of the use of non-controllable mines,
anti-personnel landmines, cluster munitions and the
handling of explosive remnants of war. We believe that
continuing to work to universalize those conventions is
the most effective way to counter the risks associated
with the use of such weapons.
In conclusion, a commitment to international
frameworks, as well as well-resourced and effective
mine-action programmes, will not only save lives but
will also enable those who have survived the ravages of
war to begin rebuilding their lives.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to express
my appreciation to the Bolivian delegation and to
you personally, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting and raising such an important topic in the
Security Council. I also thank Mr. Zuev and Ms. Ochoa
Niño for their informative briefings.
Ongoing conflicts and military activities in
States affected by instability are resulting in the
contamination of new territories by explosive remnants
of war. Improvised explosive devices are increasingly
being used by illegal armed and terrorist groups and
pose a significant threat to communities recovering
from conflict. That is why mine action remains
essential in enabling an effective humanitarian
response, the protection of civilians and freedom of
movement for communities, humanitarian personnel
and peacekeepers.
Ukraine attaches great importance to these issues
and in recent years co-sponsored General Assembly
resolutions on assistance in mine action and on
countering the threat posed by improvised explosive
devices. We also supported the General Assembly
resolutions on the Ottawa Convention and on the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons.
As a State party to these two Conventions,
Ukraine acknowledges their fundamental character in
minimizing the risks stemming from landmines and
explosive remnants of war.
Despite the current significant challenges in the
security field caused by the hybrid war waged against
Ukraine, we are fully complying with our obligations
under these treaties. Indeed, since 2014, the issue of
17-16689

13/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

mine action and explosive hazard threat mitigation has
acquired a whole new meaning for my country. The
explosive hazard threat is a direct result of the foreign
armed aggression and offensive actions carried out by
the hybrid Russian-terrorist forces operating in some
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
Mines and explosive devices are scattered
throughout the conflict area, especially along the
contact line, and pose a severe threat to civilians,
including children. During the period from 16 February
to 15 May, 36 civilians died and 157 were wounded
in Donbas. This represents a 70 per cent increase
over the same period of the previous year. In 40 per
cent of cases, people died as a result of mines and
unexploded ordnance.
Such explosive remnants of war are often planted
by illegal armed groups in residential areas and along
communication routes, thus posing a greater threat
to the civilian population than to military personnel.
Recently a member of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine fell victim to one of these devices
when a patrol car carrying OSCE personnel was blown
up on 23 April near the city of Luhansk.
Unfortunately, the Security Council statement
condemning this horrible incident was blocked by the
Russian delegation, which is very telling with respect to
the perpetrators of this crime and their Kremlin patrons.
It is in these extremely difficult circumstances that
Ukraine is taking all possible measures to destroy and
dispose of explosive remnants of war on its territory.
The State emergency service of Ukraine and other
national authorities, in close cooperation with the United
Nations Mine Action Service, UNICEF, the OSCE,
NATO and other international partners, are actively
engaged in performing a range of demining actions on
the liberated territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions, including providing mine-risk education for
Ukrainian citizens in conflict-affected areas. However,
humanitarian demining will be possible only after the
end of hostilities. So far, even repair of the critical
infrastructure damaged by persistent shelling by
Russian guns remains a major challenge.
In conclusion, I would like to underline the
importance of international cooperation in addressing
the threats posed by explosive remnants of war,
improvised explosive devices and landmines, as well
as in the implementation of the respective international

S/PV.7966

instruments. We hope that the adoption of the draft
resolution submitted by Bolivia will bring closer a total
ban on the use of one of the most inhuman weapons of
war ever created.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank the
Bolivian presidency for having brought the hazards of
mines and explosives to the attention of the Security
Council. My delegation expresses its appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Mr. Alexander Zuev and
Ms. Nathalie Ochoa Niño for their insightful briefings
and commends their efforts to bring about stability in
the world. We also value highly the work done by the
United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) in this
regard and especially the successful mine action in
Mali, the Democratic Republic of Congo, South Sudan,
Iraq and Colombia.
My delegation would like to make the following
observations and recommendations.
Mine action is at the core of post-conflict
humanitarian response, recovery and development
in all 70 States affected. Mines and explosives take a
high death toll and mutilate their victims, restrict the
movement of people and humanitarian aid, make land
unsuitable for cultivation and deny citizens access
to water, food, care and trade. Contamination by
mines and explosive remnants of war affects civilian
populations, United Nations operations and global
peace and security.
The growing number of intra-State conflicts and
the expanded range of explosive hazards have led
to growing requests for United Nations emergency
humanitarian mine-action assistance. Mine action
enables the safe return of internally displaced persons
and refugees and ensures access for humanitarian
actors and peacekeepers. We urge the international
community to support, through predictable, earmarked
United Nations funding, the activities of UNMAS,
which has proved to be an invaluable and efficient tool
in mitigating the hazards of mines.
Effective mine action should include the five
pillars, the first of which is to clear, remove and
destroy landmines and explosive remnants of war
and mark or fence off contaminated areas. Education
about risks, safety and identifying mines and explosive
remnants is essential. Medical assistance measures
and rehabilitation services for victims, advocacy for a
world free from the threat of landmines, and the need
for countries to implement international treaties remain

17-1668917/19

S/PV.7966

Maintenance of international peace and security

13/06/2017

crucial. At the same time, countries should be helped
to strengthen their national capacities to deal with the
threat posed by mines and explosives.

Those IEDs are used by armed groups and terrorists in
many attacks that have claimed the lives of thousands
across different countries and regions of the world.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs can share good practices and develop guidance
on mitigating the threat of explosive weapons in
populated areas. The Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction has,
since its entry into force, played an important role in
addressing humanitarian issues related to the use of such
weapons. We fully share and support the humanitarian
objectives of the Convention.

Egypt is one of the countries that is most affected
by mines and their impacts. More than 22.7 million
mines and explosive devices were laid in Egyptian
territories during the Second World War. That is 20 per
cent more than the total number of laid mines in the
world. More than 17 million of those mines exist in the
area of El Alamein. Identifying the locations of such
a huge number of mines and clearing them require
significant financial resources. Therefore, they are
a great impediment of development, not to mention
the humanitarian threat that has led to thousands of
casualties over the years.

Based on the importance of the humanitarian
aspects of this issue, from 2003 to 2009 Kazakhstan’s
engineer sapper unit in Iraq neutralized more than
4.5 million explosive devices and provided specialized
training to the Iraqi security forces. In the process of
furthering our national capacities in countering the
threat posed by mines and explosives, my country has
established and developed a demining centre.
Kazakhstan is committed to joining the multilateral
effort to ensure the safety and security of civilians and
to sustain peace and reinforce stabilization.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by expressing my full appreciation to
Bolivia for having organized this briefing, which is
aimed at underscoring this very important issue.
Landmines and explosive remnants of war pose
a serious threat to the life and safety of civilians in
many countries throughout the world. The hazards
posed by such explosives indiscriminately threaten not
only civilians but also those working in national lawenforcement institutions, in addition to peacekeepers
and humanitarian relief workers, including deminers.
In addition, such explosives have grave long-term
humanitarian, social and development consequences.
They pose an obstacle to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to civilians in need and to the development of
affected areas. This limits the chances of development
and of improving the socioeconomic conditions of
the people living in such areas. They also constitute a
heavy burden on peacebuilding in countries emerging
from conflicts, which can last for decades after the
conflicts end. Neglected mines and explosive remnants
of wars are sources to obtain the materials required
to manufacture improvised explosive devices (IEDs).
18/19

Given all this, Egypt has paid special attention to
addressing the issue. Egypt established the National
Demining Committee to oversee demining activities
and the development of affected areas. The Committee
has drafted a national mine strategy to address mine
issues in collaboration with various relevant ministries
and governmental bodies, as well as with civil society
organizations. A trust fund has also been established,
in cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme, to assist in implementing that strategy.
Egypt has also implemented a moratorium on the
transfer of mines to any other country in 1984. Egypt
also stopped the production of mines in 1988, even
before any international conventions on the matter
existed. Egypt has stressed the importance of striking
a balance between humanitarian considerations and
considerations related to the legitimate use of mines
for self-defence, as well as their use as a regulated and
controlled way to secure borders.
Egypt stresses the important role played by the
United Nations, through the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group on Mine Action to provide assistance in the field
of mine action. Egypt also welcomes the incorporation
of mine action into the mandates of peacekeeping and
special political missions authorized by the Security
Council in conflict areas. Egypt also stresses the
importance of drafting a comprehensive approach to
mine action. That approach should mobilize efforts
within the international community to support national
efforts in countries affected by mines and provide
assistance to build capacities to deal with mines and
hazardous explosives. Egypt also stresses that any legal
framework or instrument should respond in particular
to the legitimate concerns of the States most affected by
17-16689

13/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

mines and explosive hazards. The States that laid mines
in territories of other States should bear the legal and
moral responsibility for having done so. They should
share the burden of disposing of such mines.
In conclusion, Egypt hopes that today’s meeting
will contribute to mobilizing the international
community to intensify cooperation in order to address
the humanitarian-, security- and development-related
consequences of mines and explosive hazards.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make an additional statement.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The statement of the representative of Ukraine,
which featured simple allegations, was made with the
single goal of distracting from Kyiv’s lack of resolve to
implement the Minsk agreements. Unfortunately, it was
no surprise that he made uncorroborated allegations
and siought to besmirch Russia. Ukraine blamed Russia
for the tragic incident of 23 April on the contact line,
when a vehicle of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine exploded. We have heard an entire corpus of
similar allegations concerning similarly tragic incidents
in Ukraine, which usually come in the immediate
aftermath of the incident. Afterwards, when that
incident leads to an impartial investigation, Ukraine
falls silent. Today, we are seeing the very same thing
in spite of the fact that an international investigation is
already under way.

S/PV.7966

If anyone has any information or proof, they
should swiftly provide it to the specially established
investigative group led by the Deputy Chair of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission.
They should do that rather than get into political
demagogery. We have our own data regarding the
incident, but we do not speculate about it so as not to
hamper the investigation.
That is why, instead of spreading uncorroborated
evidence, we must deal with the actual peace process.
That is especially true because the Ukrainian statement
said the right thing — namely, that humanitarian
demining activities can begin only after the end
of the conflict. That, however, requires the swift
implementation of all provisions of the Minsk
agreements, first and foremost in the political field,
the provision of a special status for certain areas of
the Donbas and the holding of elections, as well as
rebuilding the economic and banking systems and the
provision of amnesty.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of Ukraine has asked to make an additional statement.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I will be very brief. He
who lives in a glass house should not throw stones. It is
appalling that the Russian Federation, which supplies
separatists in the Donbas with all kinds of ordnance,
ammunition and mines, has the nerve to lecture about
mine awareness and demining.
The meeting rose at noon.

17-1668919/19
