~~-leeatLSwlaa

Non-Sdf-Goveming Territories with the European
Economic Community, taking into account the information to be submitted by the Administering Members
and the studies that may be undertaken in this connexion
by the Economic and Social Council, the Economic
Commission for Africa, the Economic Commission for
Europe, the Economic Commission for Asia and the
Far East, the Economic Commission for Latin America
and other international organs, in so far as these studies
may be relevant to the development. of Non-SelfGoverning Territories;
5. Resolves to resume consideration of this question
at its fifteenth session.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

informatio!1 about the scholarships offered, and, whenever possible, the need to provide travel funds to
prospective students;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to give such assistance as is possible, and as may be sought by the
Member States concerned and by the applicants ;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for
the fift~enth session of the General Assembly a report
concernmg the actual use of scholarships and training
facilities offered by Member States to students from
the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1471 (XIV). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Sell-Governing Territories

1473 (XIV). The future of the Trust Territory of
the Cameroons under United Kingdom administration: organization of a further
plebiscite in the northern part of the Territory

The General Assembly,
Be_ari~g in mind that most of the Non-Self-Governing
Ternt?nes d? not have sufficient facilities for higher
education which would ensure the education of highly
qualified indigenous cadres,
Considering the urgent need in the Non-Self-Governing Territories for indigenous personnel who could take
over the functions held by those 'lon-indigenc-•1s persons
wh? . up ~o now h~v~ oc<;upied the most important
positions m the admm1strat10n of those Territories
N oti?7-g with satisfaction the further response t; its
resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954 inviting
Membe~ ~tates to e~tend_ offers of facilities for study
and trammg to the mhab1tants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories,
[I.xpressing regret that a great number of the scholarships offered by Member States remain unutilized,
Further expressing regret that some Administering
Members do not provide all students who have been
accorded scholarships with facilities to leave the NonSelf-Governing Territories in order to take advantage
of such scholarships,
Recalling its resolution 845 (IX) inviting the Member
States to make scholarships available to qualified students from the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on offers of study and training facilities under General
Assembly resolution 845 (IX) ;3 6
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1331 (XIII) of 12 December 1958, and invites the Administering Members
to take all necessary measures consistent with the interests ~nd needs of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
an~ ~~eir peoples to ensure that scholarships and training
fac1hhes offered by Member States may be utilized by
the_ inhabitants of those Territories, and to render every
assistance to those persons who have applied for, or
have been granted, scholarships or fellowships, particularly with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;
3. Requests all Administering Members which have
not done so to give the fullest publicity in the Non-SelfGoverning Territories under their administration to all
offers of study and training facilities made by Member
States;
4. R~quests the Member States offering scholarships
to take mto account the necessity of furnishing complete

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1350 (XIII) of 13 March
1959, concerning the future of the Trust Territory of
the_ Cameroons under United Kingdom administration,
~h1ch recommended that a plebiscite should take place
m the Northern Cameroons in November 1959 and
req nested the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner
to submit to the Trusteeship Council in time for consideration by the General Assembly at its fourteenth
sess10n a report on the organization, conduct and results
of this plebiscite,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Plebiscite Commissioner 87 and the report of the Trusteeship Council thereon, 38
Noting from the report of the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner that the people of the Northern
Cameroo?s have decided by a substantial majority that
they are m favour of deciding their future at a later date,
Noting further that the United Nations Plebiscite
Commissioner is satisfied that the plebiscite was conducted in a fair and impartial manner,
Noting_ t?e s~atement made by the representative of
the Adm1mstermg Authority at the 988th meeting of
the Fourth Committee on 5 December 1959 to the effect
that urgent action is being taken to introduce reforms
m the system of local administration in the Northern
Cameroons,
Having heard the petitioner,
. Considering that the extremely close date of the elecnons to the Legislative Assembly of the Federation of
Nigeria make:' _it im~ossible for the General Assembly
to take a dec1s10n with regard to the participation or
non-participation of the people of the Northern
Cameroons in these elections,
1. Expresses its high appreciation of the work of the
United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner and the United
Nations staff under his direction;
. 2. Recommends t~at the Administering Authority,
m pursuance of Article 76 b of the Charter of the
United Nations and in consultation with the United
Nat(ons Plebiscite Commissioner, organize under United
Nations supervision a further plebiscite in the Northern
Cameroons, the arrangements for which shall begin
87 Ibid.,

86 [bid., documents A/4196 and Add.I.

agenda item 41, documents A/4314 and Add.I.
A/4313.

38 [bid., document

8-ladou adopted on du, nporta of du, Fonrth Comminee

on 30 September 1960, and that the plebiscite be
concluded not later than March 1961 ;
3. Decides that the two questions to be put at this
plebiscite should be :
" (a) Do you wish to achieve independence by
joining the independent Republic of the Cameroons?
" ( b) Do you wish to achieve independence by
joining the independent Federation of Nigeria?";
4. Recommends that the plebiscite be conducted on
the basis of universal adult suffrage, all those over the
age of twenty-one and ordinarily resident in the
Northern Cameroons being qualified to vote;
5. Requests the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner to report to the Trusteeship Council on the organization, conduct and results of this plebiscite, in
order that the Council may transmit its report to the
General Assembly together with any recommendations
and observations it considers necessary ;
6. Recommends that the necessary measures should
be taken without delay for the further decentralization

of governmental functions and the effective democratization of the system of local government in the northern
part of the Trust Territory;
7. Recommends that the Administering Authority
should initiate without delay the separation of the
administration of the Northern Cameroons from that
of Nigeria and that this process should be completed
by 1 October 1960 ;
8. Requests the Administering Authority to report
on the process of separation to the Trusteeship Council
at its twenty-sixth session, and requests the Council
to submit a report on this matter to the General Assembly at its fifteenth session;
9. Dedares that the participation of the Northern
Cameroons in the elections to the Federal Legislative
Assembly should in no way interfere with, or influence,
the free choice of the people of the Northern Cameroons
in deciding their future in the forthcoming plebiscite.
857th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

*

*

S9

*

Notes
Election to fill vacancies in the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories
(item 37)
At its 993rd meeting on 8 December 1959, the Fourth Committee, acting on
behalf of the General Assembly, in accordance with the terms of resolution 1332
(XIII) of 12 December 1958, elected two members to the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories for a three-year period to fill the
vacancies created by the expiration of the terms of office of CEYLON and GUATEMALA.
At its 857th plenary meeting on 12 December 1959, the General Assembly confirmed this election.
The following States were elected: ARGENTINA and CEYLON.

Election of three members of the
Committee on South West Africa
(item 38 (d))
At its 857th plenary meeting on 12 December 1959, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee,89 appointed three members to
the Committee on South West Africa to replace BRAZIL, ETHIOPIA and FINLAND.
The following States were appointed: BRAZIL, DENMARK and ETHIOPIA.

89 Ibid., agenda item 38, document A/4272/ Add.l, para. 5.
