United Nations

A/RES/62/88

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 January 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 66 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 13 December 2007
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/62/L.31)]

62/88.

Declaration of the commemorative high-level plenary
meeting devoted to the follow-up to the outcome of the
special session on children

The General Assembly
Adopts the following Declaration:
Declaration of the commemorative high-level plenary meeting devoted to the
follow-up to the outcome of the special session on children
1.
We, the representatives of States gathered at the commemorative highlevel plenary meeting of the General Assembly, are encouraged by the progress
achieved since 2002 in creating a world fit for children. Fewer children under five
are dying each year. More children are in school than ever before. More educational
opportunities are being equally extended to girls and boys. More medicines are
available for children, including those infected by HIV/AIDS. More laws, policies
and plans are in place to protect children from violence, abuse and exploitation. Our
present and future actions should build upon those important gains.
2.
Yet many challenges persist. Eradicating poverty is the greatest global
challenge, as poverty poses difficulties to meeting the needs, protecting and
promoting the rights of all children in the world. Despite encouraging achievements,
the number of children dying before their fifth birthday remains unacceptably high.
Malnutrition, pandemics, including HIV/AIDS, as well as malaria, tuberculosis and
other preventable diseases continue to be a hindrance to a healthy life for millions of
children. Lack of access to education remains a significant obstacle to their
development. A large number of children are still subject to violence, exploitation
and abuse, as well as to inequity and discrimination, in particular against the girl
child. We will work to break the cycle of poverty, achieve the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, create an
environment that is conducive to the well-being of children and realize all the rights
of the child.
3.
We reaffirm our commitment to the full implementation of the
Declaration and Plan of Action contained in the outcome document of the twenty-

07-46905

A/RES/62/88

seventh special session of the General Assembly on children, entitled “A world fit
for children”, 1 recognizing that their implementation and the fulfilment of
obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 2 the Optional Protocols
thereto 3 and other relevant international instruments are mutually reinforcing in
protecting the rights and promoting the well-being of all children. In all our actions,
the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.
4.
A scaled-up, cross-sectorial response by Governments, increased
international cooperation and broader and more focused partnerships, including with
the mass media and the private sector, and global, regional and national initiatives
are critical to the achievement of the goals of the special session on children. We
reaffirm our determination to pursue the agreed global targets and actions for
mobilizing resources for children, in accordance with “A world fit for children”.
5.
As we welcome the voices and the views of children, including
adolescents, heard at the commemorative plenary meeting, we strive to strengthen
their participation in the decisions that affect them, in accordance with their age and
maturity.
6.
We renew our political will to intensify our efforts towards building a
world fit for children. We are confident that our collective aspirations will be
realized if all relevant actors, including civil society, are united for children. All our
policies and programmes should promote the shared responsibility of parents,
families, legal guardians and other caregivers and society as a whole in this regard,
bearing in mind that a child should grow up in a safe and supportive family
environment. By giving high priority to the rights of children, to their survival and
to their protection and development, we serve the best interest of all humanity. In
solidarity, we will pursue our common vision of ensuring the well-being of all
children in all societies, with a collective sense of urgency.
73rd plenary meeting
13 December 2007

_______________
1

Resolution S-27/2, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
3
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531; and ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
2

2
