A /70/PV.108

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

108th plenary meeting

Thursday, 30 June 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. John
William Ashe, President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-eighth session
The President: Before we proceed to consider the
items on our agenda for this afternoon, it is my sad duty
to pay tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. John
William Ashe, President of the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session, who passed away on 22 June. On
behalf of the General Assembly, I should like to convey
our deepest condolences to the Government and the
people of Antigua and Barbuda and to the bereaved
family of Mr. Ashe.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Mr. John William Ashe.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: Mr. Ashe was a friend and colleague
of many here in the Hall. He was a leading Caribbean
diplomat who was deeply involved in international
affairs for over 35 years. He was a faithful servant of
his country and a member of the Diplomatic Service
of Antigua and Barbuda since 1989. His career saw
him embark on a journey from the World Summit
on Sustainable Development in 2002 to the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in
2012, and finally to the Summit to adopt the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)
last September.

16-20204 (E)

He was centrally involved in a range of multilateral
processes, chairing the Fifth Committee, chairing the
Group of 77 and China and serving on the governing
bodies of major United Nations funds and programmes.
He served as Permanent Representative of Antigua and
Barbuda to the United Nations for over 10 years. His
passion for progress on matters of poverty, inequality
and environmental degradation was immense. And his
drive during the sixty-eighth session for an ambitious
post-2015 development agenda was critical. Indeed,
perhaps his finest achievement will not be felt for
decades to come. It was under his stewardship that
the ground-breaking proposal from the Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals was brought
forward from the sixty-eighth to the sixty-ninth session,
and ultimately into the heart of the 2030 Agenda.
Once again, I wish to convey my sincere sympathies
to the delegation and the Government of Antigua
and Barbuda, Mr. Ashe’s many friends and former
colleagues and, of course, Mr Ashe’s wife and two
children, who last week lost a husband and a father at
the young age of 61.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-Moon.
The Secretary-General: I extend sincere condolences
to the Government and the people of Antigua and Barbuda
on the passing away of His Excellency Ambassador John
William Ashe.
Ambassador Ashe was based in New York for more
than 25 years. During that time, he served in many
important positions. He was Chair of the negotiations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1620204*

A/70/PV.108

30/06/2016

during the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable
Development, as well as Chair of the 2004 session of
the Commission on Sustainable Development.

his tenure as President of the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session, Ambassador Ashe spared no effort
to achieve progress in that area.

Alongside the Ambassador of the Republic of Korea,
he was co-Chair of the Bureau for the Preparatory
Process of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development. He was also the consensus candidate of
all 33 Member States of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean Countries to serve as President of the of
the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, from
September 2013 to September 2014. His service during
that very challenging year coincided with notable
gains towards a future development agenda and set of
development goals, as well as important new steps in
the fight against climate change. Those efforts reached
fruition a year later with the adoption of the 2030
Agenda on Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)
and the Paris Climate Agreement.

Our thoughts and sympathy are with the family and
friends of Ambassador Ashe.

At this time of sorrow, my thoughts are with
Ambassador Ashe’s family, particularly his wife,
Anilla Cherian, his two children and all others touched
by this loss.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to representative of Bulgaria,
who will speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern
European States.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria): I have the honour to take
the floor on behalf of the Group of Eastern European
States.
It is with sadness that we learned about the untimely
passing away of His Excellency Mr. John William
Ashe, President of the General Assembly at its sixtyeighth session. On behalf of the members of the Group
of Eastern European States, I would like to express
our deepest condolences to the family and friends of
Mr. John Ashe and to the Government and the people of
Antigua and Barbuda.
Ambassador Ashe dedicated more than 23 years of
his professional career to the United Nations. As the
Permanent Representative of Antigua and Barbuda to
the United Nations, he was an active and prominent
negotiator. He was co-Chair of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development in 2012. He
also served as Chair of the Group of 77 and China and
took part in many important multilateral negotiations.
True to his passion for sustainable development, during
2/9

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Zambia, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of African States.
Ms. Kasese-Bota (Zambia): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of
African States.
The African Group received with great sadness and
shock the news of the sudden death of our colleague and
former President of the General Assembly at its sixtyeighth session, His Excellency Mr. John William Ashe.
The African Group extends its deepest condolences to
the Ashe family, the Caribbean community and wider
United Nations family for his untimely loss and death.
Ambassador Ashe left a long, indelible list of
legacies for us at the United Nations during his
remarkable career in the service of both his country
and the international community. The African Group
in particular had great respect for his intellect and
firm commitment to sustainable development, as was
evidenced by the strong leadership and clear direction
that he provided on setting the course for defining the
post-2015 development agenda.
Ambassador Ashe will also be remembered for the
decisive, broad and practical steps he took to inject
fresh impetus in the discussions on the complex and
sensitive question of Security Council reform. The
African Group believes that there is no better tribute to
the memory of Ambassador Ashe than that of a steadfast
commitment to collectively advance our common quest
to serve succeeding generations and leaving no one
behind on the path of sustainable development.
May his soul rest in perfect peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I have the great honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Asia-Pacific States at
this solemn gathering of the General Assembly.
We are deeply saddened by the demise of the
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth
16-20204

30/06/2016

session, His Excellency Mr. John William Ashe.
It is well known that Ambassador Ashe had a long
and successful record of working for sustainable
development, especially at the World Summit on
Sustainable Development and the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development. He also
served in a number of leading positions addressing
climate change.
Ambassador Ashe also had a long career and wide
range of experience here in New York, especially as
Permanent Representative of Antigua and Barbuda to
the United Nations from 2004 until 2013. In September
2013, he assumed the position of President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session.
On this solemn occasion, on behalf of the AsiaPacific Group, I wish to convey my deepest condolences
to the family of Mr. Ashe. It is our strong belief that
they have the strength to come to terms to with his
sudden death and to continue to move forward towards
the future.
May his soul rest in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Barbados, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Marshall (Barbados): On behalf of the Group
of Latin American and Caribbean States (GRULAC), it
is a sombre honour for me to pay tribute to the life of
His Excellency Mr. John William Ashe, President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session and former
Permanent Representative of Antigua and Barbuda
to the United Nations. Like all others who knew him,
members of the GRULAC family were shocked at his
untimely and tragic passing away exactly one week ago.
A veteran diplomat with 27 years’ experience,
Ambassador Ashe possessed a thorough grasp of the
multilateral arena. He served in a leadership capacity in
numerous processes, committees and other entities of
the Organization — a reflection of his competence and
skill. Among many other roles, in 2004 he was elected
Chair of the thirteenth session of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, the first policy session in the
post-Johannesburg era of the Commission. He chaired
the Group of 77 and China in 2008. He co-chaired
the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development in 2012 and presided over the Executive
Boards of UNICEF, the United Nations Development

A/70/PV.108

Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and
the United Nations Office for Project Services.
Ambassador Ashe’s passion for sustainable
development undergirded much of the work that he
undertook at the United Nations. We remember his
commitment to the negotiation of a transformative
and ambitious global development agenda, one that
would protect our planet for future generations and
create equity, justice and prosperity for all. We recall
his dedication to the revitalization and reform of the
United Nations, and in particular to advancing progress
on Security Council reform.
We mourn the loss of a colleague and friend. On
behalf of GRULAC, I extend sincere condolences
to Mrs. Ashe, their sons, Rohan and Arman, other
members of his family and friends.
May he rest in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.
Ms. Stener (Norway): On behalf of the Group of
Western European and other States, I extend to the
people and the Government of Antigua and Barbuda
our deepest condolences on the death of the former
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth
session, His Excellency Mr. John William Ashe.
Mr. Ashe is remembered for his extensive diplomatic
career representing Antigua and Barbuda and through
various positions and leadership roles at the United
Nations, where he championed sustainable development,
in particular for the World Summit on Sustainable
Development in Johannesburg in 2002 and the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
in 2012. In 2013 and 2014, Ambassador Ashe
served as President of the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session.
The members of the Western European and other
States Group offer their sympathies and condolences
to his family. Our thoughts and prayers are with them
during this difficult time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Suriname, who will speak on behalf
of the Caribbean Community.
Mrs. Sweeb (Suriname): I have the sad honour
to address the General Assembly today on behalf of
the 14 member States of the Caribbean Community

16-202043/9

A/70/PV.108

(CARICOM) at this solemn gathering to pay tribute
to the memory of His Excellency Mr. John William
Ashe, President of this organ at its sixty-eighth session
and former Permanent Representative of Antigua and
Barbuda to the United Nations.
We are shaken by the news of the untimely
and tragic passing away of Ambassador Ashe, on
22 June. CARICOM expresses its appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for presiding over the General
Assembly’s tribute to Ambassador Ashe, one of our own
and an extraordinary diplomat who had deep respect
for the principles of multilateralism. Known for his
calm demeanour and determination, Ambassador Ashe
was exemplary in accepting responsibilities entrusted
to him by the international community and for ensuring
that concrete results were achieved in the interests of
the Organization and the world.
Ambassador Ashe often quoted the saying “No man
is an island”. That encapsulated his view that global
challenges should not be faced unilaterally but globally.
He had particular passion for the cause of sustainable
development and protecting the environment. During
his tenure as President of the Assembly, he urged all
stakeholders to work together to set the stage for the new
universal global agenda for sustainable development.
Ambassador Ashe’s diplomatic track record is truly
remarkable, and his achievements manyfold, as he
played a key role in securing consensus in a wide range
of international negotiations, ranging from climate
change to persistent pollutants. He was indeed at the
forefront of international efforts to address the adverse
effects of climate change. He summed up that matter
as follows.
“We have only the planet we live on, and if we
are to leave it in a reasonable state for the next
generation, the quest for a safer, cleaner and more
equitable world is one that should consume us all”.
Ambassador Ashe was also the first Chair of the
Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol
and Chair of the Convention’s subsidiary body on
implementation. We furthermore recall his chairmanship
of the Group of 77 and China in 2008, the largest
negotiation block of developing countries in the United
Nations, and also his role as co-Chair of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. His
dedication to South-South cooperation as the Chair of
the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation
was unquestionable. It was also during the presidency
4/9

30/06/2016

of Ambassador Ashe, a son of the Caribbean region,
that the winning design of the Permanent Memorial
in Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade was unveiled.
In my capacity as current Chair of the Caribbean
Community caucus in New York, and on behalf of all
colleagues and friends from the Caribbean, I convey
our deepest and sincere condolences to Mrs. Ashe,
their sons, Rohan and Arman, and the family and
friends of the late Ambassador John William Ashe. The
CARICOM region has indeed lost one of its great sons.
May his soul rest in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Antigua and Barbuda.
Mr. Webson (Antigua and Barbuda): I would like,
first of all, to thank you, Mr. President, on behalf of the
Government and the people of Antigua and Barbuda for
holding this solemn ceremony this afternoon in honour
and as a tribute to our brother who has fallen and
who served both our country, Antigua and Barbuda,
and the United Nations. I would like also to express
our thanks for the many kind words, good wishes and
condolences expressed by so many to myself, the people
and the Government of Antigua and Barbuda and the
Ashe family.
We are gathered today at this solemn ceremony to
reflect upon and recognize the contribution of one who
has fallen. We recognize the significant contribution of
Mr. John William Ashe for over three decades to both
his country and this institution. Some may say that
Mr. Ashe was a towering figure. Some may even say
that he was a larger-than-life individual as he walked
and contributed within the walls of this institution. His
contribution to multilateralism and his great grasp of
the issues that affect our world today were significant.
Mr. Ashe started his remarkable 27-year career as
a diplomat first as a scientific attaché to the Antigua
Government. He transcended nation and worked on
behalf of all. His significant contribution to the World
Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg,
which began that process, stands out. I can list a litany
of his accomplishments, many of which everyone has
heard. Permit me to mention just a few that perhaps
stand out above all.
His leadership in many of the bodies of the
United Nations showed courage and bravery, as he
demonstrated an appetite for change and reform.
16-20204

30/06/2016

Who can forget his leadership at the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, as he worked
towards change and a new vision for the United Nations
and the world? His courageous work on climate change
and sustainable development is a legacy that has left
us with the seminal outcome of 2015, which many of
our leaders signed in September of that year. His work
on sustainable development and climate change was
crowned by the Paris Agreement and the its signing of
only a few months ago. I could go on.
We in the Caribbean Community were particularly
proud that Mr. Ashe was with us last April when the
Permanent Memorial in Remembrance of the Victims of
Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade was unveiled,
reflective of his own ancestors and heritage.
Despite his significant international accomplishments,
I must inform the Assembly that Mr. Ashe was more
than that. He was a father, and I am told by his wife that
he was a very good father. He was a husband — and,
yes, I was told by his wife that he was a very good
husband. He was a community person. He gave much of
his time to teach and tutor young boys in his community
in mathematics, science and other subjects. He coached
his son’s football team, and I understand that the team
will be honouring him this coming season by using his
initials on their helmets.
Mr. Ashe came from humble beginnings in Antiga,
but he proved that it is not where one starts, but the
race one runs. It is the contribution that one makes
along life’s journey. He proved that outstretching a
helping hand to others, as he did so often as a friend
and colleague, was the indelible mark that he truly left.
While we mourn the loss, a loss is never forever.
For mortality is held as a monument in one’s life by the
lives one affects along the way. John Ashe’s mortality
and monument will be the memories that he has left
with so many of us and the hand print that he has left on
the changing United Nations.
The people of Antigua and the family of John Ashe
thank the Assembly as we mourn the loss of a brother.

A/70/PV.108

Agenda item 112 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(a) Election of five non-permanent members of the
Security Council
The President: As Members will recall, at its
106th plenary meeting on 28 June, the Assembly elected
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan
and Sweden as members of the Security Council for a
two-year term beginning on 1 January 2017. Members
will also recall that, when the 107th plenary meeting
was adjourned on the afternoon of 28 June, and
following five rounds of balloting, including three
rounds of restricted balloting, there remained one seat
to be filled from the Group of Western European and
other States.
I would first like to draw the attention of members
to a letter dated 29 June from the representative of
Norway, in her capacity as the Chair of the Group of
Western European and other States for the month of
June, circulated in document A/70/964. In her letter,
the representative of Norway announces that the
Netherlands has withdrawn its candidacy in favour of
Italy, and that Italy is the endorsed and only candidate
of the Group of Western European and other States.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
we shall now proceed to the next round of balloting by
secret ballot. This sixth round of balloting, which is in
accordance with rule 94 of the rules of procedure, will
also be the second unrestricted ballot.
May I remind the Assembly that any Member
State from among the Group of Western European
and other States may be a candidate except those
outgoing members, those already members of the
Security Council, as well as the member elected at the
106th plenary meeting. To make this clear, I shall now
mention the names of those members that cannot be
voted for in the present balloting, namely, France, New
Zealand, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process.

16-202045/9

A/70/PV.108

Ballot papers marked “C” will now be distributed.
May I ask representatives to write on the ballot papers
marked “C” for Western European and other States the
name of one State for which they want to vote. Ballot
papers will be declared invalid if they contain the name
of more than one State. The name of a Member State
on the ballot paper that does not belong to the Group of
Western European and other States will not be counted
at all.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Moreno
González (Ecuador), Mrs. Kanchaveli (Georgia),
Ms. O’Brien (Ireland), Mr. Francis (Lebanon),
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) and Mr. Silwamba (Zambia) acted
as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 3.55 p.m. and
resumed at 4.20 p.m.
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
Group C — Western European and other States
Number of ballot papers:
192
Number of invalid ballots:
2
Number of valid ballots:
190
Abstentions:
6
Number of Members present and voting:
184
Required two-thirds majority:
123
Number of votes obtained:
Italy
179
Netherlands
4
San Marino
1
Having obtained the required two-thirds majority
and the largest number of votes, the following State
is elected member of the Security Council for a
two-year term beginning on 1 January 2017: Italy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I wish very briefly to express our
very sincere thanks to the membership. I also thank my
friend and colleague, the Ambassador of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, Karel van Oosterom, for his support
and for having understood and accepted the agreement
that Italy reached with the Netherlands, which was
endorsed by the Group of Western European and other
States, to divide the two-year term in the Security
Council. The Netherlands very gallantly withdrew from
the ballot, and Italy will do the same next year.
6/9

30/06/2016

Together with my colleague Karel, we have worked
for this objective in a spirit of cooperation between
two European Union members at a moment in which
the cohesion of the Union is of great importance. Of
course, our political leaders have done the same. We
both wish to assure the membership that we will work
together with all Member States for the good of the
Organization and for an efficient Security Council
that is able to tackle the difficult challenges we are all
facing, in a spirit of true cooperation and transparency.
Again, I thank the Assembly for its support, as well
as on behalf of the Netherlands.
The President: I congratulate Italy on its election
to the Security Council. I also thank the tellers for their
assistance in this election.
Before concluding our consideration of this agenda
item, I should like to remind members that, pursuant
to paragraph 17 of resolution 68/307, of 10 September
2014, the election of non-permanent members of the
Security Council for the term 2018-2019 will take place
during the resumed part of the next session in the spring
of 2017.
The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration
of sub-item (a) of agenda item 112.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/70/674,
A/70/826 and A/70/826/Corr. 1)
The President: The tragic events in Istanbul this
week have reminded us of the threats and dangers
posed by terrorism in our world today. Once again,
those left behind are in mourning, and I wish to take
this opportunity to convey my sincere condolences
to the people and the Government of Turkey for their
painful loss. The senseless killing of innocent civilians
by terrorist acts has become all too frequent the past
few years. It demands a response from the international
community that is both commensurate with the
challenge we face and focused on both the short- and
the long-term perspective. Through much closer
cooperation, we must redouble our efforts to combat
terrorism and prevent violent extremism.
In that context, the consultations on the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy have
given us a unique opportunity to discuss how to make
16-20204

30/06/2016

the United Nations more relevant, more credible,
more legitimate and more capable in responding to
terrorism. During this discussion, we will look at the
latest challenges that we must face as an international
community in this area and how better to respond
to these criminal and unjustifiable acts, regardless
of their motivation, wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever they are committed. Together in this Hall,
we must discharge our mandate as a competent organ
with universal membership to address the issue of
international terrorism.
We celebrate this year the tenth anniversary of the
Strategy. Ten years ago, we expressed our commitment
to take the necessary steps to enhance cooperation to
prevent and combat terrorism in a decisive, unified,
coordinated, inclusive and transparent manner. We all
agree that the acts, methods and practices of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations are activities aimed at
the destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms
and democracy. They threaten the territorial integrity
and security of States and peoples and destabilize
legitimately constituted Governments.
In these past years, we have been alarmed by the
acts of intolerance and violent extremism conducive
to terrorism and violence, including sectarian violence
and terrorism in various parts of the world, which claim
innocent lives, cause destruction, displace people and
divide communities. To all the victims of the senseless
violence, we offer our solidarity and support. For in this
year, I call upon the entire Assembly to also offer to
our peoples a commitment to concrete action to keep
the Strategy relevant and contemporary in the light of
emerging new threats and evolving trends in this area.
We can include a commitment not to let our
differences prevent us from reaching consensus on
the importance of our actions to tackle these heinous
acts and to provide the proper framework for our
common action. I wish to recognize the commitment
and flexibility shown by all delegations during the
negotiations on the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy review. I call on all of the members
of the Assembly to renew efforts in that regard. We
cannot allow ourselves to send the message of disunity
to the world when our peoples and our community of
nations face such a grave challenge.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his commitment and leadership on this topic, and
in particular for his initiative and Plan of Action to

A/70/PV.108

Prevent Violent Extremism. That Plan has allowed
Member States to engage in a fundamental conversation
about how to prevent those whose message of
intolerance — religious, cultural, social — has had
drastic consequences for many regions of the world and
has challenged our shared values of peace, justice and
human rights.
Finally, I want to warmly thank the co-facilitators — the
Permanent Representatives of Iceland and Argentina — and
their legal experts for tirelessly working for a consensus
draft resolution. Their commitment, efforts and leadership
should allow us to agree on an outcome that sends a
common message from the international community
on this critical subject. Doing so will enable the United
Nations to continue to improve its response to new and
evolving threats to international peace and security, to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1), the pursuit of the rule of law and the realization of
human rights going forward. I thank them.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I would like to thank
the President of the General Assembly and the
co-facilitators — Ambassador Martín Garcia Moritán
and Ambassador Einar Gunnarsson, the Permanent
Representative of Argentina and the Permanent
Representative of Iceland, respectively — for their hard
work in steering this fifth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I have been closely following the negotiations on
draft resolution A/70/L.55, and I have to admit that
I am profoundly disappointed that this year of all
years might be the one that does not see the adoption
of a consensus draft resolution. All Member States
agree that international terrorism is affecting them at
unprecedented levels and that it requires our concerted
action. People the world over look to us to act with unity
and resolve to address this major scourge of our time.
The urgent necessity of tackling and preventing
terrorism has been brought home to us once again this
week in the most tragic and horrific way. The terrorist
attack at Istanbul airport is an attack on all of us, on
our most fundamental values and on our solidarity and
unity of purpose. I express my deepest condolences to
everyone affected — the families, friends, colleagues
of those killed and injured — and to the Government
and the people of Turkey.

16-202047/9

A/70/PV.108

This review marks the tenth anniversary of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Important shifts
have occurred in the global terrorism landscape since
the adoption of the Strategy by consensus in 2006. While
there has been important progress in its implementation,
the Strategy has encountered unforeseen challenges.
The spread of poisonous violent extremist
ideologies through modern information technologies,
our limited success in preventing new conflicts, the
easy availability of arms, the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters across borders and heightened media attention
have all contributed to creating an environment where
terrorists have taken control of vast swaths of territory,
resources and populations. The result is a vortex of
protracted conflicts, ungoverned spaces and terrorism.
Terrorism transcends cultures and geographical
boundaries. It cannot be associated with any one religion,
nationality or ethnic group. It affects all countries.
Violent extremists and terrorists are posing a
direct assault on the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
undermining efforts to maintain peace and security,
foster sustainable development, promote respect for
human rights and deliver vital humanitarian aid.
We are at an important juncture. We need to take
tough decisions and make difficult choices, while
staying true to the commitments we have made under
the Strategy across all four of its pillars.
Military and security measures have their rightful
place. However, as leaders of Governments and
institutions, we must ensure that our responses are fully
consistent with our commitments under the Charter of
the United Nations and international human rights law.
Protecting human rights and respecting the rule
of law while countering terrorism is not only a matter
of principle. It is also essential to the legitimacy and
efficacy of counter-terrorist measures. When we fail to
uphold the values that unite us, we end up fuelling the
grievances that can lead to terrorism.
As I said in my Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, we need to take a more systematic,
preventive approach to address the drivers of violent
extremism. This lies at the heart of my call to Member
States to develop national plans of action, with the
support of the United Nations where and when requested.
8/9

30/06/2016

Terrorists not only shed the blood of civilians, but
divide and polarize our societies. This is a leadership
challenge. We must never be ruled by fear. We must
refrain from assigning collective guilt to whole
communities and religions.
I am concerned about the growing drift in many
countries and regions towards bigotry, anti-Muslim
hatred, anti-Semitism, xenophobia, homophobia and
outright racism. Terrorist groups are exploiting these
negative trends and using them as a recruitment tool.
We have a fundamental moral duty to oppose all forms
of discrimination and exclusion, and to denounce such
demagoguery, which in the past has led to unspeakable
horrors. We have to build societies in which all
legitimate human expressions have a place — societies
that include, rather than exclude. The only responsible
answer to provocation and incitement is shared resolve
to uphold universal values. The General Assembly is
the forum to forge and reinforce a global consensus in
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
In the face of the rapidly evolving global nature
of the threat, the basic tenets of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy are even more relevant than they
were 10 years ago. Now more than ever, we need strong
and effective international cooperation at the bilateral,
regional, interregional and global levels, and balanced
implementation across all four pillars.
The time has come to fully and comprehensively
implement the Global Strategy. I therefore hope that
the focus will be on implementing the commitments
we have made through collective action. While
Member States bear the primary responsibility for
the implementation of the Global Strategy, the United
Nations system stands ready to provide strong, wellcoordinated support, particularly through its CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, which has the
main responsibility for coordination and coherence in
this critical area.
If we want to make real and sustained impact on
the ground, we will need to mobilize the necessary
resources. However, apart from a generous contribution
from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, few new resources
have been provided to the United Nations, while demand
has risen exponentially. No amount of coordination
by the United Nations can make an impact without
sufficient resources.
I would like to conclude by remembering the
thousands of victims of terrorism over the past 10 years.
16-20204

30/06/2016

A/70/PV.108

The pain, suffering and loss of so many men, women and
children peacefully going about their lives is a tragedy
for us all. We have an urgent moral duty to do all we
can to prevent and end this carnage. Taking collective
preventive action against terrorism, in the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations, is the only way to secure
peace and prosperity for succeeding generations.

will also recall that the Assembly considered, in a joint
debate, agenda items 15, 116 and 123 at its 52nd plenary
meeting, on 13 November 2015. Members will further
recall that, under agenda items 15 and 116, the Assembly
adopted decision 70/539, at its 81st plenary meeting,
and resolution 70/262, at its 93rd plenary meeting, on
22 December 2015 and 27 April 2016, respectively.

In conclusion I appeal to the Assembly to show the
world its resolve by acting in unison and adopting the
draft resolution by consensus.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/70/L.54.

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
In view of the ongoing negotiations on draft
resolution A/70/L.55, on the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, I propose to hold the
debate on this item tomorrow morning, Friday, 1 July.
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 117.
Agenda items 15 and 116 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/70/L.54)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda items 15 and 116 at
its 4th plenary meeting, on 25 September 2015, and
adopted resolution 70/1 under those items. Members

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.54, entitled “High-level plenary
meeting on addressing large movements of refugees
and migrants”. In this connection, I would like to draw
the Assembly’s attention to the statement regarding
programme budget implications contained in document
A/70/967.
The Fifth Committee will examine during the main
part of the seventy-first session of the Assembly the
revised estimate arising from the draft resolution and
the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions thereon. Consequently, the
financial provisions as appropriate will be considered
as an additional budget appropriation to be approved by
the Assembly for the biennium 2016 to 2017.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/70/L.54?
Draft resolution A/70/L.54 was adopted (resolution
70/290).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 15 and 116.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

16-202049/9
