United Nations

S/PV.6342

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6342nd meeting
Friday, 18 June 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Moretti
Ms. Guo Xiaomei
Ms. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Lolo
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 31 May 2010 from the President of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991 addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2010/270)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-41106 (E)

*1041106*

S/PV.6342

Letter dated 28 May 2010 from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994, addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2010/259)

2

10-41106

S/PV.6342

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and
31 December 1994
Letter dated 31 May 2010 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991 addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2010/270)
Letter dated 28 May 2010 from the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994
and 31 December 1994, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2010/259)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Croatia, Kenya, Rwanda and
Serbia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.

10-41106

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Judge Patrick
Robinson, President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia; Judge Dennis Byron, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda;
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to the following documents: S/2010/270, which
contains the text of a letter dated 31 May 2010 from
the President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia; and S/2010/259, which contains
the text of a letter dated 28 May 2010 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
Prosecutors of those two International Tribunals.
I now give the floor to Judge Patrick Robinson.
Judge Robinson: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Security Council today in my capacity as
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, and particularly to do so under the
presidency of Mexico. I congratulate Mexico on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council, and I
thank the President for the attention that he has given
to matters pertaining to the Tribunal.
As the Tribunal’s completion strategy report (see
S/2010/270) bears witness, the Tribunal has continued

3

S/PV.6342

to work as efficiently and as expeditiously as possible
in accordance with the highest of international due
process. The Tribunal has now commenced all of the
trials pending on its docket and conducted proceedings
in 10 trials simultaneously in its three court rooms. It
has managed to do that by, inter alia, doubling up
judges and staff so that they are working on more than
one case simultaneously.
Nevertheless, there has been significant slippage
in the trial schedule. There are valid and unavoidable
reasons for that slippage, and the report clearly
identifies all the factors in relation to each trial that
have led to revised estimates of completion. It will not
surprise the Council to learn that the doubling-up of
judges and staff are contributory factors. The
scheduling of hearings, deliberations and consultations
has been complicated by the need to take into account
the obligations of judges and staff to other cases.
It must be underscored that the trial schedule
produced by the Tribunal is not akin to a bus schedule.
At most, it is a forecast subject to constant change
depending on the course that a trial takes. The
anticipated completion dates in the trial schedule are
estimated on the basis of factors within the Tribunal’s
control. But unforeseeable factors beyond the control
of the Tribunal emerge, resulting in unavoidable
delays. For example, it would have been impossible to
anticipate the death of the lead counsel in Stanišić and
Simatović; the volte-face of Šešelj in deciding at this
stage to raise a defence; the extensive litigation in
Gotovina et al., resulting from the investigations
carried out by the Croatian Government; or an
application by the prosecution to amend the indictment
to add significant new charges on the eve of the trial,
as happened in the Tolimir case.
But most significantly, the Prlić et al. case, the
Stanišić and Simatović case, the Stanišić and Župljanin
case, the Karadžić case and the Šešelj case could not
have foreseen the discovery of new evidence by the
national authorities of Serbia, namely 18 military
notebooks of Ratko Mladić, allegedly written during
the period 1991 to 1995. The discovery of that new
evidence has the potential to substantially impact the
projected completion dates of seven of the nine
ongoing trials. Thus, I must emphasize that the
schedule I present today is a forecast subject to change.
Yet another very significant reason for slippage in
the Tribunal’s trial schedule is the alarming rate of staff

4

attrition, coupled with the fact that throughout the
reporting period, the Tribunal has been running
10 trials simultaneously, with staff levels appropriate
for six trials. That has created a tremendous burden on
both staff and judges, and it has become even more
onerous with the constant departure of the Tribunal’s
highly experienced staff for more secure employment
elsewhere. Staff attrition and the desperate need for
urgent action in stemming that flow are factors that I
have repeatedly stressed to the utmost degree in my
previous presentations to the Security Council and the
General Assembly. Quite frankly, I am at a loss as to
what more might be done or said on my part to turn the
Council’s attention to this issue.
I reiterate that staff are leaving the Tribunal in
droves — three every five days — for greater job
security with other institutions, often within the United
Nations itself. I must therefore warn the Council that as
the report demonstrates, this factor is having an
adverse impact on the expeditious completion of all but
one of our trials. And it will worsen. Our trials will be
further delayed by staff attrition.
There are measures that can be taken, and the
first is the granting of permanent contracts to our staff,
which would provide them with an incentive to remain
with the Tribunal until the completion of their work.
They would have the security of knowing that, if the
United Nations cannot place them in another position
by the time their posts expire, they will nonetheless be
compensated and that compensation will buy them the
time they need to find another position. I know from
talking to staff that the granting of permanent contracts
would be a tremendous incentive for them to stay at the
Tribunal until the completion of their work.
But while many of our staff have accrued the
right to be considered for permanent contracts under
the rules and regulations of the United Nations, I have
had to fight exceedingly hard to ensure that that right is
respected. It had first been posited that our staff be
excluded on the grounds that they are staff of a United
Nations institution with a finite mandate and not staff
of the United Nations as such. Following extensive
lobbying on my part against this discrimination
towards our staff, their right to be considered for
permanent contractual status is now being respected.
But I fear that our staff will, at the end of the day, still
suffer discrimination and be denied permanent
contracts on discriminatory grounds. I urge the Council
to assist the Tribunal in ensuring that this does not

10-41106

S/PV.6342

happen. It would not only be of great detriment to our
staff, but it would have profound effects on the
Tribunal’s ability to complete its mandate as
expeditiously as possible, because staff would continue
to leave.
A second measure that can be adopted relates to
General Assembly resolution 63/256 of December
2008, which authorized the Tribunal to offer contracts
to staff in line with planned post reductions and the
prevailing trial schedules. This was a measure adopted
by the General Assembly to allow the Tribunal to offer
a measure of job security to staff. The background to
this resolution was that the Tribunal had proposed a
staff retention bonus. This was rejected, and instead
resolution 63/256 incorporated a non-financial
measure. Yet, it has not been implemented because the
budgetary authorities at United Nations Headquarters
do not consider that the Tribunal can offer contracts to
staff that are not tied to approved budgetary
submissions.
As I explain in the report, when this resolution
was brought to my attention by the Tribunal’s Staff
Union, I went to the International Civil Service
Commission — which was involved in the process
leading up to the adoption of the resolution — and to
members of the Fifth Committee and asked them to
explain to me what the resolution meant. I was advised
by every person I consulted that it allowed the Tribunal
to offer contracts in line with the trial schedules. On its
face, this is clearly what the resolution authorizes, but
the Tribunal cannot implement it without a clear
authorization from the Controller’s Office because
fiscal responsibility to the Registrar is only delegated
authority.
Now I ask: How can the General Assembly, the
principal organ of a body like the United Nations
whose membership is worldwide, adopt a resolution
unambiguous in language and purpose and on the basis
of which constituent bodies such as the Tribunal make
plans, only to be told by the budgetary authorities in
New York that the resolution does not mean what it
clearly says? The Tribunal has been severely
prejudiced by this misstep in the United Nations. It
cannot offer contracts in line with prevailing trial
schedules, and therefore critical staff cannot be
retained. In effect, the odd result is that the United
Nations will not be implementing the resolution of the
General Assembly in accordance with its plain
interpretation. This must have a consequence for the

10-41106

management and efficiency of the Organization as a
whole.
What we are now being told from high authority
is that all that the resolution means is that the Tribunal
can offer contracts, but that it must do so within the
envelope of funds appropriated under the budget. But
the Tribunal was always able to do that, and a
resolution of the General Assembly is not necessary to
tell the Tribunal that it can do something that it has
always been able to do. This state of confusion would
be delightfully risible did it not have such painful and
dire consequences for the running of the Tribunal at
this critically important stage of its life.
What is needed now is a pragmatic solution to
extricate ourselves from the institutional muddle into
which we have been immersed by the differences
between the General Assembly and the administration.
I ask the Security Council to assist the Tribunal as
much as it can in resolving the interpretation and
implementation of that General Assembly resolution,
for what is certain is that, in the absence of the
implementation of a measure of the kind set out in the
resolution to assist in the retention of staff, the dates
for the completion of the Tribunal’s work will stretch
further and further into the future. We want the
Security Council to help us by using the influence and
weight it undoubtedly has within the United Nations.
The Council should adopt a statement acknowledging
the problem faced by the Tribunal in retaining
experienced staff at this time and requesting all the
relevant United Nations bodies, including the
administration, to adopt appropriate staff-retention
measures.
A third measure that can be adopted to assist the
Tribunal in retaining its staff, and thus completing its
work, is the end-of-service grant recommended by the
International Civil Service Commission, which is still
pending in the Fifth Committee. Finally, the resolution
of the new continuing contractual regime and the
inclusion of Tribunal staff in that regime would have a
tremendously beneficial impact upon the Tribunal’s
retention of its essential staff.
These are all matters that I, as President of the
Tribunal, have been fighting for, but to be successful
the Tribunal needs strong political support. I urge the
Council to take measures now and to ensure that action
is taken on these issues. I can only repeat my warning
that a failure to take action immediately on the rate of

5

S/PV.6342

staff attrition at the Tribunal will have profound effects
on the ability of the Tribunal to complete its mandate
as expeditiously as possible. The situation will worsen.
In the face of the slippage in the trial schedule,
the Tribunal has taken immediate measures to try as
much as possible to mitigate that slippage. I
reconstituted the Working Group on Speeding Up
Trials to undertake a third review of the Tribunal’s
practices in order to assess whether further
improvements could be implemented in our work. The
Working Group submitted its report on 21 May and
recommended a number of reforms to the Tribunal’s
procedures. The Judges discussed these reforms on
7 June at an extraordinary plenary session convened
expressly for that purpose. The Judges are now actively
integrating these reforms into their ongoing trials. I
note that the problem of staff attrition is so serious that,
in its report, the Working Group expressed its greatest
concern over the effect that staff turnover has on the
speed of trials and on the Chambers’ ability to process
the evidence and motions in their cases. The Working
Group recommended that the management of the
Tribunal do all that it can to keep experienced staff.
Another matter I again bring to the Council’s
attention is that of compensation to victims. In order to
contribute to a lasting peace in the former Yugoslavia,
justice must not only be retributive; it must also be
restorative. The International Criminal Court and the
111 States that have ratified the Rome Statute accept
the importance of compensation to victims of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, and the
United Nations must, I submit, do the same. I therefore
call upon the Council to take action and to establish, as
the International Criminal Court has, without further
delay a trust fund for victims of crimes falling within
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to complement the
Tribunal’s criminal trials by providing victims with the
necessary resources to rebuild their lives.
The final issue that I wish to bring to the
attention of Council members is the mandate of the
Judges, a matter currently pending before the Council.
Just as staff need job security, so do our Judges, and I
urge the Council to bear in mind the benefits to the
Tribunal’s completion strategy of granting mandates to
the judges in line with the projections I have provided
to the Council through my letter to the SecretaryGeneral up to 2013 in respect of those judges whose
trial and appeals will be ongoing at that time, and up to
2014 for the remaining appeal judges. It is simply not

6

rational to assign judges to cases that will last longer
than their mandates.
In closing, I wish to reiterate that we at the
Tribunal are dedicated to completing the work
entrusted to us so that peace, justice and reconciliation
may prevail in the region of the former Yugoslavia. We
at the Tribunal have accepted this responsibility from
the Security Council because we believe in this
mission. However, we need more support from our
parent organ, the Security Council. We are hanging by
a thread and we need Council members to throw us a
lifeline. And I have to say this very bluntly: Not
helping us with staff retention measures is
counterproductive because trials will take longer,
appeals will take longer and the life of the Tribunal
will be much longer.
I therefore again urge the Council to actively
work with the other relevant organs of the United
Nations for meaningful retention measures as a matter
of urgency and specifically in the ways I have
mentioned here today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Judge
Patrick Robinson for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Dennis Byron,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.
Judge Byron: I would like to start by
congratulating the representative of Mexico on his
country’s current presidency of the Security Council. I
wish you, Sir, a successful tour of duty.
Today, it is my honour to present to the members
of the Security Council the thirteenth completion
strategy report (S/2010/259) of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). I would like to
begin by expressing the gratitude of the entire Tribunal
to the Governments of Council members and to the
Secretariat for their continuous trust and support on all
levels over the past six months.
Since I last addressed the Council in December
2009 (see S/PV.6228) the Tribunal has rendered two
trial and two appeal judgements. The number of
remaining judgements to be delivered at the trial level
is now down to 13. We expect judgements in seven
trials with respect to 15 accused before the end of
2010. The remaining six judgements with respect to 11
accused will be delivered during the course of 2011.

10-41106

S/PV.6342

Two of the three ongoing trials and the two trials that
are yet to commence will continue into 2011.
The two single-accused cases currently in
evidence phase, the Ngirabatware and Nzabonimana
trials, are taking significantly longer than expected,
with judgements now expected for the second half of
next year. I would like to highlight two main reasons
for the delay in the completion of the evidence phase.
First, the parallel involvement of the judges in several
other trials makes scheduling particularly difficult in
case of unexpected delays. The second and important
reason is fair trial requirements — in both cases linked,
among others things, to an alibi defence that required
cooperation from a Member State.
Our planning for the rest of this year and the
beginning of 2011 concentrates, apart from the ongoing
trial work, on judgement drafting in all remaining
cases. The expected judgement delivery in several
cases before the end of 2010 will reduce the remaining
trial workload and free up time for some of our judges
to hear special depositions for the preservation of
evidence against the remaining highest-level fugitives.
We also expect several proceedings for contempt of
court; investigations are ongoing and could lead to
prosecution in up to six cases.
I am, of course, well aware of the unpredictability
of certain factors impacting the judicial calendar, but
we believe that our goal of completing the first
instance trials based on the current workload within the
next year can be achieved. For the appeals, this means
maintaining the goal of completion by the end of 2013
in relation to the ICTR cases.
Yet, as my colleague did, I need to draw once
more the attention of the Council to the difficult
staffing situation at the Tribunal and the possibility that
this challenging situation could lead to additional
delays. I have mentioned this before. The high turnover
and the difficulties in recruitment in Chambers and in
the Office of the Prosecutor, are amongst the principal
obstacles to meeting our goals for judgement delivery
in the remaining cases. I mentioned in my written
completion strategy report the departure of 154 staff
members during the past year. For Chambers alone, the
number is 24 — roughly half of our staffing level.
Let me take one of our multi-accused cases, the
so-called military trial, as an example. That trial
spanned 395 trial days. The Chamber heard 216
witnesses and admitted 965 exhibits. Familiarity with

10-41106

the evidence, which covers several thousand pages of
transcripts, is indispensable for everyone involved in
the drafting of a judgment. With these figures in mind,
Council members can imagine the impact of the
departure of members of the drafting team, including
the judgment coordinator, only a few months before the
expected judgment date.
The Tribunal works intensely on reducing internal
delays in recruitment. But even if we were to do our
utmost and have a replacement in place when the
current incumbent leaves, no one could be realistically
expected to familiarize himself or herself with the
amount of evidence involved in less than several
months. The situation in two other multi-accused cases
is comparable. Delays in the judgment delivery in
cases of this nature are therefore unavoidable.
The Council may wish to consider issuing a
statement expressing its understanding for the difficult
situation of staff retention and recruitment at the
Tribunal and to encourage further work with the
relevant United Nations bodies to address these
problems.
This week, the Tribunal submitted the revised
estimates for the rest of the 2010-2011 biennium
budget to the Controller. The delays I have just set out
will require additional resources. I urge Council
members to be aware that providing us with the
necessary resources now will help to prevent longer
delays in the Tribunal’s completion of its work.
I have asked that the Secretary-General bring a
number of requests to the Council for consideration. In
line with the revised trial schedule, the terms of office
of all but two of our judges will need to be extended.
In addition, we are facing a particular situation at the
Tribunal with a very small number of permanent judges —
a number insufficient to fill the key positions, in
particular the President and Presiding Judge of a Trial
Chamber next year. We will also need a new roster of
ad litem judges to be appointed in case there are new
arrests or unexpected unavailability of the currently
serving judges if we do not want to risk additional
delays.
With regard to the terms and conditions of service
of the ad litem judges, I welcome the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 64/261, which decided
that this item will be dealt with as a priority at the
sixty-fifth session this autumn. The large majority of
judges on the benches of the two new trials will be ad

7

S/PV.6342

litem judges, and they will also take on most of the
other remaining judicial work at the trial level. I trust
that the General Assembly will recognize the
importance of equalizing the terms and conditions of
service with those of the permanent judges, not only as
a matter of equity, but also and in particular in the
interest of the completion strategy.
I turn now to my last major point — State
cooperation. I will start with the good news that one of
the recently acquitted persons was successfully
relocated in March 2010. However, despite significant
efforts by the Registrar, three others remain, as of
today, at safe houses in Arusha. For one of them, André
Ntagerura, it has been almost four years since the
confirmation of his acquittal by the Appeals Chamber.
The Tribunal calls once more upon Council members’
support. Their Governments’ willingness to allow these
lawfully acquitted men to settle in their territory would
be a credible symbol of their countries’ commitment to
international justice and the rule of law.
State cooperation is also essential for the
everyday judicial work of the Tribunal. I would like to
underline once more the importance for Member States
to respond expeditiously to requests for information or
other assistance by a Trial Chamber, which greatly
assists in moving the proceedings forward without
additional delay and in accordance with the
requirements of fair trials.
Since I last addressed the Council in December
(see S/PV.6228), the international community has
unfortunately not made progress with regard to our
biggest remaining task — the arrest of the remaining
11 fugitives. I am convinced that we all agree that
11 fugitives are not an acceptable legacy to leave to the
residual mechanism as the Tribunal prepares to finalize
its trial activities by the end of next year.
The Tribunal depends on the cooperation of
Member States for the tracking and arrest of fugitives.
Unfortunately, I have to highlight in this context
particular difficulties with respect to cooperation with
Kenya. The Prosecutor has reported to me that Kenya
continuously fails to comply with its cooperation
obligations under article 28 of the Tribunal’s Statute,
and I have brought his report to the attention of the
President of the Council for consideration and
appropriate action.
But fugitives are suspected to reside and to cross
borders in several other countries as well. Therefore,

8

let us once more strengthen our efforts to shut down
the remaining safe havens and arrest those indicted of
the worst imaginable crimes so that justice can finally
be done.
We have been cooperating with Rwanda
effectively over the last 16 years to ensure the smooth
functioning of our trials. In this context, I welcome the
information provided by the Rwandan authorities that
Peter Erlinder, one of the advocates before the
Tribunal, was released yesterday. The Tribunal’s work
with Rwanda and the Office of Legal Affairs of the
United Nations is ongoing in this matter. Meanwhile,
the Trial Chambers will continue to guarantee fair trials
and ensure that defence counsel can represent their
clients effectively and efficiently.
Only two weeks ago, many of those working on
international justice attended the International Criminal
Court review conference in Kampala. At the
conference, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon spoke of
the “new age of accountability”. The conference was
indeed impressive proof of how far we have come in
making international criminal justice part of the
international political agenda. The International
Criminal Court is the future, but today and in the
coming years it is still for us to write the last chapters
in the history of the ad hoc tribunals, the pioneer
institutions of this development. We should all do what
we can to make these last chapters a success story.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Judge
Robinson for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Brammertz: It is a privilege once again to
address the Council on the progress we are making in
the Office of the Prosecutor to complete the Tribunal’s
mandate. The report before the Council (S/2010/270) is
our thirteenth, and for my Office it marks a significant
step forward in achieving the completion strategy
objectives, especially in finishing trials, securing the
cooperation of States and accelerating the downsizing
process.
For the first time since the implementation of the
completion strategy, I can report that we have no more
trials at the pre-trial stage. The cases of all the accused
we have in custody are now in the active trial phase.
Nine cases, involving 18 accused, are on trial.

10-41106

S/PV.6342

On 10 June, the Trial Chamber delivered what we
consider to be a milestone judgement in the Popović et
al. case for crimes committed against Bosnian Muslims
during and after the fall of the Srebrenica and Zepa
enclaves in July 1995. The Trial Chamber convicted
seven former high-ranking Bosnian Serb military and
police officials of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Among those convicted, Popović and
Beara were found guilty of genocide, extermination
and persecution as crimes against humanity and of
murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war.
Both were sentenced to life imprisonment. Drago
Nikolić was convicted of aiding and abetting these
crimes and was sentenced to 35 years imprisonment.
It is an important judgement first of all for the
victims of those crimes, but also for other cases of the
Tribunal and, I hope, for the prosecution of lower- and
mid-level accused in the former Yugoslavia. Moreover,
the Chamber’s findings are further confirmation that
those found guilty in the Popović case worked under
the orders of other indictees, such as Ratko Mladić,
who remains at large. The Popović judgement
confirming that genocide occurred in Bosnia and
Herzegovina reminds us once again of the urgent need
to bring Ratko Mladić to justice.
Despite the various achievements made in
moving the trial forwards, it is regrettable to see
slippage in the trial programme. Trials of this nature
are complex and beset by a broad range of legal and
practical difficulties, many of which are beyond our
control. We nevertheless remain committed to the
expeditious and efficient completion of our work,
while respecting the fairness of proceedings.
To fulfil our mandate and meet completion
strategy goals, my Office continues to rely on the
cooperation of States and international organizations.
Over the past six months, Serbia has continued to
respond adequately to our requests for assistance by
providing access to documents, archives and witnesses.
At this moment, there are no outstanding requests. The
Serbian
authorities have provided notebooks
containing the handwritten wartime notes of Ratko
Mladić and associated tapes. These were seized during
a search operation conducted by the action team in
charge of tracking fugitives in February 2010. The
valuable, voluminous material recovered is currently
being analysed, and we have sought and will continue
to seek its introduction as evidence in several trials.

10-41106

The arrest of the fugitives Mladić and Hadžić
remains the highest priority for my office. Since my
last report, operational services in Serbia continue their
efforts to search for the fugitives. However, these
efforts have thus far produced few tangible results. We
therefore strongly believe that Serbia’s current
operational strategies need to be reviewed. We have
recently asked Serbian authorities to step up search
efforts by broadening their investigation, intensifying
search operations and increasing their operational
capacity. Decisive and intensified action by the
operational services and political authorities is critical
to attaining the arrest of the two fugitives. I expressed
these concerns at the European Union’s Foreign Affairs
Council on 14 June. I reiterated to the ministers that
the support of the European Union in securing the
cooperation of States has not only been extremely
effective in the past but will remain essential in the
future.
During this reporting period, Croatia has
generally been responsive to our requests for
assistance. However, the issue of missing important
documents related to Operation Storm in 1995 remains
outstanding. In October 2009, Croatia established an
inter-agency task force to take over its administrative
investigation. While there has been a general
improvement in the quality of the interviews
conducted, no full account of the whereabouts of the
important missing documents has been provided. In
addition, key investigative avenues remain unexplored.
During the past weeks, I have been assured by the
authorities that the administrative investigation will
pursue additional leads and expand its work, as
suggested by my office one year ago. I hope that these
activities will result in effective action and concrete
results. While the matter remains before the Trial
Chamber, I await the results of these efforts by Croatia
to see whether Croatia intensifies its administrative
investigation and fully accounts for the missing
documents before the end of the trial.
The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
continue to respond adequately to our requests for
assistance. I continue to encourage the authorities to
take all necessary measures against the networks
supporting fugitives. We welcome the assistance
provided by the Office of the High Representative and
other international organizations in this regard.

9

S/PV.6342

With regard to judicial proceedings, my office
supports national prosecutions and the important work
of the Special Department of War Crimes in the Office
of the State Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
strongly encourage the authorities and the international
community to carry on providing the necessary support
for the prosecution of war crimes cases.
My Office continues to provide assistance to
national prosecutors in order to ensure the transition to
domestic prosecution of war crimes cases. Building the
capacity of local courts to try war crimes is not only
critical to the success of the Tribunal’s completion
strategy and legacy, but also essential for lasting
justice. As forecast in my last report, we have now
completed the transfer of cases and investigation files
to courts and prosecution offices in the region. There is
still a regular exchange of information and knowledge
in relation to this material.
We also continue to support ongoing cooperation
and capacity-building projects. In this regard, I would
specifically like to record my gratitude to the European
Union for extending the funding of the successful
project of liaison prosecutors and young professionals
from the region who work in my Office. I also
encourage all authorities in the region to strengthen
regional cooperation in order to address war crimes
cases. I note recent improvement in certain areas and
the conclusion of important judicial cooperation
agreements. However, further efforts are necessary if
there is to be a coordinated approach to war crimes
prosecutions across the region.
As the High Representative, Mr. Inzko, said in
this Chamber a few weeks ago (see S/PV.6319), recent
conciliatory gestures from political leaders in the
region have led to the creation of a space for new and
constructive dialogue. It is only in such an
environment, devoid of provocation, that the
prosecutors and courts can do their work and further
build upon the work of the Tribunal.
As announced last year, the Office of the
Prosecutor has begun downsizing. In line with the stepby-step progress in trials and appeals, we have
abolished 22 posts so far. Despite the slippage in the
trial schedule and the fact that additional expenditure
may be required, we are nevertheless continuing to
follow a strict policy of decreasing staff levels as trials
end.

10

In the longer term, our eyes are also now on the
eventual closure of the Tribunal and what lies beyond.
As our final trial work progresses in The Hague,
discussions with the Working Group on the creation of
a future regional mechanism are well under way. I
welcome efforts already undertaken and important
progress made in this regard by the Austrian
chairmanship, the members of the Working Group and
the Secretariat.
In July, in will be 15 years since the genocide that
took place in Srebrenica, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Since then, an important number of high-level accused
have been tried in The Hague and progress has been
made in domestic war-crimes prosecutions. However,
the human tragedy of the war is still a vivid memory.
As victims, the peoples of the former Yugoslavia and
the international community continue to seek justice.
That painful chapter of recent history can be properly
closed only when all those responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law have been
brought to trial. Therefore, there can be no alternative
to the immediate arrest of the two remaining fugitives,
Mladić and Hadžić.
I thank the Council very much for its continued
support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Brammertz for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.
Mr. Jallow: I am honoured to have been given
the opportunity to report once again to the Security
Council on the state of the completion strategy at the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
When I reported here six months ago, I indicated
that the Office of the Prosecutor at the ICTR would
focus its efforts in the ensuing six months on several
fronts: preparations for the trials of the two new
arrestees, Ndahimana and Nizeyimana; the conclusion
of the part-heard trials; the renewal of our requests for
the referral of cases to Rwanda in early 2010 for trial;
the commencement of rule 71 bis evidence
preservation proceedings in respect of three top-level
fugitives; and the intensification of our tracking efforts
to apprehend and transfer to the ICTR the remaining 11
fugitives. We have, during that period, indeed focused
on those areas, with varying degrees of progress.

10-41106

S/PV.6342

During this period, the evidence phase of the
proceedings in five cases was completed. The
prosecution phase was also concluded in two other
cases. The defence stage of three cases is ongoing. The
commencement of the two new trials, the evidencepreservation proceedings and the tracking of fugitives
have been hampered by staffing constraints. However,
we are finally set to commence the trial of Ndahimana
in September 2010. The Nizeyimana trial is now likely
to commence only in the last quarter of 2010, as my
Office is grappling with the challenge of constituting
an adequate trial team to prepare and prosecute that
case. The rule 71 bis proceedings are now likely to
commence closer to the end of 2010. We hope to renew
the requests for the referral of cases to Rwanda by
September 2010.
The slight delays in respect of those matters —
with the exception of the requests for the referral of
cases to Rwanda, which are tied to the ongoing
capacity-building programme in and by that country —
have been occasioned largely by the staffing challenges
we face at the Tribunal. The current budgetary
provisions have not provided adequately for the
additional workload in 2010. At this critical juncture,
we also continue to lose staff with experience and
institutional memory, especially in the trial and
fugitive-tracking sections, due to retirement or a desire
by staff members to move on in view of the imminent
completion of the ICTR’s mandate. Replacing them has
been quite slow, due largely to the difficulty in
attracting staff with the requisite competence and
experience who are willing to work for just the short
period that remains of our mandate.
We have tried, as much as possible, to continue
some of our activities within existing resources, — for
instance by multitasking staff members. We continue to
remain
firmly
committed
to
the
effective
implementation of the completion strategy, but I
believe that sympathetic consideration of the
supplementary budgetary proposals that have been
submitted, together with measures that would iron out
the challenges in recruitment, would greatly enhance
our efforts in that respect.
While my Office prepares for the renewal of the
requests for the referral of cases of indictees to
Rwanda later this year, we have also continued the
process of handing over files from my Office to
Rwanda and other countries that relate to suspects who
were investigated but not indicted by the ICTR.

10-41106

Indeed, on 8 June 2010, I handed over 25 such files to
the Prosecutor General of Rwanda, thus bringing the
number of such cases handed over to Rwanda by my
Office to 55.
The tracking, arrest and transfer of Félicien
Kabuga and the other fugitives will continue to be a
top priority. Our tracking team will continue to deploy
all its efforts to that end. We count on the continued
call by the Security Council on all States to cooperate
fully with the Tribunal in those efforts.
I regret to report, however, that there has been no
further progress in the matter of cooperation by Kenya
in relation to the case of Félicien Kabuga. Despite
numerous requests, the Government of Kenya has so
far not provided my Office with details of Kabuga’s
alleged departure from that country. More particularly,
the outstanding ICTR requests to Kenya for
cooperation relate to a follow-up on the investigation
of Kabuga’s assets and properties in that country, the
provision to the joint ICTR/Kenya police task force of
access to all Kenyan Government files on Kabuga and
full particulars, as I have just indicated, of the
circumstances of his reported departure from Kenya —
reports that have come from the Government of Kenya.
Despite the copious evidence of Kabuga’s entry,
residence, activities and occasional reported sightings
in that country, Kenya has neither arrested him nor
provided the information requested by the Prosecutor
to assist in the tracking and arrest of that fugitive.
In view of Kenya’s continued non-compliance
with the requests of the ICTR, I have taken the step of
requesting the President of the Tribunal, under article
28 of the ICTR statute and the Tribunal’s rules, to
notify the Security Council of the failure of Kenya to
cooperate with the Tribunal in relation to that fugitive.
That request sets out in greater detail the basis for the
notification to the Council. We request the Council to
consider the necessary measures to enable the ICTR to
secure the cooperation of that country in this important
case.
The number of requests for mutual legal
assistance from national prosecuting authorities
continues to grow. In the current reporting period, my
Office has already attended to 40 requests from
10 Member States for assistance with evidence — a
significant increase over the 2009 level. The nature of
this work continues to centre on extensive research into
the Prosecutor’s evidentiary database for relevant

11

S/PV.6342

materials for use by national prosecuting authorities
and investigators in respect of their work on the
Rwandan genocide.
An important element of our international
cooperation practice has also involved extensive work
to declassify key exhibits and to vary witnessprotection measures. During the current reporting
period, my Office has secured consents for disclosure
from 89 prosecution witnesses and filed five motions
for the variation of witness-protection measures.
Submissions are being prepared for additional
measures as well. Those applications also contribute to
the overall objective of reducing the number of
protected witnesses and documents, thus scaling down
the eventual workload of any residual mechanism that
may be established.
In the months ahead, we propose to commence
the trials of the two remaining cases of detainees, file
new requests for the referral of the cases of eight of the
remaining 11 fugitives to Rwanda for trial by the end
of August or early September, intensify our efforts in
tracking and arresting fugitives, and prepare for the
commencement, early in 2011, of evidencepreservation hearings in respect of three top-level
fugitives.
The cooperation of Member States and the
support of the Security Council, the other organs and
the Secretariat have been, and will continue to be,
indispensable to the success of the completion strategy.
I would like to convey our appreciation for all such
support. We look forward to it at this crucial stage of
the ICTR mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Jallow for the information he has provided.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council, beginning with Ambassador Mayr-Harting,
Permanent Representative of Austria, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, let
me thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings. In my statement
today, I will first give an update on the activities of the
Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, which Austria has the honour

12

of chairing. Subsequently, I shall make some brief
remarks in my national capacity.
Since my last briefing, on 3 December 2009 (see
S/PV.6228), the Working Group has continued to meet
on a regular basis, and it held 15 meetings. The latest
meeting with the Presidents and Prosecutors of both
Tribunals took place yesterday. The members of the
Group continued the informal dialogue with affected
countries and the host countries of the Tribunals. The
members also heard a briefing by the Chief of the
United Nations Archives and Records Management
Section.
The Working Group has made good progress in
its discussions on a draft Security Council resolution
on the establishment of an international residual
mechanism for criminal tribunals after the Tribunals’
closure. Last December, the Working Group concluded
the first reading of the new draft resolution and its
annex, which had been prepared by the Chair with the
help of the Office of Legal Affairs (OLA) based on the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report on
the administrative and budgetary aspects of the options
for possible locations for the archives and the seat of
the residual mechanism, or mechanisms, for the
Tribunals (S/2009/258).
At the end of last year, the Group agreed to
request OLA to prepare a draft statute of the residual
mechanism based on the statutes of the ICTY and the
ICTR as well as two additional internal reports on the
declassification of documents and review of witness
protection orders by the Tribunals, and on possible
locations for the residual mechanism. I should like to
thank the Office of Legal Affairs for the preparation of
the draft statute and the reports.
On 5 February, the Chair presented the first
revised draft resolution on the residual mechanism,
with an annex including the draft statute prepared by
OLA. In February and March, the Working Group
conducted the second reading of the draft resolution
and the annex. After a period of bilateral consultations
and internal reflection and preparation, the second
revised draft resolution and draft statute were
introduced by the Chair on 26 May. The Group has just
started its third reading of the drafts, which is expected
to last until mid-July. The discussions on a further
revised draft resolution will resume in the fall with a
view to reaching a final agreement.

10-41106

S/PV.6342

In addition to the discussions on the residual
mechanism, in December 2009 and March of this year
the Working Group also considered various requests by
the Presidents of the Tribunals for extension of
mandates of judges. Following negotiations and
agreement reached in the Group, the Security Council
adopted resolutions 1900 (2009), 1901 (2009) and
1915 (2010). In resolutions 1900 (2009) and 1901
(2009), the Council underlined its intention to extend,
by 30 June 2010, the terms of office of all trial judges,
based on the Tribunals’ projected trial schedules, and
the terms of office of all appeals judges until
31 December 2012, or until the completion of the cases
to which they are assigned if this is sooner. The
Council further requested the Tribunals to submit an
updated trial and appeals schedule, including
information on the judges the extension of whose terms
of office or whose redeployment to the Appeals
Chamber will be sought.
By letters dated 25 and 31 May 2010,
respectively, the Presidents of ICTR and ICTY
submitted the requested schedules and made new
requests for extension of the judges’ mandates. The
Working Group is currently preparing two draft
resolutions, which are scheduled for adoption at the
end of this month.
Turning now to what I wished to state in my
national capacity, I should like to reiterate Austria’s
strong support for the rule of law and international
criminal justice. We highly commend the work of the
ICTY and the ICTR, which carry out crucial tasks to
fight impunity and bring to justice those responsible
for the most serious crimes. Austria fully supports the
efforts of the Tribunals to complete their work at the
earliest possible date. However, we note with concern
that in the most recent reports we see yet further
slippage of the trial and appeals schedules, which
suggests that the Tribunals’ work is not likely to finish
until 2013 or even 2014.
We urge the Tribunals to take all possible
measures to complete their work expeditiously, and we
are prepared to work constructively to assist them in
achieving that goal. In this context, we are also ready
to help develop adequate strategies to retain
experienced staff in order to prevent further delays. I
have listened carefully to what the Presidents of both
Tribunals had to say on this specific issue, and it is my
personal conviction that what they have said requires

10-41106

further reflection both within the Council and, in
particular, in other bodies of our Organization.
Moreover, by the end of this month, as I have
already mentioned, the Council will have to consider
the extension of the mandates of the judges in order to
enable the Tribunals to properly plan their trials and
appeals for the coming years.
The arrest of the remaining 13 fugitives continues
to be a key priority for the completion of the work of
the Tribunals. We call on all States concerned to fully
cooperate with the Tribunals. With regard to the ICTY,
while the arrests of Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić
are still outstanding, we welcome the Prosecutor’s
most recent report (see S/2010/270) about the
successful activities by the Serbian authorities in
seizing 18 wartime notebooks of Ratko Mladić, which
contain highly valuable information.
Austria welcomes the clear political commitment
of the Croatian Government under Prime Minister
Kosor to further intensify the work of its Task Force
and to expand it to the additional avenues of
investigation mentioned in the Prosecutor’s report. We
appreciate the growing cooperation and communication
between the Croatian authorities and the Prosecutor
and hope that this dialogue will be pursued on a very
regular basis. We remain confident that the work of the
Task Force will help to rapidly resolve the outstanding
issues.
With regard to the ICTR, we regret that there has
been no further progress in the matter of cooperation
by Kenya in the case of Félicien Kabuga. We urge
Kenya to render all necessary assistance to the ICTR.
In conclusion, I should like to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors once again for their
briefings and to express our gratitude to all members of
the Working Group for their active and constructive
participation in its discussions.
Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Let
me start by recognizing with deep appreciation the
important successes of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as well as the
increased regional cooperation of the countries where
the crimes judged by these courts were committed. The
United States is deeply committed to bringing to
justice those responsible for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

13

S/PV.6342

We welcome this chance for the Security Council
to focus on the work of the Tribunals, to take stock of
what has been accomplished over the past six months
and to work together to examine the Tribunals’
completion strategies and specific ways in which the
countries of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda may
assist the Tribunals.
The Tribunals have had many successes: more
than 250 people have been indicted, proceedings
against approximately 170 people have been concluded
and about 70 persons are on trial or have appeals
pending. Just eight days ago, the ICTY delivered a
judgement in the trail of seven high-ranking BosnianSerb military and police officials accused of a range of
crimes, including genocide. The judgement reaffirmed
that the murder of Bosnian Muslim men at Srebrenica
was genocide and convicted all seven of the accused
for related crimes — a particularly important verdict
since it comes as the international community prepares
to gather at Srebrenica in less than a month to
commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the 1995
genocide.
We applaud the many accomplishments of the
Tribunals, but we also note that the projected timelines
for completion have significantly slipped. We urge the
Tribunals to take every possible step to move their
remaining cases forward in a disciplined, fair and
efficient manner. We also urge them to focus on
completing their core mandate: prosecuting those
responsible for violating international humanitarian
law.
Nevertheless, we recognize that some factors are
well beyond the Tribunals’ control and we encourage
our fellow Council members to take a practical
approach to dealing with such matters as extending the
judges’ terms of office, so that we do not find ourselves
dealing with further delays caused by premature
departures from the bench. Retaining experienced staff
is a growing and real concern, and it will become even
more important as completion dates near. We
encourage the Tribunals and relevant United Nations
offices to develop flexible and cost-effective solutions
to these challenges.
Despite the Tribunals’ efforts to finish their work,
indicted individuals remain at large. They must be
apprehended and brought to justice without further
delay. We call on all States to fulfil their legal
obligations to cooperate with the Tribunals and to take

14

the steps necessary to ensure that the remaining
fugitives are apprehended.
In particular, let me underscore what has already
been said about the need to apprehend ICTR fugitive
Félicien Kabuga. The Government of Kenya has still
not responded to the Prosecutor’s requests, last made
on 27 March 2009, for access to investigative files and
other Government records related to Kabuga. Nor has
it provided details to support the claim that he has left
Kenya. The Kenyan authorities have also not
responded to the Prosecutor’s requests for meetings
with Kenyan officials to discuss these issues. We urge
the Government of Kenya to immediately respond to
the Tribunal’s requests, to make good-faith efforts to
locate and seize Kabuga’s assets, and to cooperate with
the Tribunal to find him and arrest him. Similarly, we
urge regional cooperation to apprehend two other
major figures in the Rwandan genocide: former
Commander of the Rwandan Presidential Guard Protais
Mpiranya and former Minister of Defence Augustin
Bizimana.
The United States applauds the cooperation
among the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the
Government of Uganda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which resulted in two fugitive arrests last
year. This type of cooperation must continue, to bring
the remaining fugitives in the region to justice.
The United States commends States’ efforts to
cooperate with the ICTY. For States in the former
Yugoslavia, full cooperation with the ICTY remains
not only a fundamental obligation but also a key to
progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration. As our
colleagues here know, the United States also supports
those countries’ European Union aspirations,
realization of which would promote regional stability,
economic prosperity and judicial reform.
The most critical unmet duty is the arrest of the
two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladić and Goran
Hadžić, and their transfer to the Tribunal to face
justice. In addition, we urge all States to support
requests from the Prosecutor in connection with
ongoing trials, including cooperation on protecting
witnesses and providing access to archives, documents
and witnesses. We welcome the Government of
Serbia’s cooperation and commend the seizure of
materials, including 18 notebooks, containing Mladić’s
handwritten wartime notes, and associated audio tapes.

10-41106

S/PV.6342

We urge Serbia to do everything in its power to locate
and arrest Mladić and Hadžić and to transfer them to
the Tribunal. Their arrests are vital for the successful
completion of the ICTY’s mandate.
We commend Croatia’s cooperation with the
ICTY and its renewed high-level commitment to
continue a credible ongoing investigation to locate
artillery documentation from Operation Storm and, if
that documentation cannot be located, to expand the
investigation into its fate. We encourage the Croatian
authorities to continue to explore additional
investigative techniques that might help recover
responsive documents, or account for them.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made good progress
in its cooperation with the Tribunal. We would
encourage the Bosnian Government to take a more
proactive approach in implementing the national war
crimes strategy adopted in December 2008. In addition,
all possible measures must be taken by countries in the
region to apprehend Radovan Stanković, who escaped
from prison in Bosnia while serving his 20-year
sentence.
As we noted last December, the ICTY has done a
commendable job supporting the development of
domestic courts, particularly in Bosnia. International
judges and prosecutors in Bosnia have performed
critically important work to bring justice on behalf of
the victims, regardless of ethnicity.
We cannot speak of the completion of the
Tribunals’ work without addressing the critical need to
establish a residual tribunal to continue the essential
functions of the Tribunals after the completion of their
pending trials. We must work together to establish a
strong, effective and efficient residual tribunal that will
encourage, among other things, ensuring that the
remaining ICTY and ICTR fugitives do not escape
justice.
Let me thank the Tribunal Presidents and
Prosecutors for their presentations today and for their
written assessments. The United States extends its
gratitude to the representatives and staffs of both
Tribunals for their effective and important work to
ensure that the perpetrators of some of the most
horrific crimes known to humankind are brought to
justice. One reason we continue to push for a
successful completion of the Tribunals’ work is very
simple and clear: we owe it to the victims; we owe it to
all those who have worked so hard to provide them,

10-41106

their families and their countries with a measure of
justice. Our collective conscience will not rest until
this task is done.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We welcome The
Honourable Justice Dennis Byron, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and The Honourable Justice Patrick Robinson,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). We also welcome Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the ICTY, and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the ICTR. We thank
them for their briefings, and we thank them and the
staffs of the Tribunals for their good work.
Uganda attaches great importance to the delivery
of justice and the fight against impunity. Our interest in
the delivery of international criminal justice continues
to be manifested in various ways. Uganda has
collaborated closely with the two Tribunals, and also
with the International Criminal Court. The arrest of
Nizeyimana in Kampala last year testifies to that. The
recent hosting in Kampala of the Review Conference
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
is further evidence of our keen interest in ending
impunity.
Resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004) call on
the Tribunals to take all possible measures to complete
all trials, and they stress the importance of
implementing the completion strategies. We commend
the Tribunals for their work towards completion in a
proper way that would not undermine efforts against
impunity. We welcome the strategy for the completion
of remaining cases. In that regard, we welcome the
holding of 10 simultaneous trials at the ICTY, which
has meant that there are no cases at the pre-trial stage.
However, we now recognize that the completion
strategies themselves raise challenges of retaining staff
to do the job. We have heard that, as the completion
dates have drawn near, the depletion of some of the
best staff has continued. We are concerned by the high
turnover of highly qualified and essential staff as the
Tribunals near the end of their mandates. There is a
need to implement measures to assist in the retention of
staff at this critical stage.
Uganda supports a clear and unequivocal
statement by this Council in support of the retention of
staff by the Tribunals. Uganda also supports the request
to grant an extension of the judges’ terms after

15

S/PV.6342

December 2014 in order to enable them to complete the
pending trials and appeals.
We welcome the initiatives undertaken to ensure
that the professional staff of the Tribunals is considered
alongside internal candidates at the 30-day mark for
vacancies within the Secretariat. The Secretariat should
endeavour to ensure that the right of long-serving staff
to conversion is protected.
It is necessary to address the issue of the
selection of candidates for the positions of President,
Vice-President and Presiding Judge of a Trial Chamber
once the terms of the current incumbents are completed
and the judges have been redeployed to their previous
Chamber. My delegation supports the proposal by the
Tribunals for the appointment of currently serving ad
litem judges as permanent judges or amending the
statute so as to make ad litem judges eligible to serve
as President or Presiding Judge of a Trial Chamber.
Uganda also supports the request for the creation of a
new roster of ad litem judges in order to alleviate the
additional workload that cannot be covered by the
serving judges.
We also note with concern the inequality in
emoluments between the permanent and ad litem
judges. The principle of equal payment for an equal
amount of work must be upheld. We therefore welcome
General Assembly resolution 64/261 adopted on
29 March, which decided that the matter should be
addressed with priority at the sixty-fifth session.
We welcome the outreach programme being
undertaken by the tribunals to raise awareness and
build capacity. Activities such as the awareness
programme of the ICTR targeting the young people of
the region on the role of the Tribunal in promoting
international justice are important. We also welcome
the efforts of the ICTY in assisting national judiciaries
of the region in securing capacity to provide education
on, investigate and prosecute war crimes and cases.

Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) for their respective briefings on assessing the
implementation of measures taken by the SecretaryGeneral concerning the implementation of the
completion strategies for the two Tribunals, in
accordance with resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004). I would also like to convey my warm
congratulations to Ambassador Mayr-Harting for the
skill with which he leads the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals. I assure him of our support.
My statement will focus on three points: the
progress made in implementing these measures, the
gaps therein, and the views of my delegation with
respect to questions we deem to be essential, especially
the cooperation of States with the Tribunals and the
capacity-building of national judicial systems.
Concerning progress, my delegation welcomes
the achievements in implementing the completion
strategies of the two Tribunals. To that end, we
welcome the firm resolve of the judges, Prosecutors
and all the staff of the Tribunals to accelerate the
completion of their judicial activities on schedule and
in accordance with applicable international norms
regarding procedural guarantees and the protection of
the rights of the accused. The efforts of the Informal
Working Group are indeed noteworthy, particularly
with regard to the drawing up of drafts for the statute
for the mechanism responsible for carrying out
essential functions once the Tribunals have concluded
the pending trials. The creation of such a mechanism
will be essential to preserving archives, which
represent a major institutional and legal legacy for the
countries concerned and the international community.

Finally, I wish to reiterate Uganda’s support for
the ICTY and ICTR because we attach great
importance to their work in the delivery of justice and
the fight against impunity. We call on Member States
and the international community to support them in
ensuring a smooth and proper completion of their
mandates.

In this regard, we support the measures taken by
the Tribunals themselves, the United Nations, national
jurisdictions and non-governmental organizations, as
well as the contribution of universities, to make fruitful
use of this legacy, in particular in the strengthening of
the rule of law, peace and national reconciliation. It
would therefore be highly desirable for the Security
Council to adopt as soon as possible a draft statute for
the international mechanism that would ensure the
competent and effective management of the legacies of
these two Tribunals.

Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank the

With respect to the challenges, my delegation
would highlight that, in spite of the progress made in

16

10-41106

S/PV.6342

moving forward the cases under way, in accordance
with the established schedule, the Tribunals continue to
face real difficulties in carrying out their activities.
Given the many unknowns, it is unlikely that the
schedule for trials and appeals cases will be complied
with. In these circumstances, it is essential that the
Security Council take measures to extend the mandates
of first-instance and appeals judges, and adopt
appropriate provisions to retain staff who are essential
to the good functioning of the Tribunals, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 63/256, which provides
for the renewal of contracts of the staff of the Tribunal
in line with the trial schedule and forecasts for the
renewal of staff contracts.
The essential role of the ad hoc Tribunals in
fighting impunity for the most serious crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda no
longer needs to be proven. It is up to the Council to
preserve this achievement. If the 13 fugitives,
including Ratko Mladić, Goran Hadžić and Félicien
Kabuga, are not tried as soon as possible, the impact of
the Tribunals could be weakened and the credibility of
the Council gravely affected. Indeed, the arrest of these
fugitives is important not only to compensating the
victims and ensuring justice, but also to promoting
reconciliation and the re-establishment of peace and
security in the countries and regions concerned.
Without their own police forces, the international
Tribunals must rely on the cooperation of States. While
welcoming the efforts of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to cooperate in arresting the 11 ICTR
fugitives who are still at large, we encourage the
Congolese Government and the countries of the Great
Lakes region to cooperate fully in arresting the
fugitives. We express the same wish with regard to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.
With respect to building the capacity of national
judicial systems, my delegation would like to
underscore the importance of that issue in the context
of the completion strategy, in particular the training of
qualified staff in the countries concerned, especially
Rwanda. That would enable national judicial
institutions to take on cases that the Tribunals will not
be able to consider before the end of their mandate.
The transfer of such cases would make it possible to
strengthen the rule of law in the countries concerned.

10-41106

Finally, my delegation wishes to highlight the
urgent need to implement effective completion
strategies that take full account of the need for fair
trials and protection for victims, a principle that must
be at the heart of our efforts. Likewise, we encourage
the efforts of the ad hoc Tribunals to raise awareness
among the populations on the scope of their work since
their establishment, in particular by disseminating
knowledge of international criminal law and
international humanitarian law.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to thank Judge
Robinson, Judge Byron, Prosecutor Brammertz and
Prosecutor Jallow for their useful briefings on the
completion strategies of their respective Tribunals. I
extend our appreciation to all the judges, prosecutors
and staff of the Tribunals for their efforts to ensure the
fair and expeditious operation of these important
judicial bodies. The International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) have made
significant contributions to the development of
international criminal law.
The original intention was to complete all judicial
proceedings by the end of 2010, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1503 (2003). However, as
the respective representatives of the two Tribunals
clarified, that expectation has proved to be unrealistic.
On the basis of the latest estimate, the ICTY is forecast
to complete its trial work by the end of 2012 and
appeals by mid-2014. The ICTR is forecast to complete
its trial work before the end of 2011 and appeals by the
end of 2013.
Japan attaches great importance to the rule of law
and appreciates the efforts made by the two Tribunals
to expedite proceedings, while ensuring fair trials. We
acknowledge the circumstances that have led to this
delay. We strongly urge the Tribunals to make every
effort to work expeditiously and to bring about
completion ahead of the projected dates.
In response to resolutions 1900 (2009) and 1901
(2009), the Presidents of the Tribunals submitted to the
Council updated schedules and requests for the
extension of the terms of judges, measures which are
necessary for them to accomplish their work. We
should take into account the need for staff retention for
the work of the Tribunals. Japan is ready to work
constructively with other Council members for an
appropriate response to these requests.

17

S/PV.6342

The Tribunals are unable to fulfill their
responsibility until the remaining fugitives are arrested
and brought to trial. It is regrettable that two suspects
indicted by the ICTY, Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić,
and 11 under indictment by the ICTR, including
Felicien Kabuga, are still to be apprehended. We
strongly urge the States concerned to cooperate fully
and take action to arrest all fugitives as early as
possible.
The referral of cases to national jurisdictions is
an essential element of the completion strategies. We
appreciate the effort made by the Rwandan authorities
and the Prosecutor of the ICTR to facilitate the referral
of cases, including addressing issues related to the
Witness Protection Service within the Rwandan
judiciary. We look forward to the application for the
referral of future cases to Rwanda starting this year.
With regard to the ICTY, it is essential to secure
the full and positive cooperation of the States of the
former Yugoslavia on access to archives, documents
and witnesses. We take positive note of the continued
efforts of the Croatian authorities to further improve
the quality of the investigation into missing documents,
in compliance with the request of the Prosecutor. We
also take positive note of the response of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the improved cooperation of Serbia
with the requests of the Prosecutor. We trust that those
States will continue their efforts to cooperate with the
Office of the Prosecutor.
The ICTY and ICTR face challenges that are
unique to ad hoc tribunals as organs established by
Security Council resolutions under Chapter VII, in an
exceptional manner. For instance, the need for a
residual mechanism after completion was not fully
explored at the time of their establishment. The
residual mechanism should meet the principal
objectives that impunity must not be condoned and that
individuals involved must be brought to justice in
accordance with international standards of due process.
At the same time, every effort must be made to ensure
as cost-effective a mechanism as possible. With those
criteria in mind, Japan is open to examining the most
appropriate residual structure. We appreciate both
Tribunals having described in their reports (see
S/2010/270 and S/2010/259) the preparatory measures
taken to facilitate a smooth transition, in response to
the request of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

18

We are also grateful to the Office of Legal Affairs
for the report on the declassification of documents and
the review of witness protection ordered by the
Tribunals. Japan will participate actively in the
discussion on a draft resolution and draft statute of a
residual mechanism in the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, under the very able
chairmanship of Austria.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I too would like
to thank very much Presidents Robinson and Byron
and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their very
helpful briefings. I thank them and all their colleagues
for the work of the Tribunals and for their reports on
the completion strategies of the Tribunals (see
S/2010/270 and S/2010/259).
The United Kingdom welcomes the efforts made
by both Tribunals to implement those completion
strategies. However, we are concerned by the further
delays reported in their latest reports. In some cases,
delays of more than 12 months are now being forecast
in comparison with the projections of some six months
ago. We acknowledge that sometimes unforeseen
events beyond the control of the Tribunals may throw a
trial off schedule. But going forward, it is vital that
both Tribunals do everything possible to minimize
further delays, in particular by focusing their resources
on their core functions, that is the completion of trials
and appeals. In that context, we welcome the
reconvening of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) Working Group on
Speeding Up Trials and we look forward to seeing its
results.
We note the concerns of both Presidents about the
impact of staffing issues on the completion strategies
and the difficulties of retaining experienced staff as the
Tribunals near the end of their work. We recognize that
losing experienced staff can have an adverse impact on
the completion of trials, and we agree that it is
important that the Tribunals remain adequately staffed
to enable them to complete their work expeditiously.
Resource issues are not, of course, a matter for the
Security Council. Nevertheless, we take this
opportunity to encourage the Secretariat to look
favourably on the Tribunals’ requests for flexibility in
the issuing of staff contracts, in line with the current
trial schedules, as provided for General Assembly
resolution 63/256, in order to help ease their staff
retention problems. The Security Council should also
assist the Tribunals by granting the appropriate

10-41106

S/PV.6342

extensions to judicial mandates, in line with the
commitment made in resolutions 1900 (2009) and 1901
(2009).
Completion of the Tribunals’ work depends to a
great extent on their receiving full cooperation from
States, in particular in relation to the provision of
documents and to tracing fugitives. The Tribunals’
work will not be complete until all remaining fugitives
are brought to justice. The United Kingdom welcomes
Prosecutor Brammertz’s assessment of Serbia’s
cooperation with the ICTY. This report shows Serbia’s
continued commitment to cooperating with the ICTY.
The discovery of the Mladic diaries earlier this year
was an important development with implications for
several ongoing trials. However, we would urge the
Serbian authorities to keep up the momentum in the
search for the two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladić
and Goran Hadžić.
The United Kingdom also welcomes Prosecutor
Brammertz’s assessment that Croatia’s cooperation is
generally responsive to the needs of his Office and that
there have been improvements in the level of
cooperation since his last report. But we continue to
urge Croatia to make every effort to satisfy the
Prosecutor in relation to the missing documents
relating to Operation Storm, in particular by following
up key investigative avenues to establish what has
happened to those missing documents.
The United Kingdom regrets that there has been
no progress in the search for the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) fugitive Félicien Kabuga.
We note President Byron’s decision to refer the issue of
Kenya’s cooperation to the Security Council, which
should now carefully consider its response. The United
Kingdom repeats its call on Kenya to supply all
information it holds on the current whereabouts of
Kabuga, and expresses its own willingness to provide
all the support it can to bring Kabuga and other
fugitives from the ICTR to justice.
As the Tribunals near completion, the Security
Council must take necessary measures to ensure that a
mechanism is in place to deal with the residual issues
of the Tribunals after they close their doors. We thank
the Tribunals for their preparations for transition to the
residual phase, and express appreciation also for the
ICTY’s report on the establishment of information
centres in the former Yugoslavia.

10-41106

We are grateful to Ambassador Mayr-Harting for
his report on progress in the Security Council Working
Group on Tribunals in drafting a resolution to establish
a residual mechanism for the Tribunals. We thank
Austria for its leadership on this issue. Discussions on
this topic have made considerable progress in recent
months. The United Kingdom hopes that this Council
will be ready to adopt a resolution by the end of this
year.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I wish to begin by
thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda for the comprehensive
briefings they have just provided. The work carried out
by both Tribunals since their very inception is of
considerable importance for the fight against impunity,
advancing the rule of law and paving the way for
reconciliation among the States concerned. We also
acknowledge the significant contribution the Tribunals
have made to the international criminal justice.
In spite of their dedicated work and continued
efforts to pursue the completion strategy, the Tribunals
will not be able to finish their work before the target
dates envisaged in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004). Thus, we are now at the point where we must
take all necessary steps to enable the Tribunals to
complete their mandates without further delay.
Meanwhile, we also urge the Tribunals to continue
their efforts to expedite the proceedings, without
compromising due process.
We noted the comments of both Presidents
concerning the terms and conditions of the staff and
judges of the Tribunals. As to the issue of extending
the mandates of the judges, the Council has already
expressed in earlier resolutions its intention to extend,
by 30 June 2010, the terms of office of all trial and
appeal judges. Further extensions are now being
considered by the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
The issue of the residual mechanism is also under
the consideration of the Informal Working Group.
Tribunals have undertaken several measures in
preparation for the transition to the mechanism, and we
ask them to continue such efforts. On the other hand,
the Working Group, under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Mayr-Harting of Austria and with the
significant support of the Office of Legal Affairs, has
made considerable progress in bringing the new

19

S/PV.6342

mechanism to life, which will be vital to the legacy of
the Tribunals.
Like others, we are concerned by the fact that the
number of fugitives remains unchanged since the last
biannual reports of the Tribunals. All States, especially
those in the regions concerned, should intensify the
efforts as to ensure that the remaining thirteen
fugitives, including Ratko Mladić, Goran Hadžić and
Félicien Kabuga, are apprehended and brought to
justice without further delay.
Effective cooperation by States in other areas,
such as access to archives, documents and witnesses, is
also an essential part of the completion strategy. We
take positive note of Croatia’s continued and serious
efforts regarding cooperation on the missing
documents. In this regard, we are pleased to note that
the Prosecutor’s report recognizes a general
improvement in the quality of Croatia’s investigations.
We also welcome Serbia’s continued cooperation,
including the submission of the notebooks of Ratko
Mladić, as well as adequate responses of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the requests of the Prosecutor. We
commend these countries for their improved level of
cooperation and hope that it will lead to the
achievement of full justice and reconciliation.
Similarly, we appreciate Rwanda’s continued
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda in various areas.
In conclusion, let me once again offer our sincere
thanks to the Presidents, Prosecutors and all judges of
both Tribunals for their professionalism and dedicated
work.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): I wish to thank the
Honourable Judges Robinson and Byron and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their
comprehensive reports before the Council (see
S/2010/270 and S/2010/259) and their remarks today.
More importantly, we commend them on their efforts
to conclude the work of both Tribunals in a timely
manner. I also take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting of Austria and his
team for their remarkable work in the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.
Today, my delegation would like to address five
specific issues related to the Tribunals: the progress
already achieved, staff retention, international
cooperation, outreach activities, and other residual
issues. Despite all the challenges and obstacles that the

20

Tribunals have faced in their ordinary activities, we
should not lose sight of the fact that both the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
have made significant progress in discharging their
responsibilities and fulfilling the completion strategy.
Their efforts are commendable and should be further
supported in order to allow for a prompt conclusion of
outstanding judicial activities.
With regard to staff retention, my delegation
agrees with the assessment of the Presidents and
Prosecutors that measures should be put in place as
soon as possible to ensure that the most highly
qualified staff continue to work for the Tribunals. It is
clear that the early retirement or resignation of
experienced employees may jeopardize the work of the
Tribunals and result in further delays in the conclusion
of their functions. That is why the Organization should
urgently consider giving further incentives and
assurances of future professional opportunities to staff
who wish to stay until the conclusion of the activities
of the Tribunals. Additionally, a swifter but thorough
recruitment process should ensure that proceedings are
not negatively affected in cases where staff decide to
leave.
A third important element is the cooperation
between Member States and the Tribunals. It remains a
key element not only for the success of the completion
strategy, but also for the proper delivery of justice. We
acknowledge the steps already taken by concerned
States to respond to requests issued by the Tribunals.
We encourage them to continue doing their utmost to
cooperate effectively and promptly with the Tribunals,
including with regard to the arrests of fugitives and the
possible referral of cases to national jurisdictions.
Fourthly, as the implementation of the completion
strategy moves forward, outreach and capacitybuilding activities will become even more important.
The affected communities should be informed of the
evolving process and how it will impact the
administration of justice. They should also be made
aware of the new mechanism that will replace the
Tribunals when final decisions are made in this regard.
Furthermore, in view of the efforts to refer cases to
national jurisdictions, in particular in respect of the
ICTR, Member States interested in receiving those
cases should be offered international cooperation to
enhance their national capacities if they so wish. The
Tribunals could play a central role in this regard.

10-41106

S/PV.6342

Finally, concerning other residual issues, my
delegation stresses the need for the continued
commitment of the Tribunals to the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his reports on
administrative and budgetary aspects and the residual
mechanism. This is of particular importance in the
consideration of possible ways to review witness
protection orders, the preparation of digital records,
and the development and adoption of strategies for
appropriate declassification of records and archives.
One of the main challenges in relying on an ad
hoc Tribunal is knowing exactly what to do when it has
performed most of its core functions but still needs to
undertake certain activities, such as trials for remaining
fugitives, witness protection and the preservation of
documentation. In addressing a completion strategy,
one should not pursue the goal of a speedy conclusion
of activities to the detriment of the principle of due
process; otherwise, the Tribunal’s legacy may be at
risk, with a consequent impact on the delivery of
justice. At the same time, no effort should be spared to
make steady progress and comply with deadlines.
The early establishment of a residual mechanism
will add an element of certainty to the delivery of
justice. My delegation hopes that the efforts to create
such mechanism for the international Tribunals may
soon bear fruit. We must all work intensively towards
the day when all remaining functions of the Tribunals
can be transferred to the new structure. The Security
Council can count on the readiness of my delegation to
continue cooperating with other Council members in
this regard.
Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) for their candid and informative briefings on
the work of the two Tribunals. We commend the ICTY
and the ICTR for the progress made in implementing
their completion strategies during the past six months.
We are pleased with the firm commitment as well as
measures deployed by the Tribunals to expedite the
conduct of their proceedings. We note with satisfaction
that the two Tribunals are complying with due process
standards and that the forecasts for the reporting period
have been substantially met.
Despite these positive developments, we note
with concern the challenges affecting the work of the

10-41106

Tribunals, not least staff constraints, the parallel
assignment of judges to several ongoing trials and
contractual matters. Given the lack of an immediate
solution to these problems, it is our view that the
Council should not be overly optimistic in its
completion strategy estimates. We urge the Tribunals to
continue to better manage delays in order to minimize
their impact. The Council, on its part, needs to be
flexible, proactive and pragmatic in its response to
those factors, particularly the retention of staff, the
extension of judges’ terms and budgetary issues that
are outside the Tribunals’ control yet inhibit their
effectiveness.
We share the assessment that cooperation
between Member States and the Tribunals remains an
indispensable element for the success of the
completion strategy. In this regard, we are concerned
that some fugitives have continued to remain at large.
We urge all States to cooperate with the Tribunals to
ensure that these fugitives are apprehended and
brought to justice. In the same vein, we stress the need
for cooperation in referring cases to national
jurisdictions, transferring convicts for the enforcement
of sentences, and relocating acquitted persons and
persons who have served their sentences.
Cooperation would also be enhanced through the
training national prosecutors and judicial officers,
information-sharing with the Tribunals, and joint
projects between States. In this context, enhancing the
capacity of States to prosecute breaches of
international humanitarian law is important. These
activities, we believe, will sustain the good work done
by the Tribunals, serve the course of justice and
advance the fight against impunity.
We welcome the efforts of the Tribunals to
increase mutual legal cooperation and assistance. We
share the assessment in the ICTR report (S/2010/259)
that recognition of the importance of such cooperation
and assistance in the residual mechanisms will greatly
contribute towards the further closure of the immunity
gap. Member States are encouraged to take advantage
of the Office of the Prosecutor’s information resources
for national prosecution of suspects not charged by the
Tribunal.
As we consider the exit strategy for the Tribunals,
it is important to continue to reflect on their legacies.
There is need to sustain activities that showcase and
disseminate information on the activities of the

21

S/PV.6342

Tribunals at this vital stage of the completion strategy.
More outreach activities are needed to make the work
of the Tribunals understood by local stakeholders. It is
also necessary to establish sustainable reference
centres for information and archives on the activities of
the Tribunals.
In closing, I would like to commend Ambassador
Mayr-Harting for his leadership of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings.
Lebanon highly appreciates the efforts of the two
international Tribunals to achieve the completion
strategy as soon as possible.
Lebanon notes the progress made in the various
trial Chambers, but at the same time is aware of the
difficulties that, as predicted, have prevented the
completion of certain tasks. Lebanon therefore
supports any necessary measure taken by the Security
Council to enable the two Tribunals to complete their
proceedings as soon as possible, without compromising
due process. Moreover, my country encourages the
referral of more cases to national courts that meet fair
trial standards, which would reduce the workload of
the ICTR and the ICTY and expedite the
implementation of the completion strategy.
Lebanon
commends
the
cooperation
demonstrated by most States with both Tribunals,
especially the States of the former Yugoslavia and the
States neighbouring Rwanda, and calls on them all to
cooperate fully with the two Tribunals. The role of
these States is fundamental to locating, arresting and
handing over fugitives, as are the potential evidence
and information available to those States.
Lebanon also appreciates the efforts of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
chaired by Austria, and hopes that a residual
mechanism will be established to ensure the
completion of the Tribunals’ efforts. Such a mechanism
must
guarantee
witness
protection,
fugitive
apprehension and the preservation of the Tribunals’
archives, which will constitute a valuable framework
of reference for international criminal law.

22

The establishment of these two Tribunals after the
end of the cold war was a qualitative leap that
confronted the phenomenon of impunity. The
Tribunals’ successful completion of their tasks will lay
the groundwork for holding criminals accountable and
for strengthening the rule of law at the international
and national levels. The Tribunals are also an important
gateway towards closing a painful chapter in the past
history of Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, as well
as towards strengthening national reconciliation,
guaranteeing stability, deterring future crimes and
providing justice for victims and easing the suffering
of their families.
Lebanon will continue to support every effort to
ensure the success of the international justice system.
Ms. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): I too would like to thank the Presidents and
the Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their biannual
reports.
The briefings we have just heard confirm that
there is slippage in the calendar, and the Security
Council will have to respond accordingly. The first
thing to do, of course, is to give the Tribunals the
resources to complete the current trials and appeals,
with full respect of the rules of fairness. We hope that
in its future decisions the Council will clearly state its
will to ensure that the Tribunals have the resources
they need. That said, as the representative of Japan
remarked, the slippage is a matter of concern, and we
ask the Tribunals to make greater efforts to increase the
effectiveness and pace of the work of the Trial and
Appeals Chambers.
The action of the Prosecutors is essential to the
search for fugitives whose arrest and transfer to the
Tribunals remains a priority. The existence of fugitive
indictees is one of the principal uncertainties weighing
on the completion strategies.
With respect to the ICTR, as Judge Byron and
Prosecutor Jallow reminded us, 11 fugitives remain at
large. There is an excellent record of regional
cooperation in making arrests in the past, and we call
on all States to fully cooperate with Prosecutor Jallow.
On behalf of France, I would like to welcome once
again the activities of the Prosecutor, who has been
able to gain the confidence of all actors in the region.
The President of the Tribunal, at the Prosecutor’s

10-41106

S/PV.6342

request, has reported to us of the non-cooperation of
Kenya, which is a significant step. We must reiterate
our request to Kenya to fulfil its obligations in order to
arrest and bring to justice Félicien Kabuga. The entire
international community, including France, remains
mobilized alongside the Rwandans, the countries of the
region and the Tribunal in ensuring that low-ranking
indictees responsible for heinous acts will also be tried.
Turning to the ICTY, Mr. Karadžić’s arrest by the
Serbian authorities was a significant step forward. His
trial must now proceed. We also hope for the arrest of
Mr. Mladić and Mr. Hadžić. As the European Union’s
Foreign Affairs Council recalled following Prosecutor
Brammertz’s briefing to it, Serbia should follow the
Prosecutor’s recommendations. As for the pending
Tribunal questions involving Croatia, we fully trust
that Croatia will resolve them.
If the issue of fugitives is not resolved, it will
have to be dealt with in the framework of managing the
Tribunal’s legacy. The arrest warrants will not
disappear. The residual mechanism thus will have to
take over the investigation and arrest process. The
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals has continued to work on this subject under
the chairmanship of Austria, for which we are very
grateful.
The Working Group is an important one and its
work has affected not only Rwanda, the Great Lakes
region and all of Europe, but more broadly for the
future of international criminal justice. That is why
France calls on the Secretariat, in accordance with the
presidential statement we adopted in 2008
(S/PRST/2008/47) to focus closely on the services,
including interpretation, needed by the Group and the
Austrian chairmanship. France will continue to work in
the Group, with a view to the Council taking a timely
decision that will preserve the integrity of the legacy of
the two Tribunals and that will meet the criteria of
continuity, simplicity and fiscal discipline.
France firmly believes that we should take
advantage of the existing structures in The Hague and
Arusha and of the services that other judicial
institutions can provide to the residual mechanism,
along with possible synergies between the mechanism
and these judicial institutions.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to welcome today the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia

10-41106

(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and to thank them for their detailed
reports and extensive briefings. We note once again
their hard work and dedication to the cause of justice
and combating impunity. Since their establishment, the
Tribunals have represented a significant element and
one of the foundation stones on which the international
criminal justice system as we know it today is built. It
is of ever-increasing importance for us to preserve their
legacy, extend the necessary support and encourage the
efficient completion of their work as well as the timely
transition to an adequate and credible residual
mechanism.
Allow me thus to reiterate the support of my
country for the work of the Tribunals and to confirm
the steadfast dedication of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
strengthening the international criminal justice system.
We strongly believe that prosecuting those who
committed horrendous crimes in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia not only will lead our countries to
reconciliation and a better future, but, more important,
will bring justice, consolation and dignity to the
victims and their families.
We would also like to extend our appreciation to
Ambassador Mayr-Harting for Austria’s firm
leadership in chairing the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals. Building on the foundation set
forth in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/258), the Group is working intensively and has
achieved significant progress in its deliberations.
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches great importance to
the Group’s work and further commends the efforts of
the Austrian delegation, with the valuable assistance of
the Office of Legal Affairs, in steering the its
deliberations towards the establishment of a residual
mechanism that will reflect the Tribunals’ legacy in the
most effective and appropriate manner.
As we consider the details of the reports
regarding the delays in implementing the completion
strategy, it is necessary to recognize that some factors
beyond the Tribunals’ control have, to a certain extent,
contributed to these delays. We should also take into
account the heavy schedules described in the reports
and the difficulties that the judges face in dealing with
the number of cases running simultaneously, which
suggests that we need to have a more realistic
approach. Even though we regret the delays,
guaranteeing a fair trial in each individual case should
undoubtedly remain our priority. While we encourage

23

S/PV.6342

the Tribunals to make every effort to complete their
work, the Council remains under an obligation to
provide its further support for their undisturbed work.
Extension of the judges’ mandates is certainly one of
the issues the Council needs to address.
It is also regrettable that the number of those
accused by the ICTY and the ICTR who are still at
large remains unchanged. The arrest and prosecution of
those individuals, either by the Tribunals or the
residual mechanism, should remain our priority. We
can consider their mandates fully completed only once
this is accomplished. The reality of the present moment
is that much work still remains to be done in the name
of justice.
Bearing this in mind, we once again stress our
concern that, for the ICTY, no progress has been made
in locating and arresting the two remaining fugitives,
Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić. In underlining the
strong commitment of Bosnia and Herzegovina to its
obligations and firm respect and support for
international criminal justice, I urge that these fugitives
finally be made to answer for the crimes they have
committed. In this regard, the cooperation of the
countries in the region is crucial, but the further
support and involvement of the international
community are also necessary.
We also note with appreciation the details of the
report of the ICTY Prosecutor, which further reflects
the record of continued and positive cooperation
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Tribunal.
Cooperation has been particularly constructive in
regard to the rule 11 bis cases transferred by the Office
of the Prosecutor to the War Crimes Chamber of the
State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Also, the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have responded
effectively to all requests of the Prosecutor’s Office,
providing documents and enabling unobstructed access
to Government archives.
In addition, further steps have been taken to
enhance cooperation between the countries in the
region. With the prospect of national prosecutions of
war crimes cases in the future and as indicated in the
report of Prosecutor Brammertz, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has entered into several agreements with
neighbouring countries aimed at improving cooperation
in judicial matters. We must agree with the
Prosecutor’s assessment that these agreements serve as
a good foundation and will eventually have a positive

24

impact on investigations, clear communication and the
exchange of information.
As Bosnia and Herzegovina has stressed
numerous times, the work of the Tribunals has a great
impact and most direct relevance for the countries
under the Tribunals’ jurisdiction. As one of those
countries, we cannot overemphasize the importance of
justice and accountability. The horrific crimes that
were committed need to be punished, individuals
responsible should be named and justice finally served.
No matter how painful the process is, it will finally
provide some comfort and dignity for victims and their
families and eventually lead to reconciliation.
Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank Judge Robinson and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings on the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and on the implementation of the
completion strategy. I also thank Judge Byron and
Prosecutor Jallow for their briefings on the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the implementation of the completion strategy.
We note that, since the last reports, the Tribunals
have continued to work to carry out the completion
strategy and have made further progress. We
acknowledge such progress, but we also note with
concern that neither Tribunal will be able to complete
its work this year. The schedule for the completion
strategy set out by the Security Council will not be
met, and part of the work may even be postponed or
extended until 2014. Of course, the delay is due to
many factors and is understandable given that some
could not have been anticipated by the Tribunals.
However, it remains imperative that the completion
strategy defined by the Security Council be pursued in
earnest by all parties.
We hope that the Tribunals will, on the basis of
their previous efforts, further explore effective means
to speed up the implementation of the completion
strategy. In this regard, we note that, according to the
Tribunals’ new trial schedules, the ICTR will have
completed pre-trial preparations for all its current cases
by the end of 2011, while the ICTY will have done so
by the end of 2012.
I wish to emphasize once again that the handing
over of cases and fugitives to the maximum extent
possible to countries willing and able to handle them is
a very important step in the completion strategy. We

10-41106

S/PV.6342

hope that the Tribunals will continue to take measures
to implement this step and we appeal to the countries
concerned to provide full cooperation in this regard.
We are ready to consider seriously any relevant
proposal that will facilitate the Tribunals’ referrals.
The Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals is having consultations on the
draft resolution on the residual mechanism of the
Tribunals and has now started a third reading of the
draft. We appreciate the work of the Informal Working
Group and look forward to the early conclusion of the
consultations. I wish to take this opportunity to thank
Austria, as Chairman of the Working Group, and the
Office of Legal Affairs for their unremitting efforts in
the interest of the work of the Working Group.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda for their information on the
current state of affairs at the Tribunals and on measures
being taken to complete pending legal proceedings.
The reports of the Tribunals and today’s briefing
are very important from a practical point of view
because the Security Council, in its resolutions 1900
(2009) and 1901 (2009), affirmed that it would take a
decision on a further extension of the terms of office of
the judges, taking into account the updated schedule of
proceedings prepared by the Tribunals. In its decisions,
the Security Council has confirmed the timelines for
the functioning of the Tribunals.
By now we should already have been moving
towards a countdown to the completion of their work.
However, the picture that has taken shape is dismal.
One thing that is bewildering is the fact that, in
December 2009, the Security Council received reports
containing completely different timelines for the
completion of proceedings. What has happened in the
past six months that was so unforeseen and
extraordinary that the ICTY, for example, is reporting a
substantial increase in the length of all trials without
exception?
We are not talking here of one- or two-month
extensions. The case of Vojislav Sešelj is being drawn
out for an additional 20 months beyond the information
previously reported to the Council; that of Mićo
Stanišić and Stojan Župljanin for an additional 14
months; that of Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović

10-41106

for an additional 13 months; and that of Zdravko
Tolimir for an additional 12 months. This is true for
every case.
Moreover, a number of the accused have been in
custody for six or seven years already. Is such a
practice really in line with universally recognized
human rights norms and civilized standards for the
administration of justice? Given the fact that the work
of the Tribunals is entering its concluding phase, we
would like to receive more realistic projections from
them and, most importantly, to see these projections
carried out in practice. We call on the Tribunals to
exhibit the utmost concentration to carry out
operational work on current trials and to show
flexibility on technical issues.
One key factor in the effective completion of the
Tribunal’s mandates is ensuring the effective
cooperation of States — and above all the States of the
regions — with the Tribunals. In this connection, we
note the positive assessments contained in the report of
the ICTY Prosecutor Serge Brammertz about the level
of cooperation of the Serbian authorities with the
Tribunal. It is regrettable that other States in the
European and African regions have not been successful
in significantly increasing the effectiveness of their
cooperation with the Tribunals or ensuring timely and
effective responses to requests from the Prosecutors of
the Tribunals.
The Security Council is actively preparing the
model for the future residual mechanism that will
partially inherit the tasks and prerogatives of both
Tribunals. We can say with certainty that the Security
Council’s decision on this issue will set a precedent,
for in the history of international justice there has been
no case of an international tribunal completing its
work. That is why it is so important to analyse in detail
the whole host of issues related to the establishment of
a new international structure, including its status,
jurisdiction, working methods and cooperation with
Member States.
The nature of the residual mechanism is still
difficult to ascertain. However, our delegation long ago
set out the basic parameters that we consider absolutely
necessary. It must be a compact mechanism with
clearly defined jurisdiction that operates on the basis of
a fixed mandate and that exists for a finite period. In
addition, the archives to be handed over to the
mechanism should remain the property of the United

25

S/PV.6342

Nations. We believe that, if those conditions are
fulfilled, it will be possible to create a genuinely
effective structure that is capable, in an effective
manner and at the highest professional level, to
conclude the complex and politically sensitive process
of restoring justice in the relevant regions and of
bringing the guilty to justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.
My delegation thanks the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunals for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia for the presentation of their
semi-annual reports on the status of the completion
strategies for their activities (see S/2010/259 and
S/2010/270).
Mexico takes interest in the efforts that both
Tribunals have made to speed up the execution of their
judicial activities in a responsible and efficient manner,
the progress made in implementing the completion
strategies in the past six months, and the way they have
ensured the application of justice and respect for the
procedural rights of the accused. We are aware that
judicial activity will always be subject to a series of
unforeseen conditions and circumstances and that both
Tribunals are addressing those in the best way possible.
The actions taken by both Tribunals therefore give us
the confidence to urge them to take additional
measures to conclude their work as soon as possible
and to make way for the establishment of the residual
mechanism.
The reports before us this morning confirm that
the Tribunals will not be able to conclude their work by
the dates set in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004). Their work will therefore continue even
beyond 2010. That is due, inter alia, to such issues as
lack of cooperation, the difficulty of retaining qualified
personnel, and difficulties in referring cases to national
jurisdictions. Taken together, these pose serious
challenges to ensuring that the conclusion of the
Tribunal’s work adheres to the dates set by the Council.
It is therefore important to provide both Tribunals
with the means to allow them to conclude their judicial
work as soon as possible. In that regard, it is necessary
to extend the terms of first-instance judges of both
Tribunals until at least the first half of 2011, and to
review the appeals work up to the second half of 2012,

26

in line with the provisions set out in resolutions 1900
(2009) and 1901 (2009).
The cooperation of States with the Tribunals is
also key. In that regard, we call on the States involved
to respond without delay to the requests of the
specialized bodies of the Tribunals, in particular when
it comes to finding and arresting fugitives — two in the
case of the former Yugoslavia and 11 in that of
Rwanda. In particular, we note the valuable judicial
cooperation provided by the Government of Croatia.
We urge it to continue that cooperation in connection
with issues pending before the Tribunal.
We cannot ignore the fact that the Tribunals face
the ongoing challenge of striking a balance between
delivering justice, administrative efficiency, ensuring
the basic rights of accused, witnesses and victims, and
completing their work as soon as possible. Mexico
therefore reiterates that the Security Council should
pursue its pragmatic and flexible approach to the
Tribunals’ completion strategies. In our view, the most
desirable option would be for the Tribunals to complete
their work in the near future, but not on the basis of
arbitrary dates. The progress in implementing the
completion strategies that the Tribunals have shared
with us contributes to ensuring that the establishment
of the residual mechanism shall take place in a more
manageable and efficient manner.
In the next six months, Mexico will continue to
contribute to the effort to shape the residual
mechanism in the context of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, concerning which
our colleague from Austria has given us a very precise
briefing. Despite those very detailed considerations,
the Security Council should not fail to bear in mind the
main goal of ensuring that justice is carried out in
connection with the grave atrocities crimes against
humanity committed in the context of the conflicts in
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you and your delegation, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and for the manner in which
you are conducting the Council’s work.

10-41106

S/PV.6342

I would also like to begin by welcoming
Presidents Byron and Robinson and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow and by thanking them for their
briefings on the implementation of the completion
strategies of the two Tribunals. Croatia welcomes the
progress achieved thus far and hopes that the current
intense pace of work at both Tribunals will be
sustained in order to conclude their mandates in a
timely and orderly manner.
We note concerns raised by the fact that the
projected dates for the completion of trials will not be
met. That said, Croatia firmly believes that the early
closure of the Tribunals, albeit a legitimate objective,
should not come at the expense of the mandate with
which they were established or of respect for fair-trial
guarantees. Let us not forget that late arrests and the
remaining fugitives are the single most important
obstacles to the early closure of the Tribunals.
With regard to the mandate of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
the mandate of the Tribunal must not be declared
complete without bringing to justice Ratko Mladić and
Goran Hadžić, the two remaining fugitives who have
been indicted for the most atrocious crimes committed
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia, namely, the
massacres in Srebrenica and Vukovar.
For its part, Croatia — an early advocate of
establishing the ICTY — welcomes the Tribunal’s
accomplishments, which have shown that peace and
justice are complementary. The Croatian Government
remains firm in its commitment to sustaining its full
and equivocal support for the Tribunal’s efforts to close
the impunity gap, thus advancing the rule of law and
paving the way for reconciliation and cooperation by
individualizing criminal accountability and providing
justice and dignity to victims.
As my Government has made clear on many
occasions, Croatia remains committed to full
cooperation with the ICTY. Over the reporting period
under consideration, the highest officials of our
country remained engaged in direct dialogue with the
Prosecutor, while the Ministry of Justice and the Office
of the State Prosecutor maintained close, frequent and
intense working relationships with the Office of the
ICTY Prosecutor.
My
delegation
appreciates
Prosecutor
Brammertz’s assessment, in which he stressed the
overall responsiveness and general improvement in the

10-41106

quality of work undertaken by Croatian authorities.
Last fall, Prime Minister Kosor established a special
task force in order to deepen and, where necessary,
broaden the work already undertaken by the
administrative investigation conducted following the
order issued by the Trial Chamber in June 2008. I
would like to state my delegation’s appreciation for the
acknowledgment expressed by the Prosecutor and the
members of the Council with regard to the notable
results produced by the task force during the reporting
period, which were contained in the seven reports on
its activities delivered to the Trial Chamber and the
Office of the Prosecutor.
I should also like to underline that the task force
will continue to vigorously pursue several avenues
aimed at finding, clarifying or accounting for missing
documents. We are convinced that these additional
explorations will only further strengthen the credibility
of my Government’s efforts.
In order to further confirm the extent of our
efforts, I should like to highlight some of the results
achieved. Following new insights gained by the task
force, 69 persons were interviewed, houses, cars and
offices were searched, and additional materials were
seized. The task force submitted new criminal charges
against nine persons on the grounds that they had
destroyed or concealed archive materials, bringing the
total of indicted persons to 13, and the total of
convicted persons to four.
As referred to in paragraph 13 of the Prosecutor’s
report (see S/2010/270, annex II), I should like to
highlight that criminal proceedings have been initiated
in Croatia against several members of the special
police forces for crimes allegedly committed in the
village of Grubori in 1995 in the aftermath of
Operation Storm. The complete court file, as well as
subsequent updates, has been transferred to the Office
of the Prosecutor.
In pursuing the path of full support to the
Tribunal, we serve our shared goal of ensuring
accountability for all crimes, with the aim of achieving
justice, peace and reconciliation, as the best road map to
a future of lasting security and prosperity in South-East
Europe. As the Tribunal is beginning to downsize and
wind down, strengthening relationships between the
Office of the Prosecutor and national prosecutorial
authorities becomes even more important. Strengthening
skills and capacity at the national level — at which we

27

S/PV.6342

continue to deal with a growing war crimes caseload —
is a crucial dimension of the Tribunal’s legacy.
Croatia is determined to continue with domestic
efforts to prosecute war crimes committed on its
territory since 1991. To that end, it has not only
developed a close working relationship with the ICTY,
but also taken the lead in strengthening cooperation
with prosecutorial authorities in the region. Only a few
weeks ago, Croatia hosted, for the third time, the
annual regional conference of State prosecutors from
countries of the former Yugoslavia. In this context, we
also welcome initiatives such as the Tribunal’s legacy
conference, which was held in February this year, as an
opportunity to factor in the views and experiences of
countries directly affected, in particular on issues in
which we have lasting interest, such as the
management of the Tribunals’ archives.
Before concluding, I should like to extend my
delegation’s sincere gratitude to Ambassador MayrHarting of Austria and his colleagues who, over the
past 18 months, have made dedicated efforts in steering
the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, notably in setting up a residual mechanism
to replace the Tribunals. This is an issue of most direct
relevance to my country and to the other countries
affected by the Tribunals’ jurisdictions, in particular as
concerns such long-term issues as the management of
archives, the protection of witnesses and the serving of
sentences. Furthermore, the credibility of such residual
mechanisms is part and parcel of the Tribunal’s
historical legacy. Croatia hopes that the Council will be
able to provide timely and sustainable solutions for the
residual issues.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): I, too, should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month.
At the outset, I wish to congratulate the President
and the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Patrick Robinson
and Mr. Serge Brammertz, on all their efforts and the
professionalism they consistently display in their work
and in the submission of their reports. As it was in
December 2009, the presentation of the cooperation
between Serbia and the ICTY in these reports is in
accord with Serbia’s own assessment of the level of
cooperation that has been reached so far. My

28

Government appreciates the fact that the reports
contain an accurate description of the efforts and
actions undertaken by Serbia during the reporting
period and their recognition by Judge Robinson and
Prosecutor Brammertz.
Serbia continues in its endeavours to fulfil its
legal and moral obligations relating to the work of the
ICTY. It has managed to sustain the level of
cooperation achieved in 2009, in accordance with the
Prosecutor’s recommendations in his previous reports.
There are currently no outstanding requests for
assistance in regard to the provision of documents,
witness protection or access to State archives, and we
continue to provide full assistance to the Trial
Chambers, the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Registry. Serbia thus considers that the level of its
cooperation with the Tribunal remains high.
As far as the issue of fugitives is concerned, the
efforts and commitment of the services engaged in
tracking down and apprehending them continue to
demonstrate Serbia’s political will to successfully fulfil
its outstanding responsibilities in regard to this issue.
The Prosecutor’s suggestions and recommendations
included in the present report are already being
implemented. Given the high level of cooperation
established between the Republic of Serbia and the
Tribunal, this additional improvement in the method of
searching for the fugitives will, we hope, lead to the
results both Serbia and the Tribunal are looking for.
I wish to mention here that the search is being
conducted on a daily basis and that the authorities of
the Republic of Serbia will not cease these operations
until both fugitives are brought to justice. Serbia is
well aware that the arrest of the two remaining
fugitives will put an end to the remnants of the past
that have burdened the recovery of Serbian society for
some time.
Serbia would like to reiterate its continuing
support for the ICTY completion strategy in its
entirety, including the issues related to the potential
residual mechanism and the location of the archives
after the closure of the Tribunal. Serbia maintains the
position communicated to the Security Council in
October 2008 and March 2009, and reiterates its strong
and consistent interest in this subject. It remains at the
disposal of the Security Council for possible future
discussions on this matter in order to contribute to the
resolution of these important issues.

10-41106

S/PV.6342

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize once again
Serbia’s commitment to full cooperation with the
ICTY. The reports presented to the Council today
affirm this commitment and testify to the usefulness of
joint efforts to bring this undertaking to its successful
end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to contribute to this debate. I should like to
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of June.
My delegation wishes to thank the President and
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) for the presentation of their reports
on the completion strategy for the ICTR (see
S/2010/259). Let me also acknowledge the open and
constructive efforts of the delegation of Austria in its
capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
The Government of Rwanda remains steadfast in
its commitment to supporting the Rwanda Tribunal’s
completion strategy, as called for in resolution 1503
(2003). As we have stated previously, we have
continued to facilitate unfettered access to witnesses
for both the defence and the prosecution. We have
assisted the movement of witnesses to and from Arusha
and have continued to ensure the security of witnesses
through the Rwanda Witness Protection Service, which
was established with the support of the Office of the
Prosecutor. My Government has continued to support
investigations initiated by both the prosecution and the
defence without prejudice to either, and a detention
facility that meets the standards set by the Tribunal is
in place and is currently hosting convicts from the
Special Court for Sierra Leone. My Government is
therefore of the considered view that no pretext should
remain to prevent the transfer of cases to Rwanda and
that if the ends of justice are to be served in the eyes of
Rwandans it is imperative that cases be transferred to
our jurisdiction.
My Government recognizes the efforts of the
Tribunal to comply with the completion strategy and in
this regard wishes to highlight the following points. We
welcome the Prosecutor’s efforts to continue to enable
referrals to national jurisdictions for the trials of eight
of the remaining 11 fugitives and his insistence that
that effort focus on Rwanda, “the only country that has

10-41106

jurisdiction and is currently willing to take up the eight
cases earmarked for referral” (S/2010/259, enclosure,
para. 80). In view of the progress my Government has
made, which I have just outlined, it is our expectation
that the applications for referral will be granted.
We take note of the efforts of the Prosecutor in
tracking the 11 remaining fugitives and in that regard
call upon all countries to extend the cooperation
necessary to ensure that they are apprehended and
brought to justice.
We take note of the issuance by the President of
two Practice Directions which regulate the size of
closing briefs and the timing for filing them and
address the timing and conduct of site visits. We urge
adherence to them in order to expedite the conduct of
trials and ensure compliance with the agreed time
standards.
We welcome the Tribunal’s efforts on outreach
and capacity building in Rwanda and encourage their
continuation. These efforts, however, need to be
complemented by decisions of the Tribunal,
particularly in respect to referrals, in order for them to
have efficacy in the view of Rwandans.
We take note of the progress that has been made
in archiving the activities of the Tribunal. We wish to
reiterate that it is our view that the archives of the
Tribunal should be transferred to Rwanda upon
completion of the Tribunal’s mandate. This conviction
is based on the fact that these records constitute an
integral part of our history. They are vital to the
preservation of the memory of the genocide and will
play a critical role in educating future generations to
ensure the prevention of genocide. We recognize the
ongoing negotiations within the framework of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
and will continue to engage in the process, in order to
ensure an outcome that meets the desire of our
Government to host the residual archives and ensures
accessibility for the international community.
We share the view expressed in the report that
“The commitment to completing the Tribunal’s
mandate requires that all efforts continue to ensure the
arrest of the remaining fugitives” (Ibid., para. 88).
Allow me to address an issue of utmost concern
to my Government: the increasing tendency to
misrepresent, misinterpret and openly deny the 1994
Rwanda genocide against Tutsis, by a cohort of

29

S/PV.6342

members of the legal profession, academia and others
associated with the perpetration of this most heinous of
crimes. The revision and denial of the 1994 genocide
of the Tutsi, a genocide recognised by the Security
Council in its establishment of the ICTR, in our view,
is not only morally reprehensible but also threatens the
hard-earned peace and stability that Rwandans enjoy
today. We will continue to ensure, without prejudice,
that any individual who engages in revisionism or
denial of the 1994 genocide of the Tutsi is brought to
justice in accordance with our constitutional
obligations.
In respect of the case to which the Tribunal
President alluded in his remarks, allow me to state
categorically that the accused was not in Rwanda for
reasons linked to the Tribunal and that his arrest has no
link whatsoever to his activities with the Tribunal — as
was, by the way, recognized by the Tribunal’s
spokesperson, Roland Amoussouga, on 2 June 2010.
My Government, however, has no intention of
interfering or hampering the ability of defence counsel
to represent their clients effectively and efficiently.
In conclusion let me reiterate my Government’s
continued commitment to supporting the Tribunal in
successfully concluding its mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kimemia (Kenya): Let me begin,
Mr. President, by thanking you and the other members
of the Security Council for inviting Kenya to
participate in the proceedings of the Council today. By
way of introduction, I am Francis Kimemia, Permanent
Secretary for Provincial Administration and Internal
Security of the Republic of Kenya.
At the outset, I wish to reiterate that Kenya is a
strong supporter of and active player in the
international criminal justice system. It is also
important, in view of the context of this discussion, to
highlight the role historically played by Kenya in the
region, especially in providing a safe haven for
refugees from destabilized neighbour States, from the
1970s to date. Today, we host more than 600,000
refugees from Somalia, the Sudan and other lands who
have yet to return to their countries. However, we as a
Government have always demanded that the refugees
act within the rule of law — of course their human
rights are observed — and where criminal elements
have been discovered, we have responded within the

30

tenets of international law. That accounts for the arrest
of 14 persons who have already been handed over to
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
for prosecution. I would have expected Mr. Jallow to
have commended Kenya, at least for this initiative.
In this regard, we appreciate the work of the
Presidents of both the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the ICTR, and
we commend them for the manner in which they have
conducted the affairs of their respective Tribunals.
However, the Government of Kenya wishes to
comment with great concern on the persistent
allegations that the Rwandan fugitive Félicien Kabuga
is hiding in Kenya and that the Kenyan Government
has refused to fully discharge its obligations with
respect to his arrest. Kenya takes strong exception to
these baseless and persistent imputations of complicity
in this matter. No evidence has been adduced to the
effect that Kenya is harbouring Mr. Kabuga. In any
case, the Republic of Kenya has nothing to gain
morally, socio-politically or economically by
harbouring the said fugitive, especially when Kenya
and Rwanda are enjoying very excellent relations.
I have listened to the allegations of the Prosecutor
that Kenya has not provided evidence of the departure
of Kabuga. I assume that this would have been
expected, possibly, from the Department of
Immigration. However, I believe that, because Kabuga
has been declared a fugitive — and, as the Council
knows, the United States Government immediately
placed a reward of $5 million on Kabuga’s head for
anybody who either arrested him personally or gave
evidence that led to his arrest — it would be almost
foolish for anybody to really expect that Kabuga would
walk up and present himself to an immigration officer,
saying “I am Mr. Kabuga, and I want to leave” and go
either to Brazil or to whichever country he might want
to go to. It is very likely that he would run away
through our porous borders and disappear like other
fugitives who are on the run.
In a similar vein, it also appears to be a figment
of the imagination to allege that Kabuga has been
sighted in Kenya and that there is copious evidence of
Kabuga’s presence in Kenya. Again, it would be
impossible that Kenyans, the majority of whom are
poor people, would ignore the $5 million reward; that
is true also of outsiders and the joint international
security forces operating in Kenya.

10-41106

S/PV.6342

In the search for Kabuga, the local and
international community and our own parliament have
been on our Ministry’s back to make sure that this
matter with the ICTR is concluded. There is media
pressure too, as we have the largest concentration of
civil society media in the region: Nairobi has the
highest concentration. It is impossible that this man
could be walking around Nairobi and not be arrested
by anybody in spite of the $5 million reward on his
head, which is still active to date.
In fact, we have arrested several persons
purported to be Mr. Félicien Kabuga, only to find that
these allegations were premeditated hoaxes by con men
who imagined that they could get all or part of the
$5 million. Our security services, led by none other
than the Commissioner of Police himself, in
collaboration with other international security
agencies, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other
forces that are working with us, have spent vast
resources going to distant districts of Kenya in search
of these fraudulent Félicien Kabuga, only to return,
having discovered that this was just phantom
information and that their searches had been wasted.
We have left no stone unturned. We have invited
international security organs to assist Kenya in the
search, and there have been no results to date. All we
get are allegations and accusations that we are
harbouring this fugitive, Kabuga, who, as I said, is of
no socio-economic, political or ideological value to the
country.
References by the Prosecutor in his report
presented this morning are similar in scope and content
to what has become a recurrent ritual of presentations
to the Security Council. It is mentioned in the report
that the last mission of the Prosecutor to Kenya was in
March 2009. As members know, Kenya is just about
100 kilometres away from where my colleague the
Prosecutor lives. I would encourage him to make more
visits to Kenya so that this matter can be disposed of
expeditiously. And, possibly, he could report to the
Security Council on his positive results so that we do
not engage in blame games that, ultimately, do not help
the region or the process of justice for our country. We
believe that impunity must be eliminated in its entirety.
Indeed, the Kenyan and Rwandan security services and
other security organs are collaborating and cooperating
on this matter, including through inspection of
premises and perusal of documents that are deemed to
be relevant.

10-41106

A lot of work has been carried out by the
Government of Kenya in collaboration with other
relevant investigation agencies, including the ICTR
itself and Rwandan and United States security
agencies. The findings of these collaborative
investigations have regularly been communicated to
the ICTR. It is disappointing to note that the Prosecutor
has not updated his report on this matter accordingly.
I wish to reiterate our previous presentations to
the Council and wish further to state that Kenya has
given full support and assistance to the ICTR since its
inception on the issue of referrals, including in the
search for Félicien Kabuga. Kenya has always
cooperated and worked closely with the ICTR with a
view to tracing, arresting and surrendering genocide
suspects to the Tribunal to face justice. As I said,
indeed, 14 suspects have already been arrested and
handed over for prosecution. That is the largest number
of indictees to be apprehended and handed over to the
ICTR by any single jurisdiction.
The Government of Kenya has also played a key
role in the relocation, protection and facilitation of
movement of witnesses for the Tribunal in a bid to
ensure that the ends of justice are met expeditiously. In
doing so, the Government has utilized immense
resources in the form of material, equipment and
personnel. Indeed, we have a police wing that remains
dedicated to this issue.
In 2007, the Government of Kenya formed a joint
investigation team to search for and apprehend Félicien
Kabuga, as well as to trace his assets and bank
accounts, including those of his associates in Kenya.
This team has discharged its mandate and has
submitted periodic reports of its findings both to the
Kenya Government and the Tribunal. Among the
team’s findings was that Félicien Kabuga’s wife had
invested in real estate and that the rent collected was
being submitted to a local financial institution. Further
investigations revealed that these funds were
transferred and credited to the wife’s bank account in
Belgium, where Kabuga’s wife and children reside and
hold Belgian passports. Kenya’s Attorney-General
promptly obtained orders from the High Court to freeze
the bank account in Kenya. And as we speak now, the
wife has disputed the freezing of the bank account; the
matter is still ongoing in court.
The Kenyan and ICTR investigators have jointly
continued to follow up information on alleged

31

S/PV.6342

sightings of the fugitive in various parts of Kenya.
Prompt investigations have been carried out and have
yielded no fruit. As I mentioned, the full particulars
related to the investigations and actions undertaken by
the Kenyan Government are within the full knowledge
of the Tribunal. The joint investigation team continues
to carry out its mandate with the full support of the
Kenyan Government.
In view of what I have said, Kenya finds the
incessant accusations of complacency in arresting
Félicien Kabuga misleading, malicious and lacking in
merit. In this regard, we urge the ICTR and the
international investigative agencies to widen the search
for Félicien Kabuga to other jurisdictions beyond
Kenya.
We also want to refute the assertion that requests
for the ICTR to visit Kenya have been made to us and
been denied. We have not denied any such requests.
The Prosecutor and his team are welcome to visit
Kenya on the shortest notice, including at the time we
leave this meeting or this place. If the Prosecutor
would like a date to visit us, he is welcome: he is free
to come and conduct his work in Kenya any time. I
want to assure him of the full cooperation of the
Government of Kenya so that this matter can be wiped
out of the process, so that justice can be seen to be
done, and so that there can be an end to these
allegations.
As part of its continued and unreserved support
for the work of the ICTR, Kenya concluded an
extradition treaty with the Republic of Rwanda in
September 2009, which provides, inter alia, for the
extradition of Rwandan genocide suspects. The treaty
has already been ratified and is fully operational. It
underscores Kenya’s commitment to and seriousness in
the apprehension of all perpetrators of the various
crimes covered by the treaty and their extradition to
Rwanda to face justice.
The Kenyan investigators, together with the
Rwandan security agencies, the United States of
America, the ICTR and other partners continue to
collaborate in the search for Félicien Kabuga. It is
therefore premature for the Prosecutor to request the
President of the ICTR to notify the Security Council of
Kenya’s alleged failure to cooperate with the Tribunal.
Let me conclude by reassuring the Council of
Kenya’s unwavering commitment to fully cooperating

32

with the Tribunal and the Council in support of
international criminal justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to Mr. Jallow to respond to the comments that
have been made.
Mr. Jallow: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the representatives before the
Council for their remarks and their support for the
work of the Tribunals. I only have a brief response to
the remarks of the representative of Kenya concerning
the case of Félicien Kabuga.
On numerous occasions, we have commended the
Government of Kenya for having assisted us in the
arrest and transfer of 14 fugitives. That is a fact, and it
is stated in the document distributed before the Council
(S/2010/259) that Kenya has collaborated with us in
the past in arresting and transferring that number. We
continue to be grateful for that. But it is also worth
noting that at the time those people were arrested,
Félicien Kabuga was also in Nairobi and was one of
those that should have been arrested and transferred at
the same time, but he escaped the net.
Briefly, last year I had a meeting with the
Minister of the Interior and National Security of
Kenya, whom the representative here represents. He
comes from his Office. That meeting was attended by a
representative of the Secretary-General. At that
meeting in Nairobi, we agreed on the information that
we requested.
First, as the Kenyans were saying that he had left
the country, which is an acknowledgement by them that
he had been in there, they should have provided us
with information concerning the circumstances of his
departure. Secondly, they should have granted access
by our investigators and the Kenyan police who are
members of the joint task force to specific Government
files containing information on Kabuga. They should
have affirmed that they would take further steps
concerning his property and bank accounts. That is
what we agreed at the meeting.
Since then, I have sent many requests for the
information. There has been no response. It has not
been provided. I have requested that I be told when our
investigators can go to Nairobi to work with the
Kenyan police and examine the records relating to
Kabuga, but there has been no response. As a matter of
fact, we sent our latest request in March for a meeting

10-41106

S/PV.6342

with the Kenyan authorities — the Attorney-General,
the Minister of the Interior and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs. It was sent by way of a note verbale
channelled through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Kenya. It was followed up with reminders, and none of
them have been responded to. I am therefore a little
surprised at the allegations that are now levelled at us.
Nonetheless, I welcome the statement of the
representative of Kenya that his authorities are open to
further discussion on this subject and that we are
welcome to go and discuss it with them in Nairobi. I
would like that invitation to become a reality and for us
to have a positive response from the Kenyan
authorities welcoming us to Nairobi, on a date to be
agreed, to discuss this particular issue with a view to
our being provided with the information on Félicien
Kabuga that they have promised to provide since last
year.
We have accepted the invitation that has been
extended to go to Nairobi, but we would like it to be
made definite, together with definite dates, so that it
can be arranged. I look forward to having such a
meeting, but clearly, with the evidence before the
Council, it is evident that Kabuga was in Kenya for a
considerable period of time. The fact that it is now

10-41106

being said that he has left the country is an
acknowledgement of that fact in itself. His presence
there is also supported, as can be seen from the dossier
before the Council, by documentary evidence
concerning his visas, permits, business registrations et
cetera, and by the fact that last year, at our request, the
Attorney-General of Kenya had to go to court to try
and seize a property registered in Kabuga’s name in
Nairobi. All this supports our statements that he has
lived in Kenya and has had business activities in that
country.
We now need to move forward to make sure that
the agreement that we entered into last year for the
provision of the information I have described is
implemented. I look forward to the Kenyan authorities
really implementing their decision to sit with us to
discuss it further.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
I would like once again, on behalf of the Council,
to thank President Robinson, President Byron,
Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for their
presentations to the Council today.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

33
