United Nations

A/RES/65/163

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 March 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 20 (h)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2010
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/65/436/Add.8)]

65/163. United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable
Development (2005–2014)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 59/237 of 22 December 2004 and all relevant previous
resolutions on the United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development,
Acknowledging the importance of education for achieving sustainable
development, including in the context of the Millennium Development Goals,
Agenda 21, 1 the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 2 the upcoming United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and the Education for All
initiative,
0F

1F

Recognizing the importance of promoting a holistic approach towards education
for sustainable development and the need to reinforce the interdisciplinary linkages
of the three pillars of sustainable development, including different branches of
knowledge,
Recognizing also the role of education for sustainable development in
promoting the eradication of poverty and more sustainable patterns of consumption
and production, particularly in the context of the nineteenth session of the
Commission on Sustainable Development, to be held in New York in May 2011,
Takes note of the report of the Director-General of the United Nations
1.
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the mid-Decade review of the
United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development, 2005-2014, 3
including the areas identified for further action in the remaining half of the Decade;
2F

_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
2
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
3
See A/65/279.

10-52232

*1052232*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/163

2.
Also takes note of the Bonn Declaration of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization World Conference on Education
for Sustainable Development, held from 31 March to 2 April 2009, 4 including the
areas identified for further action in the remaining half of the Decade;
3F

3.
Recognizes that, while progress has been made in raising awareness of
the significance of education for sustainable development, such progress remains
unevenly distributed;
Encourages the international community to reinforce its collective
4.
commitment to raise awareness of the significance of education for sustainable
development, including by mobilizing resources, supporting national efforts and
establishing processes that will continue beyond the end of the Decade;
Encourages Governments to continue implementing the Decade at the
5.
international, national and local levels, including by working with all relevant
stakeholders, particularly education systems at all levels, introducing, as appropriate,
the concept of sustainable development into curricula and cooperating in order to
conserve, protect and restore the health and integrity of the Earth’s ecosystem;
Invites Governments to continue to promote public awareness of and
6.
wider participation in the Decade, inter alia, through cooperation with and
initiatives engaging civil society and other relevant stakeholders;
Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
7.
Organization, as the designated lead agency, to continue its coordination role in
promoting the Decade, in cooperation with other relevant United Nations
organizations, funds and programmes;
Notes that the End-of-Decade World Conference on Education for
8.
Sustainable Development will be hosted jointly by the Government of Japan and the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in 2014;
Requests the Secretary-General to invite the Director-General of the
9.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to prepare, in
cooperation with other relevant United Nations organizations, funds and
programmes, a review of the implementation of the Decade for submission to the
General Assembly at its seventieth session, under the sub-item entitled “United
Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development”.
69th plenary meeting
20 December 2010

_______________
4

2

Available from www.esd-world-conference-2009.org.
