United Nations

S/PV.6391

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6391st meeting
Tuesday, 28 September 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Apakan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2010/471)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-55258 (E)

*1055258*

S/PV.6391

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Canada.

Adoption of the agenda

It is so decided.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (S/2010/471)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests
that the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone be invited to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Sierra
Leone to participate in the consideration of the item
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Bangura
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to Her Excellency
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Michael von der Schulenberg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Von der Schulenberg to take a seat at
the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. John McNee, Chairperson of the Sierra

2

I invite Mr. McNee to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/471, containing the fifth report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Michael von der Schulenberg and His
Excellency Mr. John McNee. I now give the floor to
Mr. Von der Schulenberg.
Mr. Von der Schulenburg: I thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to introduce the fifth Report of the
Secretary-General on Sierra Leone (S/2010/471).
When the Secretary-General visited Freetown on
14 and 15 June, he wanted to draw attention to Sierra
Leone’s extraordinary achievements in regaining its
peace and stability since the end of its civil war.
Indeed, Sierra Leone is a country that was able to leave
years of dictatorships, repeated military coups and
11 years of a devastating civil war behind it and to
embark on building a new peaceful, democratic and
more prosperous society. In the more recent period,
Sierra Leone has made considerable economic and
social progress. The Government has mastered
successfully the impact of the recent global food and
financial crises in the country, engaged in an ambitious
infrastructure development programme, improved
agricultural production and increased energy
production.
Against the background of the ongoing review of
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the
Government’s efforts to provide free medical care to
mothers and children under five, its successful
programmes to fight HIV/AIDS and malaria, its
commercialization programme for small and often
desperately poor farmers, and the construction of
feeder roads connecting isolated villages to the
national road grid are of particular importance. It is

10-55258

S/PV.6391

therefore not surprising that Sierra Leone has made
steady progress towards achieving the MDG.
In this context, we have also to recognize the
considerable long-term support that Sierra Leone has
received and still receives from the international
community. In particular, we commend President
Koroma’s commitment to creating Africa’s only second
independent public broadcaster, the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation, which was inaugurated
during the Secretary-General’s visit. The Corporation
is still in its infancy and will have to overcome many
challenges to live up to its aspirations and our
expectations for it as a professional and impartial voice
for Sierra Leone and, it is to be hoped, one day for the
subregion. But I am convinced that the enthusiasm and
integrity of its independent board members will make
it a reliable and impartial voice for Sierra Leone’s
newly found democracy and an example for other
countries in the region to follow.
I will not expand further here on these
development issues, as we will discuss them at the
Peacebuilding Commission meeting this afternoon.
Instead, I would like to use this opportunity to
concentrate on three more recent developments that
could have a major impact on shaping Sierra Leone’s
political, social and economic future: first, the
Government’s efforts to make greater use of the
country’s mineral and natural resources; secondly, the
preparations for the 2012 elections; and thirdly,
developments in neighbouring Guinea.
All three of these developments have the
potential to bring great benefits to Sierra Leone. The
increase in the exploitation of Sierra Leone’s rich
mineral resources could help break the country’s high
donor dependency and give it the resources needed to
pursue its development goals more aggressively. The
2012 elections could strengthen the country’s still
young democracy, increase the credibility of State
institutions and ultimately help Sierra Leone to cross
the magic line of its tenth year since the end of the
civil war. Finally, elections and a successful
democratic transition in Guinea could, for the first
time, create a subregion of like-minded States and open
the potential for greater cooperation among the three
countries of the Mano River Union in solving many of
the shared problems.
While these three developments are indeed a
source of hope for Sierra Leone, they also bear

10-55258

considerable risks for its future that, if not managed
carefully, could have adverse impacts on the progress
made in Sierra Leone in recent years. I shall first talk
about the recent mining contracts.
Sierra Leone is a country endowed with rich
natural and mineral resources. To manage its mineral
resources better, the Government enacted a new mining
law last year and began, with the assistance of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), to
renegotiate existing mining contracts for the
exploitation of diamonds and rutile, a precursor for the
production of titanium. More recently, the Government
concluded two significant mining contracts for the
exploitation of the country’s large iron ore resources
that could give extractive industries in Sierra Leone’s
economy an unprecedented dominant role. In fact, with
its largely unexploited gold resources and the potential
of economically viable off-shore oil and gas reserves,
Sierra Leone may be on the verge of turning from a
major recipient of foreign aid to becoming a major
exporter of primary mineral and hydrocarbon products.
This is surely a welcome development for Sierra
Leone, as well as for an international community that
has invested so much in Sierra Leone’s stability and
development over the past 10 years or more.
However, experiences in different parts of the
world suggest that countries depending on the export
of raw materials are often plagued with great
difficulties. Dependence on mining and oil exports has
often resulted in social dislocations, huge income
disparities and rampant corruption that have at times
erupted into violent internal conflicts. In fact, Sierra
Leone itself has had such bitter experience in the past.
Today, its formerly diamond-rich district of Kono is
one of the poorest areas of Sierra Leone, with one of
the highest unemployment rates in the country,
especially among its youth. Much of its once fertile
agricultural lands are now dotted with water-logged
holes and Kono’s destroyed infrastructure. The many
burned-out houses still bear witness to the destructive
force of a civil war that was largely funded by socalled blood diamonds from that very district.
It is the sheer size of the two iron ore mining
contracts that elicit unease, as they could become a
game-changer for Sierra Leone, with the potential to
dramatically change the country’s economic, social and
political landscape. This applies in particular to the
mining agreement for the large Tonkolili iron ore
deposits. If official pronouncements are correct, the

3

S/PV.6391

financial turnover of that mining operation alone would
dwarf the financial and organizational capacities of the
Government itself.
Therefore, it is incumbent on all concerned, in
particular the Government of Sierra Leone, to make all
the necessary efforts to ensure that its emphasis on
extractive industries is put on the right track from the
very beginning. Concerns about the mining agreements —
especially their compliance with Sierra Leone’s mining
law, the transparency of contract negotiations or
concerns about how much economic power has been
given to a single external investor — should be taken
seriously. Further, concerns about the influence that
such huge commercial interests could have on the
integrity of an underpaid public service, the media and
civil society will require attention.
I am convinced that even large-scale mining
contracts can be managed in a way that both the
international investor and the country will emerge as
winners. Against that background, I welcome the
assurances given by President Koroma of his
determination to ensure that all mining agreements will
be compliant with Sierra Leone’s laws and with
international practices, to increase transparency in the
mining sector, and to seek external assistance in
beefing up national capacities to deal with the
challenges of large-scale mining concessions. I also
wish to express gratitude to the World Bank, the
African Development Bank, the Department for
International Development of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and, closer to home,
UNDP for their offers of assistance to enable the
Government to manage this critical aspect of Sierra
Leone’s development.
I shall now turn to the elections. The next
nationwide elections in Sierra Leone will be held in the
latter part of 2012 — that is, only two years from now.
Despite the remaining time, it feels as if the electoral
campaign has already started. Press statements,
interviews, relatively unimportant by-elections and
even certain other social events are taking on the form
of early electoral campaigns. Regrettably, the main
political parties accuse each other of shady intentions,
and the opposition has expressed increasing mistrust of
the impartiality of key State institutions. There are
fears that both sides could try to prevent the other from
campaigning legitimately in their respective political
strongholds. Recent by-elections for parliamentary and

4

local council seats also witnessed similar incidents, as
well as violence or the threat of violence.
All indications are that the 2012 elections could
be challenging and complex. This is partly due to the
fact that the country will run three nation-wide
elections at the same time: presidential, parliamentary
and local council elections. But also other factors —
such as a winner-take-all electoral system, a likely twoparty contest, both with their regional strongholds,
temptations to exploit regional and ethnic differences
as well as the newly found wealth from recent mining
contracts — could all contribute to highly contested
and potentially difficult elections.
To mitigate conflicts in the run-up to and during
the 2012 elections, it is critical that the institutional
framework responsible for conducting the elections be
accepted by all sides as being professional, credible
and, even more important, impartial. This applies in
particular to the two main electoral bodies: the
National Electoral Commission and the Political Party
Registration Commission. Other national institutions,
such as the Sierra Leone police, the Independent Media
Commission and the newly established Independent
Broadcasting Corporation also have very important
roles to play in this context. In view of that, serious
efforts should be made to address all outstanding issues
involving electoral management bodies and other
relevant institutions well in advance of the elections.
In this context, I would like to urge the National
Electoral Commission to do more to alleviate fears
within
the
main
opposition
following
the
reappointment of the chief electoral officer. At the
same time, I call on the main opposition party to show
greater flexibility in discussing their electoral concerns
without getting entangled in personality conflicts.
Although much work has been done in strengthening
the Political Party Registration Commission to carry
out its important regulatory and mediation functions,
its effectiveness is hampered by the fact that its chair
has been vacant for over two years.
We are pleased to note that the Sierra Leone
police and its leadership have committed themselves to
regular dialogue with all political parties and to protect
the operational impartiality and professionalism of the
force in providing security during the electoral process.
The police should increase its capacity in non-lethal
crowd-control techniques and refrain from any
temptation to use assault weapons in social

10-55258

S/PV.6391

disturbances. An early establishment of an independent
police complaints committee, as envisaged in the joint
communiqué, will also greatly enhance confidence in
the police.
The role of the media in the electoral process will
be critical and the Independent Media Commission is
expected to protect the media from undue political and
commercial influences. In this context, the creation of
the Guild of Editors of the major newspapers is a very
welcome initiative.
If the 2007 and 2008 elections or recent byelections are any indication, ethnicity and regional
divisions may play a much greater role in the
upcoming elections. This could add a dangerous
dimension to the elections. I therefore hope that more
efforts will be made by all political stakeholders to
defuse this potential for conflict well in advance of the
election. This could also include greater efforts by the
Government to create a better regional balance in
appointments of its senior political and civil service
positions.
Finally,
we
are
concerned
about
the
Government’s intention to hold an inquest into the
1992 extrajudicial executions by the former military
Government, the National Provisional Ruling Council,
which ruled the country between 1992 and 1996. This
action by the Government could be misunderstood by
many in the opposition as an effort to influence the
2012 elections and could open the way for demands for
all sorts of new inquests into past atrocities. If the
Government proceeds with the inquest, it should make
its intentions much clearer in order to obviate
misinterpretations later.
Let me now turn to the third issue: Guinea. It may
be no surprise to Council members that Sierra
Leoneans look with apprehension at developments in
its larger neighbour, Guinea. There is much at stake for
Sierra Leone. Should Guinea manage its democratic
transition well, it would make the subregion more
stable and give Sierra Leone wider options in solving
subregional problems, including cross-border trading
and subregional security concerns such as illicit drug
trafficking and illegal fishing. However, should the
democratic transition in Guinea be stalled or even
reversed, that could have serious negative
consequences for Sierra Leone. The ethnic, cultural
and geographical links between the two countries, the
long border with a number of yet unsolved issues, as

10-55258

well as the large quantities of small weapons in
Guinea, could make any potential conflict in Guinea
trickle down into Sierra Leone.
Against this background, I feel that we should all
commend President Koroma and his Liberian
counterpart, President Johnson-Sirleaf for their careful
approach in support of the democratic transition in
their fellow neighbouring country.
Finally, let me use this opportunity to share with
this Council some concerns about our own integrated
peacebuilding mission in Sierra Leone. When the
Secretary-General visited Sierra Leone, he wanted also
to draw attention to a successful United Nations
intervention and in particular to the new model of an
integrated peacebuilding mission that could serve as an
example to other United Nations interventions. We
have been able to prove that it is possible to draw down
from one of the largest peacekeeping missions into a
much smaller and purely civilian mission while
maintaining a credible political and development
engagement in the country. As I mentioned before, the
new peacebuilding mission costs Member States only
2.2 per cent of the previous peacekeeping operations.
Unfortunately, all of these successes and savings
have not translated into any increase in United Nations
financial resources for development purposes, in Sierra
Leone a key factor for our peacebuilding strategy. In
fact, funding to United Nations operations is steadily
declining. This is a worrying trend as it will no doubt
jeopardize the United Nations work and credibility. It
could also jeopardize the integrated approach to
peacebuilding. I intend to discuss this issue in more
detail at the Peacebuilding Commission meeting this
afternoon but would appreciate also the Council’s
continued support.
Sierra Leone may today no longer be one of the
Council’s most critical concerns today. And this is a
good sign. But I would urge the Council not to abandon
Sierra Leone completely: it is a potential success story,
not only for Sierra Leone but also for the Security
Council. Sierra Leone will continue to need the
Council as the United Nations will continue to need
Sierra Leone.
Finally, let me express here my thanks through
the Minister for Foreign Affairs to President Koroma
and his Government, members of the political parties
and civil society in Sierra Leone for their cooperation
and hospitality.

5

S/PV.6391

The President: I thank Mr. Von der Schulenburg
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. McNee.
Mr. McNee: I am pleased to have the opportunity
to brief the Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. While the past year has seen Sierra Leone
make considerable strides forward, significant
challenges remain. Ten years after the end of the civil
war and two years ahead of the third set of national
elections, Sierra Leone stands poised to consolidate
peace fully and embark on long-term economic
development. Doing so successfully will require
continued support.
The Peacebuilding Commission is currently
considering the progress that has been achieved in
consolidating peace in Sierra Leone and is charting its
future engagement. Indeed, the Sierra Leone
configuration will meet this afternoon to discuss these
issues and adopt an outcome document containing
conclusions and recommendations. This review process
has focused on the joint progress report on the Agenda
for Change prepared by the Government of Sierra
Leone in full collaboration with the United Nations,
international partners and civil society.
The report in our view is an impressive
achievement. Its preparation reflected strong national
ownership and included the participation of a wide
range of national stakeholders, including civil society.
Its findings are comprehensive, mapping progress
across the entire Agenda for Change and providing
important recommendations for future action. Given
that the review monitors progress on the basis of all
actors’ contributions, it continues Sierra Leone’s
exemplary record as a country where standards for aid
effectiveness, engagement in post-conflict States and
integrated service delivery are put into practice.
As decided last year, the Peacebuilding
Commission has focused its engagement on the major
threats to peace consolidation identified in the Agenda
for Change, specifically concerning good governance
and the rule of law, youth employment and drug
trafficking. There have been successes in each of those
areas. The Anti-Corruption Commission continues its
excellent work, now under the able leadership of a new
Commissioner. The establishment of the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation as an independent media
organization will help further democratization. The

6

Joint Drug Interdiction Task Force has been
transformed into the Transnational Crime Unit under
the West Africa Coast Initiative.
Sierra Leone has also made important changes to
its youth employment and empowerment strategy,
moving to better match skills-training and employment
programmes with market demand. The creation and
ongoing establishment of the National Youth
Commission represents another significant step
forward.
But to that list of successes one must add
emerging needs. Attention is rightly turning to
preparations for the 2012 elections, as Mr. Von der
Schulenburg just noted. Those elections represent one
of the significant remaining challenges before Sierra
Leone completes the process of consolidating peace
and embarks on longer-term development.
It is essential that political conditions be
established for free, fair and peaceful elections. That
will require continued progress on implementing the
agreements in the joint communiqué of April 2009,
further strengthening the Political Parties Registration
Commission and providing the National Electoral
Commission with the necessary support. Continuing to
build the capacity of the Sierra Leone police to serve as
a neutral and effective force for stability will also be
critical. Most important, it is imperative that the major
political parties engage in a manner that reinforces
peaceful democratic governance and mitigates
burgeoning regional tensions within the country.
The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), under the able
leadership of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, has already conducted a series of
activities intended to improve multiparty dialogue,
mediate wider political tensions and build capacity to
respond to incidents of public disorder. It is clear that
this particular aspect of UNIPSIL’s mandate will be of
growing importance over the next year. Sierra Leone is
also increasingly taking advantage of its abundant
natural resources. The latent economic potential of the
mining sector in particular holds great promise for
generating growth, strengthening Sierra Leone’s budget
and reducing dependency on aid.
Yet, as we have all seen in other contexts, natural
resources also bring risks. Resources must be managed
in a transparent manner that delivers the economic
benefits of a peace dividend to the population as a

10-55258

S/PV.6391

whole. Sierra Leone’s membership in the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative and the Kimberly
Process are important initiatives in that respect.
(spoke in French)
Let me conclude by turning to a crucial issue with
respect to peacebuilding. For the most part, Sierra
Leone has established the strategic and institutional
mechanisms needed to coordinate and implement
peacebuilding activities. In the Agenda for Change and
the United Nations Joint Vision, the country has two
comprehensive and integrated strategies. Yet the need
for resources remains significant.
The United Nations multi-donor trust fund
established to fund the Joint Vision and, in that regard,
to support the Agenda for Change, has to date received
only $10 million towards a multi-year target of $204
million. While the international community has been
quick to commend the particular model of integrated
peacebuilding developed in the country, it has been
slower to mobilize resources. Recognizing this need,
the Sierra Leone configuration has decided to develop
a resource mobilization plan to help meet current
funding targets, attract non-traditional donors and
explore alternate means of providing international
assistance.
Sierra Leone remains a multilateral success story
in peacebuilding, but the country is at a critical
juncture. A final investment in peace is necessary to
secure the gains that have been made since the end of
the civil war. The Peacebuilding Commission stands
ready to continue assisting Sierra Leone’s efforts to
mitigate the major threats to peace. It also wants to
support the country in the preparations for the holding
of free, fair and peaceful elections in 2012. Lastly, the
Peacebuilding Commission is determined to assist the
country to build a durable and comprehensive peace to
the benefit of all Sierra Leoneans.
The President: I thank Mr. McNee for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone.
Mrs. Bangura (Sierra Leone): My delegation
congratulates you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of September. We would also like to thank you for
convening this meeting on the situation in Sierra Leone

10-55258

and for giving us the opportunity to contribute to this
debate.
We also express our sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his detailed report (S/2010/471)
on the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). Among other things, the
report highlights the important developments that have
taken place in the country, the challenges to surmount
and, of course, the activities of UNIPSIL during the
period under review. The recent visit of the SecretaryGeneral to our country was particularly productive and
remains fresh in the minds of all Sierra Leoneans, as it
coincided with the inauguration of the second-ever
independent public broadcaster in Africa, the Sierra
Leone Broadcasting Corporation.
We would also like to pay particular tribute to the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General for
his statement this morning, as well as to the Chair of
the Sierra Leone country-specific configuration,
Ambassador John McNee, for his usual meaningful and
instructive contribution to this debate.
For due economy of time, I will resist the
temptation to recount in detail all the important
developments that have taken place in my country
during the period under review, as President Ernest Bai
Koroma, in addressing the General Assembly at its
sixty-fifth session, already did so five days ago by
outlining some of the visible progress his Government
has made during that time, in partnership with the
international community, in the process of
consolidating peace and security to promote economic
growth and development.
Many of those efforts and successes, which are
also reflected in the report before us today, have
equally been acclaimed in indicators, such as those of
the Global Peace Index, which ranks Sierra Leone as
the fifty-third most peaceful country in the world; the
Mo Ibrahim Index, which reflects our significantly
improved ranking in democratic governance among
crisis-affected countries; the World Bank rankings on
doing business; and the Transparency International
Corruption Perception Index, among others. However,
the President was very forthright in cautioning against
complacency based on our achievements so far and in
asserting that those accolades should serve as a catalyst
for the Government to intensify its efforts to improve
the quality of life of its people.

7

S/PV.6391

The Government is fully cognizant of the
importance of some of the issues that the SecretaryGeneral raises in the report with regard to the
implementation of the joint communiqué of 2 April
2009, in particular with respect to such matters as the
dialogue among political parties, the report of the
Independent Review Panel, the proposed inquest into
the executions, on 29 December 1992, of a former
inspector-general of the police and 27 others, and the
enhancement of the political participation of women in
Sierra Leone.
With respect to furthering the culture of political
tolerance, President Koroma has consistently
emphasized that, irrespective of political affiliation or
religious denomination, the bonds of unity that bind us
together as a nation are stronger than the issues that
have a tendency to divide us. In one such instance, he
reassured the country by asserting:
“I am President of the country and I have a
responsibility to unify the country. I have a
responsibility to let everybody develop a new
concept of democracy, a new culture of
democracy, and that is, you are not enemy with
anybody. You are just maybe opponents on
political issues, but at the end of the day we must
present ourselves as Sierra Leoneans, united in
the development of our country.”
On various occasions, he has extended the olive
branch and has been quick to point out that tolerance is
a two-way street and that all Sierra Leoneans should
strive for a unified nation. He has demonstrated his
commitment to deepening the democratic process and
unifying the country, not only by his regular visits
around the country, but also by ensuring that the
development programmes initiated by the Government
are implemented fairly throughout the country,
irrespective of the political leanings or ethnicity of any
particular region or locale.
The Government is fully committed to
strengthening
governance
and
private
sector
development. The fight against corruption is
unrelenting. A new anti-corruption Commissioner has
been appointed, and the Government continues to
provide financial support for the implementation of the
National Anti-Corruption Strategy. The commitment to
fighting drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime is equally vigorous. We have transformed the
Joint Drug Interdiction Task Force into the

8

Transnational Crime Unit, with much greater leverage
to eradicate that pernicious menace. However, it is
greatly in need of sustained technical assistance and
support.
On another major front in the ongoing
peacebuilding initiative, we have been able to take
further steps to address the concerns of the young
people of the country. A Youth Commissioner was
recently appointed to lead the National Youth
Commission, established to formulate strategy and
policy related to the empowerment and involvement of
the youth population in nation-building and national
development. That clearly signals the Commission’s
readiness to undertake its responsibilities and to start
work on implementing its strategies. We would
therefore appreciate more concrete support from all our
partners, including those that have been actively
involved in addressing that challenge.
With respect to the forthcoming 2012 elections,
the Government is committed to ensuring that the
National Electoral Commission and the Political
Parties Registration Commission deliver effectively on
their constitutional mandate, independently and free of
interference. In that regard, my colleague the Minister
for Finance and Economic Development, has already
started mobilizing support and the necessary resources
to set the stage for a credible, free, fair and fully
participatory process. We count on the United Nations
and the international community to respond promptly
and favourably to his call to action.
Achieving openness and transparency in the
exploitation of our mineral resources is one of the most
fundamental aspects of the Government’s development
policy, with the political will to ensure that the
country’s vast mineral wealth is exploited for the
benefit of the people. To that end, the Government is
very receptive to the concerns that have been raised
over the mining agreements entered into recently, and
is strongly disposed to put in place modalities to
address those concerns with a view to ensuring full
compliance with the country’s mineral laws.
Despite the Government’s efforts and the
progress that has been made to date in addressing many
of the problems that led to the civil war, challenges
still abound. Some aspects of the recommendations of
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission still require
support for their full implementation. Most notably, the
reparations process remains largely underfunded some

10-55258

S/PV.6391

six years after the recommendations were issued. On
the socio-economic front, the prevailing global
economic and financial uncertainties are seriously
undermining our efforts to turn around the economy as
quickly as desired.
In view of the severe impact of those
uncertainties on our efforts, we appeal for urgent and
appropriate attention to be given to the delivery of the
pledges made at the most recent Consultative Group
meeting on Sierra Leone, held in London.
I would like to reiterate my Government’s
commitment to playing a constructive role in
addressing the unfolding events and democratization
process in the sister Republic of Guinea. We are
satisfied that our National Electoral Commission was
able to facilitate and ensure the enfranchisement of
Guinean citizens in Sierra Leone, particularly within
the context of the Mano River Union. In that regard,
we will continue to monitor events with intense
interest.
The Government is actively considering the
report of the Independent Review Panel, as well as the
proposed inquest into the extrajudicial executions of
29 December 1992, involving a former inspectorgeneral and 27 other private citizens, with due regard

10-55258

to resolving this matter in the best interests of the
nation.
In conclusion, I would like to register our
gratitude to the members of Council for their sustained
interest in and engagement with Sierra Leone. We look
forward to their steadfast support of our continuing
efforts to ensure sustainable peace and long-term
prosperity in Sierra Leone and to keep this potential
success story on course.
We share the concerns raised by the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General on the steady
decline in funding of United Nations operations, in
particular UNIPSIL, and the adverse effect that it will
have on the work and credibility of the United Nations.
We hope that that decline will be effectively addressed
by Council.
The President: I thank Minister Bangura for her
statement.
There are no other speakers inscribed on my list.
In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

9
