S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9099th meeting

Tuesday, 26 July 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Almeida Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mrs. Dime Labille
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Setia
Ms. Kelly
Ms. Nthoki
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Mr. Tetzschner
Mr. Khloponin
Mr. AlMatrooshi
Mr. Mansfield
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-43895 (E)
*2243895*

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than three minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I will try to be brief, but
my statement was delayed to this afternoon because of
the lengthy statements that were made in the Security
Council this morning.
Pakistan thanks the Brazilian presidency for
convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East and Palestine.
Pakistan expresses its deep concern about the
continued deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including occupied Jerusalem,
especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
Pakistan condemns the continued killing and wounding
of Palestinian civilians, including children, as well
as the demolition of Palestinian homes, the forcible
displacement of Palestinian families and the brazen
murder of Palestinian journalist Shireen Abu Akleh.
The forty-eighth ministerial meeting of the
Foreign Ministers of the Islamic countries adopted the
Islamabad declaration, which, inter alia, re-emphasized
the centrality of the question of Palestine and Al-Quds
Al-Sharif for the Muslim Ummah, reaffirming
its principled and continued all-level support to
the Palestinian people to regain their inalienable,
legitimate national rights, including their right to
self-determination and the independence of the State
of Palestine along the 1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.
It also reaffirmed that Al-Quds Al-Sharif is an
integral part of the occupied Palestinian territory of
the State of Palestine and called on the international
community to compel Israel, the occupying Power,
to desist from its colonial practices and abide by
all international resolutions on the city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and refrain from all measures, practices
and decisions aimed at altering the character and legal
status of the holy city.
First, there is no question in anybody’s mind that
Israel’s actions in the occupied Palestinian lands, its
seizure of land and properties for Israeli settlements, its
violence against unarmed Palestinian children, women
2/22

26/07/2022

and men and its blockade of Gaza are grave violations
of Security Council resolutions and international law,
including humanitarian law.
Secondly, there is no moral, legal or political
equivalence between Israel, the occupying State,
and the occupied and oppressed Palestinian people.
The Palestinian struggle for self-determination and
the implementation of the resolutions of the Council
is legitimate. Israel’s repression of the occupied
Palestinian people is illegitimate.
Thirdly, the perpetuation of the Israeli occupation
will not bring peace to the holy land. If history is a
guide, even if they are dispossessed and disempowered
by Israel, every succeeding generation of Palestinians
will persist in seeking its freedom and fundamental
rights, including the right to self-determination, as
well as the two-State solution formula involving the
establishment of a sovereign, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel within
recognized and accepted pre-set 1967 boundaries, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, which offers the only
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. A peace
process to achieve that objective must be revived.
It is regrettable that the Council has failed to
reassert the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law in occupied Palestine. It
has not condemned Israel’s violations of human rights,
international law and the Council’s own resolutions. It
has not been able to revive the process to promote the
accepted two-State solution. The festering wound of
Israeli occupation and atrocities in occupied Palestine
is the principal source of instability, tensions and
conflict in the entire Middle East. In order to bring
peace and stability to the Middle East, the Palestine
question — the source of the region’s insecurity and its
multiple conflicts — must be effectively addressed as
the first and most urgent priority.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Keçeli (Türkiye): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open
debate, and we welcome the briefing by the Deputy
Special Coordinator.
We remain concerned about the lack of progress
towards the resolution of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Equally frustrating is the lack of interest on the part of
the international community to find a just, lasting and
22-43895

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

comprehensive solution to that long-standing conflict
on the United Nations agenda. The status quo in the
occupied Palestinian territory is simply unsustainable.
Illegal settlements, forced evictions, the use of
disproportionate force against civilians, the attempts
to erode the status of Jerusalem and the blockade in
Gaza — all of those unilateral actions in the occupied
territories curtail the fundamental rights and freedoms of
Palestinians. They are in contravention of international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
The establishment of an independent and sovereign
State of Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, is the only viable solution to
this conflict. There are no interim solutions — whether
economic incentives or humanitarian assistance — that
can resolve this conflict. Returning to a political path
and accelerating efforts to revitalize the peace process
is an urgent necessity. The members of the Middle East
Quartet have a special responsibility in that regard.
The international community cannot wait for a new
escalation in the region to address the root causes of
the conflict. The United Nations should also play the
critical roles it has assumed, including as a member of
the Quartet.
Millions of Palestinian refugees rely on the
life-saving assistance of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). As a member of UNRWA’s Advisory
Commission and Chair of the Working Group on the
Financing of UNRWA since its establishment, we were
pleased to once again see strong support for UNRWA and
its crucial mandate at last month’s pledging conference.
But the international community has a responsibility
to match that strong political support with sufficient,
sustained and predictable funding for the Agency. The
projected funding gap of approximately $100 million
is concerning. We strongly encourage all members to
fulfil their pledges, provide financial support to the
Agency and redouble their efforts to enable UNRWA to
effectively fulfil its mandate. For its part, my country
will continue to support UNRWA’s vital work, both
financially and politically. That includes strong support
for the General Assembly’s renewal of the Agency’s
mandate this autumn. The continuation of UNRWA’s
lifeline operations is essential.
Türkiye will continue to support all efforts aimed
at finding a comprehensive and lasting solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on Brazil’s
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. I also want to express our appreciation to the
Deputy Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process for her remarkable briefing to the Council.
We are meeting today at a time when the world is
shifting its focus to our Arab region, which has recently
witnessed a growing international movement. We hope
that movement will attract more international attention
to the main issues in our Arab region and the Palestinian
question above all, including through more effective
participation by the major Powers, regardless of their
orientation or affiliation. The increased attention to
the Middle East on the political, security and economic
fronts should be reflected in the various international
and multilateral forums, especially here in the Council.
That will help support the consideration of Arab issues
at the United Nations with the aim of achieving a
lasting and comprehensive peace in our region, based
on a two-State solution and the principle of land for
peace, which the United Nations and the international
community have adopted as a basis for reaching
a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question
that ensures the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
along the June 1967 borders, in accordance with the
resolutions of international legitimacy law and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
In that regard, the Council should block any
attempts to transform the principle of land for peace
into a principle of peace for peace. It should block
Israel’s attempts to defer or postpone the realization
of a two-State solution and prevent the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State, or to expand its
circle of peace with other Arab countries without
making simultaneous progress towards establishing a
Palestinian State on the occupied territory. It is crucial
that we build on the positive momentum of the Jeddah
Security and Development Summit between the Arab
countries and the United States, held in mid-July
with the effective participation of the United States.
The Summit emphasized the pivotal link among
those countries, with the security aspect of that link
connected to the work of the Council. That positive
momentum should enable the Middle East Quartet to
start meeting at the ministerial level without delay, with

22-438953/22

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the goal of preparing for direct negotiations between
the Palestinians and Israelis on the five final-status
issues, particularly the issue of land, which is critical
to establishing the Palestinian State and implementing
a two-State solution. The other four are security, water,
refugees and lastly Jerusalem, an issue that has great
significance not just for the Palestinian people but for
all followers of the three major monotheistic religions
worldwide. East Jerusalem is and will remain the capital
of the independent Palestinian State.
In parallel, the Council must take measures to ensure
that the defenceless Palestinian people are protected
from Israel’s repeated violations of their inalienable
rights throughout the occupied Palestinian territories.
Grave violations, inflicted on the Palestinian people
by Israeli forces and settlers, have occurred recently
in Masafer Yatta, Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan and Hebron,
as well as Jerusalem itself. In Jerusalem they have
violated holy Islamic sites, particularly the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, preventing Palestinian Muslims from visiting
the sites and practicing their rites, a stark violation of
their freedom of religion.
The League of Arab States welcomed the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report on children and armed conflict
(S/2022/493), discussed last week in the Council (see
S/PV.9096). The report mentions the very concerning
cases of violations in Palestine against children due to
flagrant Israeli violations. In that context, given the
positive momentum of recent meetings, the Security
Council should not feel it has done its job by merely
listening to report after report from the Special
Rapporteur on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), while in every report that Israel is still
continuing to build settlements, and as of yesterday,
25 July, Israel continues to pursue its fierce settlement
policy, preventing the implementation both of a twoState solution on the ground and of the principle of land
for peace.
It is now more important than ever for the Council
to take decisive measures to ensure that Israel complies
with the provisions of international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
and respects the Council’s resolutions. The Council
must adopt measures that can hold Israel accountable
for all the grave violations it has perpetrated against
the Palestinian people. Besides those accountability
measures, the Council should lead an independent
international investigation into Israel’s assassination of
the martyred Palestinian journalists Shireen Abu Akleh
4/22

26/07/2022

and Ghufran Harun Hamid Warasneh, whose murders
are a flagrant violation of freedom of opinion and the
press and of the most basic human rights of defenceless
journalists, simply because they are reporting on the
practices of the Israeli army and the settlers who are
violating the rights of the Palestinian people.
The Council must also address Israel’s systematic
violations of the rights of young Palestinians, which
are preventing them from achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals and from establishing and fulfilling
their political, economic and social aspirations. An
entire generation of Palestinians is being wiped out
under occupation, giving them no hope for the future.
On several occasions, President Mahmoud Abbas
has proposed an initiative to the Council and the General
Assembly to convene an international conference under
the aegis of the Secretary-General for the purpose of
holding direct and serious negotiations between the
Palestinian and Israeli sides under the auspices and
supervision of the international Quartet. The League of
Arab States strongly supports that initiative. We call on
the Council to take advantage right away of the recent
positive momentum created in Jeddah and the unique
support of the Arab-United States summit for the
Palestinian question in order to convene a conference
as soon as possible, in the particular hope that the
remaining members of the international Quartet agree
on the importance of convening a meeting at the
ministerial level to start the preparations immediately
for holding such a conference.
At the same time, the international community
needs to give further importance to effectively
addressing the deteriorating economic situation of the
Palestinian people, especially given the continuing
negative repercussions of the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the worsening food and energy crises,
in addition to the global financial crisis. The League of
Arab States appreciates the valuable financial support
provided to the Palestinian Authority to help it address
that devastating economic crisis.
We also appreciate the initiative of the President
of the General Assembly to convene a high-level
meeting in support of the efforts of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in order to enable it to perform
its pivotal tasks in dealing with the growing needs of
Palestinian refugees, who are also suffering from the
repercussions of those crises. We would also like to
22-43895

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

thank all the countries that have made financial pledges
to help the Agency overcome its current funding crisis.
The League of Arab States also stresses that renewing
UNRWA’s mandate during the Assembly’s seventyseventh session is crucial.
In conclusion, the Palestinian question has suffered
in the past from unfair and irresponsible decisions.
In recent times, the question has been deliberately
neglected for no reason and has fallen victim to the
conflicts between super-Powers. However, the League
of Arab States insists that we restore the Middle East
peace process in its entirety. We need to use the hope
and positive momentum we have achieved recently to
overcome all the obstacles in the way of the realization
of the peace desired. The League of Arab States looks
forward to working hand in hand with the Security
Council in the near future to achieve that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the
convening of today’s quarterly open debate on a topic
to which we attach special importance based our longstanding, principled position and firm support for the
just cause of the heroic Palestinian people. We would
also like to thank the Deputy Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process for her briefing.

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

the Palestinian territories and destroy the viability of
establishing two States on the basis of the pre-1967
borders, is jeopardizing the possibility of achieving a
just and lasting peace in that region.
On 7 June, the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel,
published its first report, concluding, among other
things, that ending the Israeli occupation, including the
illegal settlement policy, as well as the discrimination
against Palestinians, is fundamental to stopping the
conflict and the persistent cycle of violence, and that
the prevailing culture of impunity fuels resentment
and tensions on the ground, which in turn increases
instability and prolongs the conflict.
Worse still, the report notes that, faced with what
it calls “an occupation in perpetuity”, the occupying
Power “has no intention of ending the occupation” and
that on the contrary, it is pursuing “clear policies for
ensuring complete control over the occupied Palestinian
territory, and is acting to alter the demography through
the maintenance of a repressive environment for
Palestinians and a favourable environment for Israeli
settlers” (A/HRC/50/21, para. 70).

Unfortunately, since we last met in this Chamber
to address this issue (see S/PV.9021), the situation on
the ground has not improved. Quite the contrary, it
continues to deteriorate day by day, while the suffering
of the noble Palestinian people, victims of violent
attacks by Israel’s occupying forces, including acts
of terror perpetrated by extremist settler militias,
continues to drag on and on.

That is not a new conclusion, but rather a
confirmation of what we have been denouncing
for years — that the lack of accountability is being
leveraged by the occupying Power to continue its
brutal aggression against Palestine; pursue its policies
of colonial occupation and apartheid, violence and
collective punishment against Palestinian civilians;
advance its illegal expansion and construction of new
settlements; continue arresting and detaining innocent
Palestinians arbitrarily; pursue its policy of evictions
and demolition of homes, including in Sheikh Jarrah,
Silwan and Massafer Yatta, and the expropriation
of Palestinian land; and continue perpetrating
crimes against humanity and war crimes against the
Palestinian people.

A clear example of that is the situation in the
Gaza Strip — the world’s largest prison — which
has been subject to a cruel blockade for more than 15
years, resulting in a dire humanitarian situation and
deplorable socioeconomic conditions for more than
2 million Palestinians that continue to deteriorate
daily. We therefore insist that that deliberate policy,
which seeks not only to inflict pain and suffering on
the Palestinian civilian population but also to fragment

In that regard, it is clear that the Government of one
of the permanent members of the Security Council has
been perpetuating that context of international impunity
over time, serving only to support Israel’s routine
criminal practices and policies, with total impunity.
However, we welcome, as an important first step
towards accountability, the potential inclusion of the
United States partner, Israel, on the list of perpetrators
of violations against children, in the event that there

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

22-438955/22

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are no noticeable improvements and the indiscriminate
attacks against that vulnerable group continue.
We want to know how much more time must pass
before the Council demands that Israel put an end to
its continued aggression against Palestine? How many
more Palestinian lives must be lost before the Council
holds Israel accountable for its crimes once and for all?
How much more time must pass before justice is served
and the prevailing cycle of impunity is ended? How
much longer will it take for the Council to hold Israel
accountable for its crimes, implement the relevant
resolutions and demand that Israel stop its continued
aggression against Palestine or agree to provide
international protection for the Palestinian people?
For our part, we in Venezuela can only continue to
insist that this organ, in line with the powers conferred
on it by the Charter of the United Nations, not only
play a constructive role in the peaceful resolution of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including by fostering
an environment conducive to the resumption of a
necessary political dialogue and credible, serious and
direct negotiations to achieve a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace based on the two-State solution,
with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security, but also to move forward by taking
concrete measures to ensure, without further delay, the
accountability of Israel, the occupying Power, before
international justice.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our unwavering
position in support of the defence of the independence
and inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and to realize their legitimate national
aspirations. We renew our commitment to continue
working towards the achievement of a free, independent
and sovereign State of Palestine, within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and as a full
Member of our Organization. The Council must stop
depriving the heroic Palestinian people of peace, justice
and freedom.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Gala López (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We support the statements to be delivered by the
representatives of Azerbaijan, on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, and Indonesia, in its capacity
as Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
6/22

26/07/2022

Cuba maintains its long-standing and unwavering
position in defence of and solidarity with the just cause
of the Palestinian people. The most recent report of the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967 states that Israel is practicing apartheid
in the occupied Palestinian territories. We note with
deep concern the increasing tensions and human rights
violations in those territories, including East Jerusalem.
The violence against Palestinian civilians continues,
and it includes arrests, detentions, imprisonment
and killings, including of children. Israel is ramping
up its illegal annexation policy and expanding its
colonization practices. Homes and properties continue
to be destroyed and more Palestinian families are
being forcibly displaced as a result of the continued
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements. The
blockade of the Gaza Strip continues, as do the plans
to annex the Palestinian territories in the Jordan Valley
and other parts of the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Despite long-standing requests from the United
Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, the League of
Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and other international actors, the Security Council
has still failed to act to put an end to Israel’s military
aggression and occupation of the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. There can be no justification
for continuing to prevent the Palestinian people from
exercising their right to self-determination and to an
independent and sovereign State within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and with the
right of return of refugees also guaranteed.
The United States, which has repeatedly obstructed
Council action and prevented it from fulfilling its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations
to ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security, continues to obstruct a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
while enabling Israel’s impunity. Other unilateral
and unwarranted decisions by the United States
Government, which the current Administration has
not reversed, further undermine the possibility of a
negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
continue to severely harm the legitimate interests of
the Arab nations and maintain the latent danger of an
escalation in the region.
We condemn the unilateral decision of the
Government of the United States to recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and establish its
22-43895

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

diplomatic representation in that city, disrespecting its
historical status, as well as its decision to recognize
the sovereignty of Israel over the Syrian Golan, both
of which constitute serious violations of the Charter,
international law and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. We reiterate our rejection of the socalled deal of the century, which ignores the concept
of a two-State solution and threatens the future of the
State of Palestine within its pre-1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We demand an immediate
and unconditional end to the United States’ arbitrary
and illegal unilateral coercive measures imposed on
sovereign nations in the Middle East.
We reiterate our demand for Israel’s full and
unconditional withdrawal from the Syrian Golan
and all the occupied Arab territories. We call for an
end to external interference in Syria and full respect
for its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We also
support finding a peaceful and negotiated solution to
the situation imposed on that sister Arab nation. We
reiterate our support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) with Iran and for the inalienable
right of States to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
We reiterate our rejection of the unilateral withdrawal of
the United States from the JCPOA and its reimposition
of unilateral sanctions against the Islamic Republic
of Iran, which are contrary to international law and
the Charter. We affirm our unreserved support for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. We will continue to strongly
support the accession of the State of Palestine to full
membership in the United Nations. We support President
Abbas’s call for the holding of an international peace
conference. As the Commander-in-Chief of the Cuban
Revolution, Fidel Castro Ruz, said at the Non-Aligned
Movement’s sixth summit conference in 1979,
“[N]o more brutal dispossession of the right of a
people to peace and existence has been committed
in this century (...) Stripped of their lands, expelled
from their own homeland, dispersed throughout
the world, persecuted and murdered, the heroic
Palestinians constitute an impressive example of
abnegation and patriotism and are the living symbol
of the greatest crime of our time”.
It is unacceptable that such a heart-wrenching reality
has extended into the twenty-first century.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Othman (Malaysia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and I
would like to add several points in my national capacity.
We have repeatedly heard expressions of support
by the international community, including the Security
Council, for a two-State solution. Yet the Palestinians’
right to full membership status in our Organization
has been denied, and that is coupled with a lack of
progress towards realizing a two-State solution. We
have also heard today that Palestinians’ human dignity
continues to be violated in every sense with impunity.
Israel continues to practice extrajudicial killings, the
torture and killing of children, collective punishment
and attacks on human rights defenders and the press,
in addition to its illegal settlements, home demolitions
and evictions.
A culture that enables impunity for human rights
violations cannot advocate for respect for human
rights, the rules-based order and the Charter of the
United Nations while at the same time ignoring the
atrocities perpetrated against the Palestinians. It is
abundantly clear that Israel’s systematic oppression and
discriminatory policies against the Palestinian people
are tantamount to the crime of apartheid, something
that has been confirmed in the March report of the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967 and by various international human rights
organizations. All conflicts must be resolved peacefully
and in accordance with the Charter and international
law. The Council in particular is obligated to maintain
international peace and security, yet we see that it has
not accorded the same strength of attention and action
to Palestine’s decades-long struggle in resisting Israel’s
foreign occupation.
We urge the Security Council, especially the
Middle East Quartet, to galvanize efforts and create the
conditions necessary for peace talks with the relevant
parties. The inaction of the Security Council in urgently
addressing the conflict will only further embolden the
oppressor. It is high time for accountability. We also
call on all Member States to respect and implement
the relevant United Nations resolutions to ensure
that Israel is accountable for its crimes and human
rights violations.

22-438957/22

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Malaysia remains committed to supporting the
Palestinian people in realizing their inalienable rights
to self-determination and independence. Our position
is clear: only a negotiated political settlement involving
a two-State solution can create sustainable peace based
on internationally agreed parameters, international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions. We
will also continue to provide financial support to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
The credibility of the Safety Council rests upon its
collective ability to address all conflicts, including the
existence of threats to peace or acts of aggression.
Let me conclude by reiterating the urgent need
for the Security Council to end the foreign occupation
by Israel and to work towards a peaceful solution to
the conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alateek (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to sincerely thank the delegation
of Brazil for having convened this important debate.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia remains committed
to the constant principles of the Palestinian question,
namely, ending the occupation, the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State with Jerusalem
as its capital and guaranteeing the right of return for
Palestinian refugees.
The Kingdom reiterates the fact that it stands with
the Palestinian people. We emphasize the importance
of achieving a comprehensive and lasting peace in
the Middle East as a strategic choice to end one of
the longest and most complicated historical conflicts
witnessed by our contemporary world. That peace
should be based on the two-State solution and in line
with the international terms of reference as well as
the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, which guarantees the
establishment of a Palestinian State along the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital; the return
of refugees; and an end to Israel’s occupation of all
Arab territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan and
Lebanese territories.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses that its
consistent and firm position vis-à-vis the Palestinian
question and the Palestinian people will not change
even if we allow international flights to cross our
airspace. We reaffirm that the decision to allow the
8/22

26/07/2022

use of our airspace by all airlines is in line with our
international obligations. That step will not be a prelude
to other steps.
The international community and the Security
Council must shoulder their responsibilities to support
the Palestinian people and the Palestinian question by
ensuring that justice prevails through the realization of
the aspirations of the Palestinian people to establish an
independent State in line with international resolutions
and by resolutely addressing all ongoing Israeli
practices and violations of international law and of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Armed conflicts and disputes as well as pandemics
have had an adverse impact on the entire world,
especially the Middle East, which is a vulnerable
geographical region that has always suffered from
disputes and instability. The Kingdom believes in the
importance of strengthening regional and international
cooperation to respond to those common and emerging
challenges confronting the region and the world. We
also support the creation of favourable conditions so
that the region can enjoy peace and prosperity while
maintaining Arab harmony. The Kingdom therefore
hosted the Jeddah Security and Development Summit
on 16 July, with the participation of a number of Heads
of State from the region. The outcomes of the Summit
were welcomed at the regional and international levels.
We would
three points.

like

to

highlight

the

following

We reaffirm my country’s steadfast position in
support of a solution that guarantees the security
and stability of the Republic of Yemen and meets
the aspirations of the brotherly Yemeni people. We
also value the efforts of the Special Envoy, Mr. Hans
Grundberg, to strengthen the commitment to the
current truce, sponsored by the United Nations, and his
efforts to extend that truce in line with the initiative
of the Kingdom announced in March 2021 to end the
crisis in Yemen and to reach a comprehensive political
solution. The Houthi militias must abide by the truce
and stop exploiting the suffering of Yemeni civilians.
They must open humanitarian corridors in Taiz.
We also stress the importance of keeping the
Arab Gulf region as a region free of weapons of
mass destruction, and we reaffirm the importance of
cooperating with the International Atomic Energy
Agency in that regard. We also reaffirm the importance
of strengthening regional and international efforts
22-43895

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to combat terrorism and extremism. We also need to
prevent the funding, arming and recruiting terrorist
groups by certain countries in the region, and we must
address all activities threatening the security and
stability of the region.
My country also expresses our condemnation and
denunciation of the attack against Dohuk governorate,
in the northern part of the sisterly Republic of Iraq.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will stand with the
Government and the brotherly people of Iraq in
confronting the challenges threatening its security and
territorial integrity.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
remains committed to the unity and territorial integrity
of Arab territories and the welfare of their peoples. We
support all the efforts of the United Nations to that end
and hope that the international community in general
and the Security Council in particular will carry out
their roles in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): The IsraeliPalestinian conflict continues to be the subject of
many meetings in this Chamber owing to its impact
on security and stability in the Middle East and the
whole world. It is therefore disconcerting that despite
what appears to be a deteriorating security situation,
there has been virtually no meaningful action from the
Security Council to resolve that protracted conflict.
The Security Council’s inability to act against Israel
despite its willingness to act decisively on other issues
on its agenda illustrates the persistent double standards
and inconsistency in its work. That perpetuates the
Council’s failure to hold the occupier accountable for its
violations of international law and its own resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016).
South Africa is deeply concerned about the
escalation in settler violence against Palestinians in
the occupied territories and the continual advancement
of illegal Israeli settlement activities. The persistent
threat to Palestinian’s livelihoods through forced
evictions and demolitions leads to heightened tensions,
sparking a cycle of violence and perpetuating insecurity
and instability.
Moreover, Israel’s imposition of an apartheid
system, detailed in several reports by international
as well as Israeli and Palestinian human rights

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

organizations, manifested through stringent policies
that deprive the Palestinian people of their freedom,
dignity and rights, debilitates any prospect of the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State. The
hostile environment created by the occupying Power
does not encourage an atmosphere of constructive
dialogue and peace. Recently, the South African
Council of Churches visited the occupied territories
and reaffirmed the existence of the apartheid conditions
that the Palestinians are subjected to.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
affirms in its article 1 that
“All human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights”.
However, that is not true for the Palestinians.
Deep inequalities divide Palestinians and Israelis
across the occupied Palestinian territories and Israel.
Discrimination by law is in breach of the provisions laid
out in the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid.
The Secretary-General’s report on children
in armed conflict (S/2022/493) sheds light on the
inequalities perpetuated by the occupying State on
Palestinian children. The report states that there
has been an alarming increase in grave violations
against children, particularly a significant increase in
the killing and maiming of children in the occupied
Palestinian territory by Israeli forces during hostilities,
air strikes on densely populated areas and the use of live
ammunition during law enforcement operations. We
are disheartened at the high number of verified grave
violations against Palestinian children. Accountability
for those violations must be ensured so that they do not
continue. In that regard, South Africa concurs with the
Secretary-General’s proposal that action must be taken
to include Israel and other groups as listed parties should
they not put in place measures to prevent violations and
improve the protection of children.
On 12 August the international community will
celebrate International Youth Day under the theme
“Intergenerational Solidarity: Creating a World for
All Ages”. The day was designated by the General
Assembly to acknowledge youth as key partners in
bringing about change and raising awareness of the
challenges they face around the world. Palestinian
youth face many challenges affecting their economic
and social well-being owing to their painful reality of
violence, discrimination and oppression at the hands

22-438959/22

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of their occupier. In that regard, their future remains
grim, as they are robbed of realizing their hopes and
aspirations. The international community cannot stand
by idly and deny the youth of Palestine their right to
a prosperous future. As the States Members of the
United Nations, we are obligated to call for justice and
accountability as a precursor to a lasting peace.
South Africa therefore remains of the view that it is
pivotal that we revitalize international action and seek
to find new solutions within the international system in
order to address the challenges facing the Palestinian
people. We must intensify the call for international
action, with the United Nations playing a leading
role to find a solution premised on a just, rightsbased settlement with fair laws. As the international
community, we must seek a solution that facilitates
equality and equity for all who have the right to live
in the territories of Israel and Palestine, without which
security, dignity and prosperity will, unfortunately, not
be achieved.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Nasir: On behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, I congratulate Brazil for its capable presidency
of the Security Council in July. I also thank Deputy
Special Coordinator Hastings for her briefing.
Israel’s continued settlement expansion and land
confiscation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, has grave political
repercussions. They constitute grave breaches
of international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions and undermine the contiguity and viability
of the Palestinian State and the prospects for realizing
the two-State solution on the pre-1967 borders that
the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the international community, as a whole, have long
endorsed and called for.
The Committee expresses its concern over the
ongoing developments in Masafer Yatta, in the south
of the occupied West Bank, after the Israeli Supreme
Court ruled that the area is to be appropriated by the
Israeli military. That action risks forcibly displacing
more than 1,200 Palestinians, including a large number
of women and at least 580 children, the largest forcible
expulsion of Palestinians since 1967. As referenced by
the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
10/22

26/07/2022

for the Middle East Peace Process and as reported
in the 15 July 2022 end-of-mission statement by the
United Nations Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories, the implementation of that decision will
test the international community’s resolve and the
Security Council’s ability to take decisive action to
uphold international law and the Charter of the United
Nations and to protect Palestinian civilians living under
occupation, as well as their homes and livelihoods.
The Committee calls on the Security Council
to clearly and firmly reiterate its demands that
the Government of Israel, the occupying Power,
immediately end all settlement expansions, demolitions,
confiscations of Palestinian property and forcible
removals of civilians, in compliance with international
law and United Nations resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016).
The Committee is alarmed by the increasing
violence and casualties in recent months in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, as
reported by Special Coordinator Wennesland. We
condemn the indiscriminate killing and excessive use
of lethal force against civilians, particularly children,
which have become all too frequent and for which
no one is being held accountable. The protection of
civilians is central to the work of the United Nations
and the Security Council and must be a prioritized in
the absence of a just solution.
Recent findings in the Secretary-General’s report
on children in armed conflict (S/2022/493) highlighted
the dramatic increase in grave violations inflicted
on Palestinian children. Those findings must serve
as a stark reminder to the Security Council to act.
The Committee urges Israeli forces and Palestinian
armed groups to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and to take measures to protect
Palestinian children caught up in the midst of this
ongoing tragic conflict.
We applaud and join the multiple calls for action
to also protect human rights defenders and the
freedom of the press. The Committee welcomes the
United Nations Human Rights Office’s preliminary
investigation regarding the killing of journalist Shireen
Abu Akleh and urges Israel to bring those responsible
to justice. The Committee also commends the nine
22-43895

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

member States of the European Union that, in the
absence of any substantial information to support
Israel’s allegations, have pledged to continue working
with the six Palestinian civil society groups that Israel
labelled terrorist organizations in October 2021. Those
organizations, some of which are Committee partners,
play a crucial role in promoting democracy and building
a robust Palestinian civil society and must continue to
be supported.

capital of the State of Palestine. We urge the Security
Council to act without delay in order to contribute to
the achievement of that solution.

Through its multifaceted work, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) plays a crucial role in providing
essential services to the Palestinian people. The
Committee lauds the commitments made by Member
States at the recent United Nations pledging conference
and joins the Secretary-General in urging Member
States to put the Agency on a sustainable financial
footing. By contributing to UNRWA, we contribute
to the welfare and dignity of Palestine refugees and to
Middle East peace and stability.

Over half a decade since the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016), we remain no closer to the achievement
of an independent and sovereign Palestinian State or
to the realization of the right of Israelis to security
within the internationally recognized pre-1967 borders.
That lack of progress is compounded by the fact that,
according to the Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2022/504), the situation features the highest number
of settlement units advanced since October 2020, an
increase in daily violence throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory and Israel and the deadliest
terrorist attacks in years. In that regard, the Holy See
renews the expression of its deepest regret at the deaths
of the civilians killed during those attacks.

We commend the June 2022 findings of the
United Nations Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem and in Israel. We concur with
the assessment that the continued Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territory and all its facets, including
annexation, the Gaza blockade and policies based
on discrimination and segregation, are the primary
root causes of the recurrent tension, instability and
conflict in the region. The Committee pledges to
continue its advocacy with Member States and United
Nations officials towards resuming negotiations
aimed at addressing those root causes, resolving the
core issues and achieving a just and lasting peace.
Only a comprehensive political process addressing
the unfulfilled promises to the Palestinian people and
leading to the realization of their inalienable rights,
including to self-determination and return, will result
in an end of the conflict.
In line with its mandate, the Committee will
continue its advocacy work, organize public events
and draw attention to the plight of the Palestinian
people’s inalienable rights, including in relation to
East Jerusalem.
The only way to resolve the question of Palestine is
through a two-State solution based on the 1967 borders
and with two States — Israel and Palestine — living
side by side in peace and security, with Jerusalem as the

The President: I now give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Archbishop Caccia: The Holy See would like to
thank the Brazilian presidency for convening an open
debate on this important topic.

Concerning the death of Ms. Shireen Abu Akleh,
a Catholic journalist, who was shot and killed in the
exercise of her profession in Jenin on 11 May, the Holy
See expresses its concern and deepest sorrow, as already
communicated to the Israeli and Palestinian authorities.
Regarding the events that occurred at the Catholic Saint
Joseph Hospital in Jerusalem before her funeral, my
delegation cannot but condemn the behaviour of the
Israeli police.
Furthermore, the war in Ukraine has threatened
the food security of Palestinian families, as well as
other civilians throughout the wider region. In the
light of increased costs due to rising food prices, my
delegation encourages all States to consider additional
contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
The Holy See also notes with concern the heightened
tensions around the holy places in Jerusalem. Those
sites form an important spiritual and cultural heritage
for the whole of humankind. In his Easter message this
year, Pope Francis expressed the hope that Israelis,
Palestinians and all who dwell in the holy city, together
with pilgrims, experience the beauty of peace, dwell in
fraternity and enjoy free access to the holy places in
mutual respect for the rights of each.

22-4389511/22

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In that regard, my delegation reaffirms its appeal
for all parties to maintain the historic status quo within
Jerusalem, the city of peace, and rejects any unilateral
measures aimed at changing it, including attempts to
alter the multicultural and multireligious character of
the holy city, which is dear to Jews, Christians and
Muslims alike.
In the face of Palestine’s many challenges, the
Holy See reiterates the need for all parties to respect
international law, refrain from inflammatory rhetoric
and reject all forms of violence. Such commitments are
vital to the fostering of genuine encounter, dialogue
and accompaniment on the path to peace. It is only
along such a path that a lasting two-State solution can
be realized. My delegation urges political leaders on all
sides to demonstrate the requisite will to nurture the
trust necessary for resuming final-status negotiations.
Allow me to offer a few words on the situation
in the wider Middle East. The Holy See welcomes
the six-month renewal of the Syrian cross-border
mechanism, although a longer extension to allow aid
organizations to better plan deliveries would have been
preferred. Given the immense humanitarian needs of
the Syrian people, which are at their highest level since
the war began, the cross-border mechanism should
remain in place until the situation improves and crossline deliveries can adequately address the country’s
humanitarian challenges.
Turning to Yemen, my delegation welcomes the
extension and consolidation of the current truce. It is
the hope of the Holy See that the ceasefire can pave the
way towards lasting peace, facilitate the distribution of
aid and contribute to early recovery efforts.
In both Syria and Yemen, my delegation notes with
concern the issue of overcompliance with sanctions,
in which banks place burdensome requirements on
aid organizations or even refuse to do business with
them altogether out of fear of punishment despite the
existence of humanitarian exemptions. To tackle that
issue, the Holy See encourages all States implementing
sanctions to provide precise guidance on permitted
activities to financial institutions so that the flow of
humanitarian assistance is not impeded. In that regard,
my delegation would like to recall the words of the Holy
Father, who has insisted that the imposition of sanctions
should not strike directly at everyday life in order to
provide a glimmer of hope to the general populace,
increasingly caught in the grip of poverty.
12/22

26/07/2022

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you and your
delegation, Mr. President, on Brazil’s successful
management of the work of the Security Council in
the month of July, and we wish you all the best for the
remaining meetings of this month. We would also like to
thank Ms. Lynn Hastings, Deputy Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for her briefing, and
we reiterate our support for her and for all efforts to
restore calm and stability in the region.
Since our last open debate, on 24 April (see
S/PV.9021), under the agenda item “The situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question”,
the international community has followed with great
concern the grave escalation in the occupied Palestinian
territory as a result of the systematic crimes and
aggression committed by Israel, the occupying Power,
against the Palestinian people. We have seen that the
Al-Aqsa Mosque is still subject to repeated violations,
whether by the Israeli occupying forces or settlers,
the latest of which was yesterday. We reiterate our
strong condemnation and denunciation of those hostile
practices, which constitute a provocation to the feelings
of Muslims throughout the world and an explicit threat
to the freedom of worship in the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Those hostile practices are also part of a series of
flagrant violations against all international conventions
and resolutions, as well as a driver of the destruction
of stability in the region and a source for fuelling hate,
extremism and violence.
The aggression and crimes committed by the Israeli
occupying forces are among a series of such crimes
and violations committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, of the relevant resolutions 476 (1980), 478
(1980) and 2334 (2016), which all emphasize the
importance of not undermining the special status of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif and invalidate any measure aimed
at changing its demographic character. The occupying
Power must respect the historical and legal status quo
at Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We therefore reiterate our call
on the international community, and in particular the
Security Council, to play its role in ensuring that the
Israeli occupying forces be held fully responsible for
the repercussions of those crimes and the illegal and
provocative practices in Jerusalem and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and violations against the unarmed Palestinian
people and their land and holy sites. It is important to
22-43895

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

work jointly together to strengthen international efforts
to restore comprehensive calm and focus on reviving
the peace process in the Middle East.
The Israeli policies and practices confirm once
again that Israel seeks to entrench the occupation, as
well as its unwillingness to reach a comprehensive and
just peace agreement. That was affirmed by the recent
report of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and Israel, which clearly
noted that Israel has no intention to end the occupation
and that it has clear policies to ensure its control of
the occupied Palestinian territory and to work to alter
the demographic composition therein. There is also
an increase in the number of settlement activities in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, which has
led to many Palestinian families being displaced after
being dispossessed of their property and having their
homes demolished, without any accountability for the
perpetrators of those crimes.
Whenever and wherever they occur, impunity
and the lack of accountability will inevitably expand
the cycle of violence, prolong the conflict and
reduce opportunities to achieve sustainable peace
and security, which is directly demonstrated in the
occupied Palestinian territories, whose people suffer
from daily crimes that require the international
community to make the perpetrators of those crimes
and violations accountable.
In that regard, Israel must also uphold its
international obligations. We reaffirm our strong
condemnation of the heinous assassination of journalist
Shireen Abu Akleh by the Israeli occupation forces
in a Jenin camp last May, while she was doing her
job and covering the crimes committed against the
Palestinian people. We stress the need for an immediate
international, independent and transparent investigation
of that crime to ensure that those responsible are
identified and brought to justice.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reaffirms its
full support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), as we believe in the vital role it plays in
mitigating the suffering of Palestine refugees in its five
working zones. We urge the international community
to continue supporting UNRWA in order to ensure
that it continues to provide health, educational and
relief services.

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

We reiterate our support for the Arab, Islamic and
international position, which underscores that peace
is a strategic choice and that a lasting, comprehensive
and just settlement is based on the two-State solution
pursuant to the agreed parameters — relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative — so
that the Palestinian people can fully enjoy all their
legitimate political rights in their own independent
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on presiding
over the Security Council this month. We express
our appreciation to Ms. Hastings, Deputy Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for her
valuable briefing this morning.
The Middle East is suffering from dangerous crises
that require the attention of the United Nations. There
are decades-long and emerging challenges, such as the
coronavirus disease pandemic, food insecurity and
other economic, social and environmental challenges,
which the international community must seriously
address in order to find lasting and radical solutions
to end the conflicts, including the atrocities and the
suffering of millions of innocent people in the region.
The State of Qatar continues to make tireless
efforts to resolve the crises in the region and reduce
their impact on civilians affected by armed conflict
by providing needed humanitarian assistance and
supporting the efforts of the United Nations.
Although there are many crises in the Middle East,
the Palestinian question has remained the central and
longest-standing issue before the Council for more than
seven decades. Therefore, the Council must shoulder
its responsibility for that issue and reach a just, lasting
and comprehensive settlement, based on the two-State
solution, in order to establish an independent, viable
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including
the Syrian Golan and territories in Lebanon, must end.
There must also be an immediate and full cessation
of settlement activities, the return of refugees and the
restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to self-determination.

22-4389513/22

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is undeniable that the city of Jerusalem has a
special status given its significance as home to the
holy sites, particularly the sacred Al-Aqsa Mosque. We
therefore once again strongly condemn all attempts to
raid Al-Haram Al-Sharif, attacks against its unarmed
worshippers and their arrest, which hinders them
from practicing their religious rites. Jeopardizing
the historic and legal status of Islamic and Christian
holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem and attempts to
Judaize them and divide the Al-Aqsa Mosque spatially
and temporally, while undermining Muslims’ freedom
of worship therein, are illegitimate practices, as they
contravene international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions.
Israel, the occupying Power, continues its
repressive policies against Palestinians by annexing
and seizing their land through the use of overwhelming
violence and arbitrary arrests. The most recent example
of such practices was the assassination of Palestinian
Al-Jazeera journalist and television correspondent
Shireen Abu Akleh as she was carrying out her work
in a vest that clearly identified her as a member of the
press. The State of Qatar has condemned that crime in
the strongest terms as a blatant violation and flagrant
aggression against the freedom of the press and the
right of people to access information. We echo the call
of Council members for an immediate, comprehensive,
transparent and impartial investigation in order to
ensure accountability.
It is high time for the international community to
shoulder its responsibilities with regard to protecting
the Palestinian people, safeguarding the holy sites
and ending all flagrant violations against them,
while guaranteeing the implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2334 (2016), including by ending the occupation and
illegal settlements.
We reiterate the solidarity of the State of Qatar with
our Palestinian brethren by providing the necessary
humanitarian support and assistance in order to improve
the living situation of Palestinians, especially in the
Gaza Strip, which suffers from the destructive impact
of the military escalation and the continued unjust
blockade. We have funded the construction of hundreds
of residential units and provided basic construction
material, fuel, electricity and cash assistance.
Since the State of Qatar appreciates the
indispensable role of the United Nations Relief and
14/22

26/07/2022

Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in supporting the refugees until a just solution for them
is reached, we have provided financial support for its
core resources. Our most recent contribution totalled
$18 million for 2021 and 2022.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar reaffirms the
need for all parties to uphold their obligations under
resolutions of international legitimacy, the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. We
reiterate our commitment to collectively work with
our partners in the international system to overcome
shared challenges in support of the Security Council’s
mandate to maintain international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): Within the framework
of this quarterly meeting to address the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
I would like to draw the Security Council’s attention
to the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the situation in East Jerusalem, which is
worsening on a daily basis.
The continuing occupation of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, the 15year blockade of Gaza and long-standing discrimination
are the reality that Palestinians continually face.
Israel’s occupation is a grave breach of international
law, including resolution 2334 (2016), which explicitly
calls for immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians, including acts of terror. Israel needs to
end its illegal occupation immediately. Indonesia urges
the Council to take decisive action and immediately put
in place accountability measures to ensure that Israel
ends its occupation and reverses its policies, including
the building of settlements, the siege of the Gaza Strip
and the forced transfers of the Palestinian population in
Jerusalem, Masafer Yatta, the Jordan Valley and other
areas. Indonesia also welcomes the collective action
and efforts of the United Nations Human Rights Office
to conduct a preliminary investigation into the killing
of the journalist Shireen Abu Akleh and urges Israel to
bring those responsible to justice.
A few days ago, the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
convened a virtual conference focused on Palestinian
youth in East Jerusalem under occupation, issues
of identity and resilience in East Jerusalem and
empowering young people to promote change. However,
22-43895

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

at the moment there can be neither change nor a future
for Palestinian children, who often bear the brunt of
the costs of ongoing conflict, including indiscriminate
killing and the excessive use of lethal force against
civilians. The Security Council should prioritize and
address the issue of the protection of civilians as a
matter of vital importance, since the ongoing violent
acts constitute grave violations of international law,
including humanitarian law and human rights law, and
of numerous relevant resolutions.
As a long-standing supporter of the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), Indonesia
believes in the crucial role of the Agency’s ongoing
services, including in the areas of education, health
and social protection for Palestinian refugees. As the
Agency has continued to experience a shortage of the
funds it needs to carry out its humanitarian work in this
calendar year, it is important that Member States work
to strengthen their political and financial commitment
in support of UNRWA’s work. Indonesia also supports
the renewal of the Agency’s mandate and deplores any
deliberate attempts to delegitimize its work.
It is essential that immediate steps be taken to
lower the tensions that undermine the prospects for
peaceful solutions between the two States. That is not
enough, however, and it never will be. The only way to
end Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestinian land and
oppression of the Palestinian people, and to achieve just
and lasting peace, leading to the realization of the selfdetermination and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, is a committed and comprehensive political
process. It is our responsibility to keep shining a light
on the ongoing efforts to realize the international
consensus based on the existence of two States, Israel
and the State of Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security within internationally recognized borders,
a goal that we have all long sought.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I commend the
leadership of Brazil in steering the work of the
Council this month. I also thank the presidency for
convening today’s important debate and the briefers for
their insights.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and I would
like to add a few points in my national capacity.
The year 2021, which saw the deaths of at least 324
Palestinians, including 86 children, was the deadliest
for Palestinians since 2014. The intensity of the military
atrocities, detentions and arrests, attacks by settlers,
demolitions of homes and civilian infrastructure and
general terror leading to injuries to innocent people,
the destruction of property and so on has been further
aggravated by the Israeli occupying forces in the
first half of 2022. Moreover, we continue to observe
the Israelis’ expansion of illegal settlements and the
growing numbers of attacks by armed settlers, with the
help of the Israeli security forces.
It is a matter of serious concern that the Israeli
settlers have continued to violate the historic and legal
status quo of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, while terrorizing
and harassing Palestinian children and setting fire to
Palestinian villages. We are also deeply concerned
about their further encroachment on Palestinian land
and their extraction of natural resources, restricting
the free movement of the Palestinian population and
cutting off their access to grazing lands that have long
been used by Palestinian pastoralists, as mentioned in
the Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2022/504). In
addition to the attacks on civilians, such illegal actions
create serious obstacles to economic activity and
lead ultimately to a deterioration in the humanitarian
situation. We would like to point to the recent report of
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and Israel, which mentions that Israel has
no intention of ending the occupation and has clear
policies aimed at ensuring its complete control over the
occupied Palestinian territory. The report also noted the
views expressed by the former Secretary-General that a
sense of despair and frustration was growing under the
weight of half a century of occupation and paralysis of
the peace process.
Bangladesh reiterates its position in support of the
Palestinian people’s just cause of an independent, viable
and sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, under the two-State solution, based on
the pre-1967 borders. In that regard, we would like to
highlight the following points.
First, the Security Council must demand an end
to all of Israel’s provocations and violations. It must
demand the implementation of the relevant United

22-4389515/22

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
and ensure Israel’s compliance with international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Secondly, it is time for concrete action by the
international community aimed at holding Israel
accountable for grave injustices and violence against
the people of Palestine and for repeated violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law in the occupied territory. The
offences
committed
against
the
Palestinians
are tantamount to war crimes. We also echo the
continued calls of the international community for
an independent international investigation into the
murder of the journalist Shireen Abu Akleh by Israeli
occupying forces.
Thirdly, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
has pointed out that children are the worst affected
in the occupied Palestinian territory. The SecretaryGeneral’s recent report on children and armed conflict
(S/2022/493) also highlighted how brutally the Israeli
occupying forces treat children in the occupied
territory. There can be no moral or legal justification
for the killing of innocent children. We call for
consistent and urgent action to protect all civilian lives,
particularly children.
Before concluding, I would like to reiterate
Bangladesh’s unwavering and steadfast support for
the inalienable rights of our Palestinian brothers
and sisters and for a just and lasting solution to their
legitimate aspirations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Hatem (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it is my pleasure, Mr. President, to thank the
delegation of Brazil for its efforts at the helm of the
Security Council this month, which we very much
appreciate. I also thank Brazil for convening today’s
important open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, and Ms. Lynn
Hastings, Deputy Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for her valuable briefing.
The Middle East, a region that is of great
international strategic importance, has been suffering
for years from a difficult political, security and
economic situation, as well as extremely dangerous
challenges that threaten to undermine regional stability
and international peace and security as well as global
16/22

26/07/2022

interests. The situation demands that the international
community demonstrate solidarity and coordination and
make effective collective efforts to find solutions to the
region’s current crises and conflicts and achieve peace,
prosperity and sustainable development in the interests
of the peoples of the region and the entire world.
In that context, the important Jeddah Security and
Development Summit was held in our sister Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia this month. It promoted collective efforts,
addressed joint challenges and sought to achieve
security, peace and prosperity with the participation
of the leaders of the countries of the Gulf Cooperation
Council. The participants also included King Abdullah
II of Jordan, President Al Sisi of Egypt, Mr. Mustafa
Al-Kadhimi, Prime Minister of Iraq, and President
Biden of the United States.
His Majesty Hamad Bin Issa Al Khalifa, King of
the Kingdom of Bahrain, addressed the Summit and
presented his wise vision, reiterating his unwavering
commitment to laying the foundations for constructive
cooperation and peaceful coexistence in order to
counter the challenges and threats in the Middle East
and the world. His Majesty emphasized the need to
demonstrate balanced and profound reflection about
how we can resolve the conflicts and crises in the
region and tackle the political, security and economic
situation, including the difficult challenges in the
Middle East.
The Palestinian question requires a just settlement
through the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State pursuant to the two-State solution and
the Arab Peace Initiative, in addition to the creation
of promising economic and sustainable opportunities
for the brotherly Palestinian people and their effective
participation in the development process.
His Majesty also recalled the conclusions of
the workshop on the theme “Peace for prosperity”,
which was held in the Kingdom of Bahrain in 2019,
and reiterated the importance of achieving a political
solution to the crisis in Yemen, as well as the delivery
of humanitarian and development assistance to the
Yemeni people.
My country reiterates the importance of joining
efforts and ceasing interference in the internal affairs
of States, while safeguarding the principles and rights
set forth under international law and respecting the
sovereignty and religious and cultural values of States,
in addition to respecting others, tolerance and peaceful
22-43895

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

coexistence. Moreover, we must work together to rid
the Middle East of weapons of mass destruction and
fight against extremism and terrorism, while protecting
international navigation and the security of oil delivery
and global trade.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates
its commitment as an effective partner to establish
security and stability at the regional and international
levels, while making international efforts to address
all political, security, economic and environmental
challenges with a view to meeting the aspirations of the
peoples of the region and the entire world for achieving
peace, development and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mehdiyeva (Azerbaijan): I am honoured
to speak on behalf of the 120 States members of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
At the outset, I congratulate Brazil on its presidency
of the Security Council this month and express the
Movement’s appreciation for the opportunity to present
its position on the question of Palestine.
During the July 2021 NAM mid-term ministerial
conference, ministers adopted a political declaration
stressing, inter alia, that a just, lasting and peaceful
solution to all aspects of the question of Palestine,
based on the internationally endorsed parameters
enshrined in the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, must remain a priority on the
Movement’s agenda. The issue also constitutes an
ongoing responsibility of the United Nations until it is
satisfactorily resolved in all its aspects, in accordance
with international law and relevant resolutions.
In that regard, the members of the Movement once
again reaffirm that this ongoing historic injustice, with
the nearly 55-year Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
and other Arab territories at its core, continues to pose
a serious threat to regional and international peace
and security. As an entire people — the Palestinian
people — continue to be deprived of their inalienable
rights, including the rights to self-determination and
independence, continued international paralysis on the
issue is inexcusable, as are the dismissive arguments
that the issue is intractable or that peace is not possible
at this time.
The international consensus on a just solution is
firm and clear, and there is an abundance of multilateral

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

political and diplomatic tools for promoting the
achievement of a peaceful resolution in accordance
with international law, the relevant resolutions and
the Charter of the United Nations. We must use those
tools responsibly and urgently — and NAM members
are ready to do so. We therefore urge the Security
Council to act forthwith to shoulder its responsibilities
in that regard.
The Security Council must uphold its duty under
the Charter to maintain international peace and security
and act to implement its own resolutions. The question
of Palestine cannot be the exception to international
law and the authority of the Council. In particular, the
Movement remains deeply concerned that this organ
has for too long been unable to fulfil its mandate on
this important question due to the use of the veto by one
permanent member.
The members of the Movement call on the
Security Council to overcome its paralysis on the
Palestinian question so as to uphold its obligations
for the achievement of a just and peaceful solution to
that protracted conflict and tragic injustice. Not only
will that open a new era for the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples and the region but, it will also restore credibility
to this organ and to our international system as a whole.
In that regard, NAM still believes that resolution
2334 (2016) provides the most effective and viable
path to peace, setting forth the essential requirements
and parameters for the realization of a just outcome
on the basis of the two-State solution based on the
4 June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as the capital
of the State of Palestine, in accordance with the longstanding terms of reference of peace endorsed by the
international community — the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions; the Madrid
principles, including the principle of land for peace;
the Arab Peace Initiative; and the Middle East Quartet
road map — while ensuring the Palestinian people’s
fulfilment of their inalienable rights, including the right
to self-determination and the independence of the State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as a just solution for the plight of Palestine refugees in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
NAM therefore reiterates its call for full respect for
resolution 2334 (2016) and the effective implementation
of its provisions and obligations, particularly by
the occupying Power, including in terms of States’

22-4389517/22

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

obligations with regard to distinction — a matter
central to ensuring accountability.
The Movement also underscores the need for
the intensification of international and regional
diplomatic efforts aimed at bringing an end to the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and achieving a
just, lasting and comprehensive solution, as also called
for in resolution 2334 (2016), and calls on the Security
Council to urgently examine all practical ways and
means to ensure the implementation of that resolution,
as it has pledged to do.
Similarly, the States members of the Movement
continue to call for full respect for and implementation
of all other relevant resolutions, including with regard to
the complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities
and the status of occupied East Jerusalem. Respect for
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions and
international law would inherently create the necessary
conditions to bring the occupation to an end by justly
resolving the conflict in all its aspects and making
Palestinian-Israeli peace and security a reality for the
benefit of both peoples, the region and the international
community as a whole.
It is imperative that action be taken immediately
to help de-escalate the volatile situation on the ground,
which has been marked by increasing violence,
particularly settler violence and terror, leading to the
tragic loss of lives of more civilians, including children,
and to foster an appropriate environment in the pursuit
of peace. That must include a halt to all unilateral
and unlawful measures by Israel, the occupying
Power, in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.
Actions that violate Security Council resolutions
and the historic and legal status quo of Jerusalem and its
holy sites are provocative and dangerous. They destroy
the prospects for peace and should not be supported or
celebrated by anyone. In that regard, we reiterate the
call for full respect for the historic and legal status quo
and the historical Hashemite custodianship over the
Christian and Muslim holy sites in the city and for the
protection of the sanctity of the holy sites.
In that regard, the Movement stresses that the
Jordanian Ministry of Awqaf Islamic Affairs and Holy
Places is the only entity authorized under the provisions
of international humanitarian law to manage all the
affairs of Al-Aqsa Mosque in its entirety of 144,000
square metres. Maintaining comprehensive calm
18/22

26/07/2022

requires Israel’s respect for the legal and historical
status quo of the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
There is a need to find a real political horizon that
guarantees the fulfilment of all legitimate rights of the
brotherly Palestinian people on the basis of the twoState solution.
Moreover, threats of annexation by Israeli
officials, continued settlement activities and the forced
displacement of Palestinian families from their homes
and lands must be unequivocally condemned. Any
measures taken in that regard must be forthwith rejected
as null and void and without any legal effect and must
be met with firm measures of accountability for such
grave breaches, including lawful countermeasures.
The Movement commends the efforts of His
Majesty King Mohammed VI as Chair of the Al-Quds
Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The Movement welcomes the call for Al Quds/Jerusalem,
signed in Rabat on 30 March 2019 by His Majesty King
Mohammed VI of Morocco and His Holiness Pope
Francis, to stress the important role that Al Quds/
Jerusalem plays as a city of tolerance and mutual
respect among the people of the three monotheistic
religions and the need to preserve its specificities and
features as a city of peaceful coexistence.
In
relation
to
the
Gaza
Strip,
the
situation — particularly the grave humanitarian
situation — remains of great concern to the Movement.
NAM reiterates its call for the complete lifting of the
illegal Israeli blockade, which continues to impose
untold humanitarian, social and economic suffering
on more than 2 million Palestinian children, women
and men in Gaza. This crisis must be comprehensively
addressed in accordance with international law and
the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 1860 (2009) and in the context of the
unequivocal calls and overriding responsibility to bring
an end to the illegitimate, belligerent Israeli foreign
occupation since 1967 of the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.
In the absence of a just solution, the States members
of NAM reiterate their call for the continued provision
of the needed humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance to the Palestinian people, including Palestine
refugees. The Movement therefore reaffirms the
continued importance of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), along with other United Nations agencies
22-43895

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and international organizations, in alleviating their
plight, and calls for full support for UNRWA’s mandate
to ensure the continuity of its vital programmes and
its contribution to regional stability. In the light of
the continuing financial shortfalls, the NAM urges
the international community to provide UNRWA
with sufficient and predictable funding to ensure the
continuity of its indispensable efforts in all fields
of operation.
As Israel has clearly abdicated from its obligations
as the occupying Power to protect the Palestinian
civilian population, as prescribed by the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, the Movement also reiterates its
long-standing call for international protection for the
Palestinian people. This is urgent in order to alleviate
the dire state of insecurity of the occupied population
and prevent the loss of further innocent human lives.
Failure to do that can lead only to further escalations
and the tragic loss of more civilian lives.
In this regard, the Movement reiterates grave
concern with respect to lack of accountability for
all violations committed by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, many
of which may amount to war crimes. The absence of
justice only fosters greater impunity, leads to the
recurrence of crimes and destabilizes the situation on
the ground, thereby further diminishing the prospects
for peace. Member States of the Movement continue to
call for international action, particularly by the Security
Council, to ensure a cessation of, and accountability
for, the violations that are being systematically
committed by Israel against the Palestinian civilian
population under its occupation. NAM reiterates that
Israel must comply with its duties and responsibilities
under international law and be held to account if it
continues its blatant contempt of this organ and of its
international legal obligations.
With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, the Movement reaffirms that all measures and
actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the occupying
Power, such as its illegal decision of 14 December
1981 that purports to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status and the institutional structure of
the occupied area, as well as the Israeli measures to
apply its jurisdiction and administration there, are null
and void and have no legal effect. In this regard, and
in line with NAM’s principled position, the Movement
once again demands that Israel abide by resolution 497
(1981) and fully withdraw from the occupied Syrian

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

Golan to its 4 June 1967 borders, in implementation
of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). In addition,
NAM reiterates condemnation of the unilateral and
arbitrary proclamation by the United States of America
that recognized the Golan Heights as part of Israel.
Moreover, the NAM member States emphasize that
Israel must withdraw from all Lebanese territories,
including Sheba’a Farms, the Kfar Shouba hills and
the Lebanese part of Al-Ghajar village up to the Blue
Line, in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006).
In conclusion, the Movement takes this opportunity
to reiterate its call for the international community
to act collectively and with responsibility to uphold
international law and exert and intensify all necessary
efforts in support of the just Palestinian cause, the
ultimate goal of which is to bring an end to this historic
and grave injustice. The States members of NAM
reaffirm their commitment to promoting a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question
of Palestine in all its aspects, including alleviating
the plight of the Palestine refugees, and reaffirm their
support for the Palestinian people in their struggle
to achieve justice and fulfil their inalienable rights
and legitimate national aspirations, including to selfdetermination, freedom and independence in their
sovereign and independent State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Brazilian delegation for facilitating today’s
important debate.
Argentina continues to believe that the only solution
to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is through negotiations
between both parties aimed at seeking agreement on
the final-status issues identified in the Oslo Accords,
namely, Jerusalem, refugees, settlements, borders and
security measures.
My country supports a peaceful, definitive and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question,
through a two-State solution on the basis of the
1967 borders and on what the parties determine
in the negotiation process, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. Argentina reaffirms its support
for the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and to the establishment of an

22-4389519/22

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

independent and viable State recognized by all nations,
as well as the right of the State of Israel to live in peace
with its neighbours within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
Likewise, Argentina reiterates its concern over
the persistent and continuous growth of illegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories and
urges the cessation of their expansion. As the General
Assembly has repeatedly stated, settlements are
contrary to international law, hinder peace, weaken the
prospect of a two-State solution, with the two States
living side by side in peace and security, and thereby
promote the perpetuation of an unsustainable status
quo. The gravity of the situation has been recognized
by the Security Council in its resolution 2334 (2016),
the terms of which we fully reaffirm.
On the other hand, Argentina condemns all
violent actions by Hamas and other armed groups. It is
necessary for Palestinian leaders to sincerely address
Israeli security concerns. In this context, we recognize
Israel’s right to exercise its legitimate self-defence,
emphasizing the importance of Israel acting in ways that
respect the country’s obligations under international
humanitarian law, taking into account, in particular,
the principles of distinction and proportionality.
With regard to the situation in East Jerusalem,
Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 478 (1980) and, in
this regard, rejects any unilateral attempt to modify
it, in particular with regard to the Old City, which has
a special significance for the three great monotheistic
religions. Argentina believes that Jerusalem is one of
the issues whose final status must be defined by the
parties in bilateral negotiations.
In view of the financial difficulties being
experienced by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
Argentina wishes to reiterate its full support for the
Agency’s work, which contributes to preventing a
further deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. We also reaffirm
the need for the international community to develop
appropriate responses to ensure that it has the necessary
funds to guarantee that its services are not interrupted.
In relation to the Syrian Golan, Argentina maintains
a principled position with regard to the illegality of the
20/22

26/07/2022

acquisition of territories by force and respect for the
territorial integrity of States.
We firmly believe in the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes and deem important the quest for
a negotiated solution to the conflict between Syria and
Israel so as to put an end to the occupation of the Golan
Heights as soon as possible, in line with resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land
for peace.
In conclusion, Argentina wishes once again to urge
the Palestinians and Israelis to resume peace talks,
acting in good faith and with flexibility and in line
with international law and the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council, in the
endeavour to reach an agreement on the outstanding
final-status issues for Palestine in all of their aspects.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Kader.
Ms. Kader: I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the secretariat of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
As we meet once again to discuss the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, the
current trajectory is becoming increasingly untenable
and grimmer owing to the ongoing Israeli human
rights violations against the Palestinian people and
grave breaches of international law, which are welldocumented and inherent in Israel’s intricate system
of apartheid, colonization, racism and occupation, as
outlined in many United Nations documents, including
the reports of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967.
The OIC secretariat expresses its deep concern over
Israel’s ongoing violations against the occupied city of
Jerusalem, its citizens and holy sites, especially Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif; Israel’s illegal colonial
settlement policy, which has intensified especially in
and around occupied Jerusalem; the blockade on the
Gaza Strip; and the inhumane situation experienced by
Palestinian prisoners, among other violations, which, in
many cases, amount to war crimes.
The OIC secretariat welcomes and recalls in that
regard the recent report issued by the independent
international commission of inquiry on the protests
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and Israel, which clearly indicated that
22-43895

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

“Israel has no intention of ending the occupation,
has clear policies for ensuring complete control
over the occupied Palestinian territory and is acting
to alter the demography through the maintenance
of a repressive environment for Palestinians and
a favourable environment for Israeli settlers”.
(A/HRC/50/21, para. 70)

their right to return, to self-determination and to
the establishment of a State of Palestine with full
sovereignty and independence on the basis of the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The report highlighted the fact that Israel’s impunity
is feeding increased resentment among the Palestinian
people and is fuelling recurrent tensions, instability
and the protraction of the conflict as well as an endless
cycle of violence that compromises the chances for
sustainable peace and security. It concluded that ending
the occupation of lands by Israel, in full conformity
with Security Council resolutions, remains essential
to ending the systematic recurrence of tensions, the
instability and the protracted nature of the conflict.

Ms. Pyo (Republic of Korea): At the outset, the
Republic of Korea reaffirms its support for a twoState solution, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, international law and bilateral
agreements. My delegation takes this opportunity to
reiterate its position that the status quo of the holy
sites in Jerusalem must be respected. We strongly urge
all sides to resume peace talks, and we restate our
support for the mediation efforts of the Quartet and the
international community.

The OIC secretariat would like to voice once again
its strong condemnation of the heinous assassination
of the journalist Shireen Abu Akleh by the Israeli
occupation forces while on duty reporting facts
and documenting the crimes committed against the
Palestinian people last May. It stresses that that crime
constituted a blatant violation of international law and
norms and requires immediate investigation and the
holding of those responsible to account.

We would also like to express our support for the
efforts of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process to that end.

Among other violations, reports have documented
the killing and wounding of hundreds of Palestinian
citizens in the second quarter of 2022. The OIC
secretariat reaffirms in that regard that the accountability
deficit towards the countless Israeli crimes against the
Palestinian people creates an environment in which
impunity thrives, encouraging further abuses and
violations while victims and their families are denied
justice and redress.
The OIC secretariat calls upon this international
body to uphold its responsibility to ensure Israel’s
respect for and full compliance with the provisions
of international law and United Nations resolutions,
including, inter alia, resolution 2334 (2016), which
provides a clear path towards putting an end to Israeli
violations, reviving a multilaterally sponsored peace
process leading to the achievement of a just, lasting
and comprehensive solution based on international law,
United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
In closing, the OIC secretariat reiterates its full
support for the Palestinian people in their endeavour
to regain their legitimate inalienable rights, including

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.

My delegation remains deeply concerned about
the Israeli settlement advancement, demolitions and
evictions. Such unilateral actions are not helpful in
addressing the current situation. As resolution 2334
(2016) clearly underlines, such settlements have no
legal validity and constitute a flagrant violation of
international law. In particular, the settlement plans
in the E-1 and E-2 areas in the West Bank, which
could precipitate the territorial and geographical
disconnection of a future independent State of Palestine,
must not be advanced.
It is also very alarming that the number of violent
incidents in both Israel and Palestine has increased. We
call on all sides to refrain from any actions or incitement
that could escalate tensions.
Furthermore, no terrorist attacks can be justified.
Any form of violence against civilians must stop
immediately. Most of all, those who are responsible for
such reprehensible acts must be held accountable.
We also echo the Secretary-General’s statement
calling for an independent and transparent investigation
into the killing of Palestinian-American journalist
Shireen Abu Akleh, as well as ensuring accountability
for those responsible. We take note of the briefing by the
spokesperson of the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the conclusion of
the Office’s independent monitoring in that context.

22-4389521/22

S/PV.9099 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We remain concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip due to food and energy price hikes. The role of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for Palestinian
refugees, particularly as concerns taking care of the
health and education of girls and boys, is now more
critical than ever. In that regard, the Korean Government

22/22

26/07/2022

will remain steadfast in supporting UNRWA through
continued financial contributions.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its strong
commitment to continuing its constructive role
in advancing peace and stability in the region, in
close cooperation with the United Nations and the
international community.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

22-43895
