66

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

synergism between radiation and other environmental
agents, non-stochastic effects of radiation, sources of
radiation and the corresponding human exposures and
analyses of the models for assessing radiation dose,
1. Notes with appreciation the report of the
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation;2
2. Commends the Scientific Committee for the
valuable contribution it has made since its inception
to wider knowledge and understanding of the levels,
effects and risks of atomic radiation;
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue
its work, including its important co-ordination activities, to increase knowledge of the levels and effects
of atomic radiation from all sources;
4. Notes with satisfaction the continued and growing scientific co-operation between the Scientific Committee and the United Nations Environment Programme;
5. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue providing support for the effective
conduct of the Scientific Committee's work and for
the dissemination of its findings to the General Assembly, the scientific community and the public;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance
rendered to the Scientific Committee by Member
States, the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and non-governmental organizations and invites them to increase their cooperation in this field;
7. Requests all Member States and the United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
concerned to continue to supply to the Scientific Committee further data relevant to its work with a view
to facilitating the preparation of its report.
43rd plenary meeting
3 November 1978
33/16.

International co-operation in the peaceful
uses of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/196 A of 20 December 1977,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on its twenty-first
session, 3

Soviet Socialist Republics within the "Intercosmos"
programme of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule of law in the peaceful
exploration and use of outer space,
Recalling its resolution 32/195 of 20 December
1977 concerning the tenth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Treaty on Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies,4
1. Endorses the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites States which have not yet become parties
to international treaties regulating the peaceful uses
of outer space to give consideration to ratifying or
acceding to those international agreements;
3. Notes with satisfaction that the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space at its seventeenth session continued:
(a) Its efforts to elaborate draft principles governing the use by States of artificial earth satellites for
direct television broadcasting;
(b) Its efforts to formulate draft principles relating to the legal implications of remote sensing of the
earth from space;
( c) Its efforts to complete the draft treaty relating
to the moon;
( d) Its discussion of matters relating to the definition and/or delimitation of outer space and outer
space activities, bearing in mind, inter alia, questions
relating to the geostationary orbit;
4. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the
Legal Sub-Committee at its eighteenth session should:
(a) Continue, as matters of priority:
(i) Its efforts to complete the elaboration of
draft principles governing the use by States
of artificial earth satellites for direct television broadcasting;
(ii) Its detailed consideration of the legal implications of remote sensing of the earth from
space, with the aim of formulating draft
principles;
(iii) Its efforts to complete the draft treaty relating to the moon;

Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in
furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend
to all States the benefits derived therefrom, as well as
the importance of international co-operation in this
field, for which the United Nations should continue
to provide a focal point,

( b) Continue to discuss matters relating to the
definition and/ or delimitation of outer space and outer
space activities, bearing in mind, inter alia, questions
relating to the geostationary orbit;

Welcoming the successful completion of the three
recent international outer space missions with participation for the first time in the peaceful exploration
of outer space by the cosmonauts from Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic and Poland
together with the cosmonauts from the Union of

5. Notes with satisfaction that the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its fifteenth session:

2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Annexes, agenda item 53, document A/33/103.
3 Jbid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/33/20).

(c) Include in its agenda an item entitled "Other
matters";

(a) Continued to consider in detail both the current pre-operational/experimental phase and a possible future global/international operational phase of
remote sensing of the earth from space;
4 Resolution

2222 (XXI), annex.

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

( b) Continued to consider the implementation of
the United Nations programme on space applications;
(c) Achieved significant progress in its detailed
consideration of questions relating to the convening
of a United Nations conference on outer space
matters;
(d) Examined the physical nature and technical
attributes of the geostationary orbit;
6. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the
Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee at its sixteenth session should continue its work on the matters
before it, giving priority to the following four items:
(a) Questions relating to remote sensing of the
earth by satellites;
(b) Consideration of the United Nations programme on space applications and the co-ordination
of space activities within the United Nations system;
(c) Question of convening a United Nations conference on outer space;
( d) Questions relating to space transportation
systems;
7. Approves the recommendation of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the coordination of activities between the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee and the Legal Sub-Committee in the area of remote sensing and on the need
to continue such co-ordination at their future sessions;
8. Approves the decision of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to request the
Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee to include in
its agenda consideration of technical aspects and safety
measures relating to the use of nuclear power sources
in outer space for which purpose the Committee
recommended that the Sub-Committee should, unless
it decides otherwise, create a working group of experts5 open to all its members to meet during its
session in accordance with paragraph 76 of the report
of the Committee;3
9. Requests launching States to inform States concerned in the event that a space object with nuclear
power sources on board is malfunctioning with a risk
of re-entry of radio-active materials to the earth;
10. Adopts the recommendations of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space relating
to the convening of a second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space as well as to the arrangements for its preparation, contained in paragraph 75 of the Committee's
report; 3

l l. Endorses the proposed United Nations programme on space applications for 1979, as proposed
to the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee by the
Expert on Space Applications; 0
12. Approves a continuing sponsorship by the
United Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket
Launching Station in India and the CELP A Mar del
Plata Station in Argentina;
13. Requests the specialized agencies to continue
to provide the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
11 Subsequently referred to as the Working Group on the
Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space.
6 Al AC.105/211.

67

Outer Space with progress reports on their work relating to the peaceful uses of outer space;
14. Welcomes the report submitted by the World
Meteorological Organization on its tropical cyclone
project, 7 in response to General Assembly resolution
32/196 A, and requests the World Meteorological
Organization to continue submitting annual status
reports on the project;
15. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments
which acted as hosts to, offered fellowships for, or
otherwise assisted in the holding of, international
training seminars and workshops on space applications, particularly for the benefit of developing
countries;
l 6. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work, in accordance
with the present and previous resolutions of the
General Assembly, to consider, as appropriate, new
projects in outer space activities and to submit a
report to the Assembly at its thirty-fourth session,
including it views on which subjects should be studied
in the future.
51 st plenary meeting
JO November 1978
33/112.

United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East
A

ASSISTANCE TO PALESTINE REFUGEES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/90 A of 13 December
1977 and all previous resolutions referred to therein,
including resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948,
Taking note of the report of the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
covering the period from 1 July 1977 to 30 June
1978, 8
I. Notes with deep regret that repatriation or
compensation of the refugees as provided for in paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
has not been effected, that no substantial progress
has been made in the programme endorsed by the
Assembly in paragraph 2 of resolution 513 (VI) of
26 January 1952 for the reintegration of refugees
either by repatriation or resettlement and that, therefore, the situation of the refugees continues to be a
matter of serious concern;
2. Expresses its thanks to the Commissioner-General and to all the staff of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, recognizing that the Agency is doing all it can
within the limits of available resources, and also expresses its thanks to the specialized agencies and private organizations for their valuable work in assisting
the refugees;
3. Notes with regret that a part of the headquarters of the United Nations Relief and Works
7 A/AC.105/225.
8 Official Records

of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/33/13 ).
