THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

17 AUGUST

1978

YORK

CONTENTS
Pa?
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2084)

Adoption

of the agenda

. . _ . . . . . _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . .. . , . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee
on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application
of Solomon Islands for admission to membership
in the United
Nations (S/12814)
. . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . .

1

S/PV.2084

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2084+th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 1’7 August 1978, at 10.30 a.m.
f’re~id~t:

Mr. CHEN Chu (China).

3. The HWSIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): The
Council will now consider the report of the Committee on
the Admission of New Members concerning the application
of Solomon Islands for admission to membership
[S/12814].

~csc~rt: The representatives of the followirlg States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

4. In paragraph 3 of the report, the Committee recommends to the Council the adoption of a draft resolution on
the application for membership of Solomon Islands. In
accordance with the procedure followed on previous
occasions, I propose that the Council should first proceed
to the vote on that draft resolution and that those
representatives who wish to speak do so thereafter. If I hear
no objection, I shall take it that that PTOCedUTe is
acceptable to the members of the Council. Accordingly, I
shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2084)
I. Adoption of the agenda
2. Admission of IICW Mcmbcrs:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Solomon
Islands for admission to membership in the United
Nations (S/12814)

A vote was taker1 by show of hands.
The draf’t resolution was adopted unanimous[y. 1

The mectiug was called to order at I I a.m.

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation Jkom Cf&ese): I slz~ll
immediately request the Secretary-General to transmit this
recommendation to the General Assembly.

Adoption of the agenda
The agcuda was adop tal.

6. I shall now give the floor to those representatives who
asked to speak after the vote.

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Solomon Islands
for admission to membership in the United Nations
(S/l 2814)

7. Mr. BYATT (United Kingdom): Before coming to the
matter which is before the Council today, I should like to
welcome you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council and to congratulate you on having the good
fortune, as your first task for the month, to preside over
the discussion of the admission of a new Member. I should
like also to pay a tribute to the representative of Canada for
his skilful conduct of the Council’s business during July.

1, The PRESIDENT (interprctatiorz from Chinese): I have
received letters dated 17 August from the representatives of
Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea in
which they ask to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the application of Solomon Islands for admission to
membership. In accordance with the provisions of Article
31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure, and in conformity with the usual practice of the
Council, I proposc to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

8. My delegation was very pleased to support the draft
resolution which the Council has just adopted recommending the admission of Solomon Islands to membership. My
country has a long and intimate relationship with the
peoples of the South Pacific. Fiji became a member of the
Commonwealth and a Member of the United Nations in
1970. Since then, two other Commonwealth countries in
the arca have joined the Organization-Papua New Guinea
in 1975 and Samoa in 1976. We have equal pieasure in
supporting the application of Solomon Islands, which
achieved its independence on 7 July this year and became
the thirty-seventh member of the Commonwealth.

2. In view of the limited number of places available at the
COUIIC~~ table, I invite those representatives to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding that they will be invited to take
a place at the Council table when it is their turn to address
the Council.

9. Solomon Islands gained its name when a Spaniard,
Alvaro de Mendana, sighted Iand in 1.568 and spent some

At the tzvitatiotl c)j’ the Presiderlt, Mr. Anderson
(Atrstralia), Mr. S&J~ (Fiji), Mr. Hannah (NLW Zealand)
aud Mr. Matarle (Papua NW Guinea) took the places
reserved fur them at the si& of the Council chafnbfr.

1 Set resolution 433 (1978).
1

takingits placeat the GeneralAssemblysession
next month
asthe 150th Member of the United Nations.

six months exploring the southern part of the group Of
islands. He named them the Isles of Solomon, being
convmced of their great wealth. Besides the name, Mendana
left to the world maps so inaccurate that I99 years passed
before any other sailor from Europe was able to find the
islands which Mendana himself had visited.

16. Mr. LAPOINTE (Canada) (interpretation front
French): Sir, allow me first to convey to you OUTsincere
congratulationson your aCCeSSiOn
to the presidency.We
haveno doubt that the talents we all recognizein you will
enableyou to carry out our work for this month. I also
wish to thank you for your kind words addressedto
AmbassadorBarton, which 1shallconvey to him.

10. My country’s
association with Solomon Islands is
more recent. During the nineteenth century, sugar plantations developed in neighbouring areas, and subsequently
people began to recruit labourers in the islands for these
plantations, The methods of some of the recruiters were
not of a kind which the International Labour Organisation,
or indeed anyone else, would approve. In 1893 the United
Kingdom therefore declared a protectorate over Solomon
Islands in order to stop the brutalities which were occurring. Since that time the association between the United
Kingdom and Solomon Islands has, I believe, been satisfactory to both parties.

17. Once againwe have the pleasureand the honour to
welcome a new Member to the family of the United
Nations.Canadahas a number of reasonsto be pleasedthat
SolomonIslandssubmitted a requestfor membership
in the
Organization. Solomon Islands is a memberof the Commonwealth, another international organization to which
Canadaattachesthe greatestimportance. Thisnewcountry,
which gainedindependenceon 7 July last, is alsoa country
of the Pacific, where, we must not forget, Canadahas
interests.Politically and geographically,Canadawill intensify its contacts with Solomon Islands in the United
Nations, as well as in other organs,and consequentlyit is
with great pleasurethat we supported the resolutionjust
adopted.

11. My delegation has kept the Committee of 242
informed of the successive constitutional changes which
have paved the way for independence. Briefly, in 1960
nominated legislative and executive councils were established to which elected members were introduced for the
first time in 1964. In the short time that has elapsed since
then, Solomon Islands has progressed to complete internal
self-government, and now to independence. My Govemmerit has warmly welcomed the speedy progress of the
people of Solomon Islands to self-determination, I should
like particularly to pay a tribute to the new Prime Minister
of Solomon Islands, Mr. Kenilorea, under whose wise
stewardship the country has spent its last two years as a
British colony.

18. Weare alsopleasedthat the independenceof thisnew
country wasthe outcome of a processof peacefuldevelopment. The representativesof this new country will occupy
their deservedplace in the GeneralAssemblythis year. We
wish to bid them a most cordial welcome, wish them
prosperity and assurethem of our total co-operation.
19. Mr. FUENTES IBAREZ (Bolivia) (interpretationfronl
Spanish): The calling of a Security Council meetingis
almostalways a causefor concern to its members,but this
time that is not the case: the present meetingis characterized by a spirit of peaceand brotherhood.

12. Even so brief a sketch of Solomons history as I have
given should not end without a reference to the blows
which the Islands and their people, like many elsewhere,
suffered during the Second World War. They were the
centre of much fighting; it is perhaps sufficient to recall the
battle of Guadalcanal.

20. It would seem that the presidency being held by
time-honouredChina, so worthily representedby you, Sir,
hasallayedthe ill windswhich at timesblow in our midstas
an echo of the afflictions of peoples.Under your presidency, we have the opportunity of acting pursuant to
Article 4 of the Charter and admitting a new country to
membershipin the United Nations.

13. My Government has assured the Government of
Solomon Islands of the wish of the United Kingdom to
retain close ties with the new State, and has agreed to
contribute some L26 million in the form of grants for
development aid in the four years following the achievement of independence. In addition, of course, existing
grants will continue to be paid,

21. As far asmy delegationis concerned, we do this with
the natural joy which is arousedby so pleasantan event.
This young South Pacific State, which extends as a vast
constellation of luminous islands, will enrich the ecumenicalsignificanceof our Organization.

14. Solomon Islands, with its population of 200,000, and
a land area of 11,500 square miles, is by no means the
smallest country to seek membership in the United Nations,
and we are sure that it has as much to contribute to the
Organization as it has to gain by joining.

22. FOT that plausible reason, MT. President,I wish to
voice our satisfaction at seeingyou presideover our work
for the month of August, a satisfactionwhich is enhanced
by the reasonfor our conveningtoday.

15. In the confident assumption that the General Assembly will in due course take the same view of Solomon
Islands’ application as the Council has done today, my
delegation Iooks forward with great pleasure to seeing a
delegation from Solomon Islands, led by Mr. Kenilorea,
2 SpecialCommittee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
2

23, We are also pleasedto take part in this professionof
faith in the tenets of the Charter expressedby the
“youngest nation in the world”, asit hasbeencalledby its
Prime Minister, MT. Kenilorea, becauseit embodiesthe
experienceof a country which, although a mere child in
terms of the date of its constitution as an independent

State, is no stranger to the sufferings of war or the evils of
colonialism and foreign dependency,

the resolutions adopted by its various organs, has always
supported the right of colonial countries and peoples to
accede to independence.

24. We are certain that Solomon Islands will be a loyal and
committed Member of the United Nations and that this will
be reflected not only in the development of its internal life
as well as in its prosperity and growth, but also in the
cordial projection of its spirit towards all member nations
of the international community.

30. The people of Solomon Islands has clearly shown that
it is able to meet the requirements of Article 4 of the
Charter. The recognition of Solomon Islands not only by
countries of the third world but also by socialist and
Western countries has shown that its people fulfil the
necessary conditions required by international law and
custom. In the application for admission to membership,
the Prime Minister of Solomon Islands solemnly declared
that his people accepted all the obligations contained in the
Charter as a whole, was in a position to comply with them
and undertook to fulfil those obligations in all loyalty and
conscien ce ,

25. My delegation would be remiss if, in concluding our
remarks, we failed to congratulate Ambassador Barton,
through his worthy colleague Mr. Lapointe, on the wise and
efficient manner in which he conducted our work in the
month of July, It was not his luck to preside over the birth
of a new State, but he came close to it, and we hope that
his tireless, well-directed efforts will soon enjoy a full
measure of success.

31. The delegation of Gabon is fully convinced that that
people not only has shown that it is faithful to the lofty
principles of the Charter but also has expressed its resolve
to ensure their implementation in all honesty. The United
Nations, in welcoming Solorno~l
islands to its ranks, is
welcoming a Member State which will firmly support the
struggle for peace, international security, mutual understanding and friendship among the peoples of the third
world.

26. Mr. ELJEAAN (Kuwait): Sir, it is a pleasant task for
me to congratulate you on behalf of the Kuwait delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to recall the excellent relations between our
two countries. It also gives me great pleasure to express our
gratitude to our President for last month, the representative
of Canada. Under the guidance of Ambassador Barton, the
Council was able last month to take historic decisions.

32. Furthermore, we should not forget the fact that most
of our countries began their independent existence as
fragile and weak sovereign States and that, with the passage
of time, many of them are now able to make a positive
contribution
to the quest for the well-being of all the
peoples of the world. Consequently, in a spirit of cooperation and understanding, we wish to offer all possible
aid and friendship to this newly-independent country and
warmly welcome it to our ranks. We are all firmly
convinced that Solomon Islands, like other Members of the
United bkitioIlS,
will firmly endeavour to fulfil the ideals of
the Charter.

27. Kuwait has always supported the principle of universality in the United Nations. This support has been
reaffirmed by statements made by the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad, during various sessions of the General Assembly.
Today we are pleased to support the recommendation to
admit a new member to the family of nations. We
congratulate Solomon Islands on attaining independence,
its declaration to accept the obligations enshrined in the
Charter and its undertaking to fulfil those obligations.
Kuwait welcomes Solomon Islands as a Member of the
United Nations. We are gratified to see the membership of
the United Nations grow and another country achieve
independence. We are confident that Solomon Islands will
play a constructive role in the work of our Organization.
We wish it peace and progress and we assure it of Kuwait’s
co-operation.

33. Mr. EOKINE (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(inrerpretation from Russiun): Mr. President, allow me first
of all to congratulate you on your assumption of the very
responsible duties of President of the Security Council for
this month. I should like also to say how grateful we are to
the representative of Canada, Ambassador Barton, ~110 SO
ably guided the proceedings of the Council during July.

28. Mr. ADMINA (Gabon) (interpretation from French).
Mr. President, first allow me to congratulate you on your
accession to the very important and responsible post of
President of the Security Council. I am convinced that your
long experience and your recognized competence are very
appropriate for the carrying out of the delicate task YOU
have before you this month. I ,also wish to pay a tribute to
your predecessor, Ambassador Barton of Canada, for the
masterly manner in which he conducted the proceedings of
the Council in July.

34. Today we are witnessing a momentous event in the
history of the United Nations. The Security Council has
just adopted a recommendation to admit SO~O~IIOII Islands
as a Member, the youngest independent State in the world.
35. It is natural and right that that State shouldwish, as
one of the first steps in its independent existence, to
becomeinvolved actively in the world community, to be a
full-fledged member. In the application for admissionto
membershipmadeby the Prime Minister of that country we
seea declaration to the effect that SolomonIslandsaccepts
the obligations contained in the Charter of the United
Nations and solemnly undertakes to fulfil them.

29. Having studied the letter dated 24 July 1978 from the
Prime Minister of Solomon Islands to the Secretary-General
[see S/12801] relating to the application of his country for
admission to membership in the United Nations, the
delegation of Gabon notes that the valiant people of
Solomon Islands justly deserves the right to take a place in
this
vast international community. The United Nations, in

36. The delegation of the Soviet Union supported with
satisfaction the positive recommendationof the Council on
3

that question. We believe that this recommendation is a
fresh step towards the total elimination of the colonial
system, which will enhance the development of relations of
equality and co-operation among all States, large and small.
It is noteworthy
that, after the adoption of the Council’s
recommendation
by the General Assembly, Solomon
Islands will become the 150th Member of the Organization.
This can be seen as a kind of jubilee in its history, a sign
that it is growing closer to the goal of universality.

colonial regimeis opening a new pagein the history of its
people who, for many decades,languishedunder colonial
domination. Now they must strengthen their young State
andprotect it from any outsideinterference.
41. The Soviet delegation would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the independent State and the
people of Solomon Islandsin connexion with the positive
decisiontaken by the Security Council on its application
for membership.Wewish it peaceand success
in its national
development.

37. The Soviet people sympathize with and understand
the aspirations of the people of Solomon Islands. When the
independence of that country was proclaimed, the Soviet
Government sent to the Prime Minister, Mr. Kenilorea, its
heartfelt congratulations and best wishes for the progress
and well-being of its people on the way to independent
development. The telegram from the President of the
Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, Mr. Kosygin, said:

42. Mr. HRCKA (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation from
Russian);Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you
on your assumptionof the responsiblepost of Presidentof
the Security Council for the month of August. I should also
like to take this opportunity to thank the representativeof
Canada,AmbassadorBarton, for his able and competent
guidanceof the work of the Council during the month of
July..

“The Soviet Government, pursuing its unswerving
policy based on the principles of the equality and
self-determination
of peoples and the development of
friendship and co-operation among all countries, by this
communication recognizes Solomon Islands as an independent and sovereign State and expresses willingness to
establish diplomatic relations with that country.”

43. The CzechoslovakSocialistRepublic consistently supports the inalienableright of all countries and peoplesto
self-determination and independencein accordancewith
the Charter of the United Nations and the historic
Declaration on the Granting of Independenceto Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV). Therefore, the proclamation of
independenceby Solomon Islandsis consideredby us to be
a new important achievementin the processof decolonization In this connexion, we shouldlike to point out the fact
that in the Pacific Ocean region there are still Territories,
such as Micronesiaand others, whosepeoplesare not able
to enjoy their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence.

The telegram also expressed the hope that the Soviet Union
and Solomon Islands would develop rcIations of friendship
and co-operation for the well-being of the peoples of our
countries and the cause of peace.
38. I should like to mention that the admission to the
United Nations of a State newly liberated from colonial
dependence detnonstrates every time the historic significance of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which was adopted on
the initiative of our country.

44. The delegationof the CzechoslovakSocialistRepublic
supportedthe application of Solomon Islandsfor membership.Weareconvinced that the positive recommendationof
the Security Council welcoming Solomon Islandsto membershipin the Organization will be one more step alongthe
road to destroying completely the colonial system, to
promoting the implementation of the principle of universality in the United Nations and to encouraging the
development of relations of equality and co-operation
amongail States.

39. The Soviet Union, true to its policy of principle
supporting the struggle of colonial peoples for freedom and
independence, will consistently back those peoples until
colonialism has been completely eliminated throughout the
world. This also refers to the peoples in the colonial
Territories of the Pacific. It is no secret that in that region
of the warld we still find a policy depriving the people of
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence. The people of Guam are still biding their time, as
indeed are those of so-called American Samoa, Tuvalu etc.,
as well as the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands
(Micronesia). The Security Council, in accordance with
Article 83 of the Charter and the Trusteeship Agreement of
1947 between the Security Council and the United States,
bears full responsibility for the latter, since the Council is
the only body that exercises all functions on behalf of the
United Nations for such Territories. In this connexion, the
Soviet delegation would draw the attention of tnembers of
the Council to the statement of the PermanentMissionof
the Soviet Union to the United Nations, dated 14 August
1978, contained in document S/12811. Our delegation
believes that it is a matter of urgency for the Council to
follow carefully the situation in the Trust Territory of the
Pacific Islandsand, if necessary,to examineit.

45. At the time SolomonIslandsgainedits independence,
the Prime Minister of our Republic, Comrade Lubomir
Strougal, sent a telegramto the Prime Minister of Sofomon
Islands,Mr. Kenilorea,stating the following:
“The Czechoslovakpeople have followed very sympathetically the efforts of the people of SolomonIslandsto
achieve freedom, the right to self-determination and
national sovereignty. We welcome the proclamation of
independenceof your country with all our heart and we
wish your people prosperity in freedom and continued
well-being.”
The telegramfurther emphasizesthat:

40. In the south-west Pacific Oceanregion a newindependent State is beginning its life. The elimination of the

“The all-round development of friendly relations between the CzechoslovakSocialist Republic and Solomon
4

Islands will be an important contribution to peaceful
co-operation between peoples and the peoples of our two
countries.”

the processof decolonization of Solomon Islands,we were
pleased to vote in favour of the Security Council recommendation to the General Assembly that Solomon Islands
should be admitted to membershipin this world Organization.

46. The delegation of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
would like to take this opportunity once again to congratulate the people of Solomon Islands on gaining their
independence and to wish them peace and every success in
the further all-round development of their country.

53. We have also taken note of the fact that, in the letter
he addressedto the Secretary-General on behalf of Solomon Islands (see S/12801/, Prime Minister Kenilorea
expressedhis acceptanceof the obligations contained in tile
Charter of the United Nations and his solemnundertaking
to fulfn them.

47. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): I should
like first to join my colleagues, Mr.. President, in congratulating you on your assumption of the office of
President of the Council for this month and in recording
our appreciation of the skill with which your predecessor,
Ambassador Barton, presided over the historic actions of
the Council during the month of July.

54. The advent of this new State and its entry into the
Organization will contribute to the strengthening of the
principle of universality, for our Organization includes a
concert of countries irrespective of their political, social or
economic systems, the race or creed of their inhabitants,
their military or economic power, their size or density of
population. That is why we expect Solomon Islands to
make a valuable contribution to the promotion and
protection of the principles and purposesthat are the raison
d’etre of the United Nations.

48. The United States is pleased to support the application
of Solomon Islands for membership in the United Nations.
Solomon Islands achieved its independence on 7 July this
year in peace and concord, and with the support and
friendship of the United Kingdom and many other countries, among which we count ourselves. We have followed
the progress of Solomon Islands towards independence with
satisfaction at the smooth transition which has been
effected. Both the former administering Power, the United
Kingdom, and the leaders of SoIomon Islands are to be
congratulated for the manner in which this took place.

55. My delegation understands that the Government of
the administering Power of the former colonial Territory,
the United Kingdom, has adopted important decisions in
terms of ensuring its co-operation towards the future
development of the new State. We consider this to be a
positive and healthy step.

49. The inhabitants of the new democracy will now guide
their own destiny. We note that they have already begun to
shoulder international responsibility as the future headquarters of the South Pacific Regional Fisheries Organization. We wish them well as they pursue internal development and economic well-being, and we are pleased that our
Government, through the Peace Corps, has had an opportunity to play an active role in this.

56. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express its
faith in the future of Solomon Islandsin continued progress
and prosperity and in a climate of work, peace and
freedom.
57, Mr. HUSSON (France) (interpretation from Frer~lz):
Mr. President, it is my pleasureto extend to you heartfelt
congratulations on your accessionto the Council presidency.. My delegation cannot but be delighted to see the
representative of the People’s Republic of China, a great
country with which France enjoys excellent relations, once
more giving us the benefit of his vast experience and
wisdom. Nobody doubts that under your guidance our
Council will be able to accomplishthe tasksentrusted to it.
I wish, furthermore, through the Charge d’Affaires of
Canada, to thank AmbassadorBarton for the very effective
way in which he conducted our very delicate work during
the particularly busy month of July.

50. We support the application of Solomon Islands for
membership in the confidence that the principles which
inspired the leaders of the new State to guide their people
successfully to independence will continue to guide them in
our common effort to establish a world of peace, justice
and prosperity.
51. Mr, CHADERTON MATOS (Venezuela) (irztcrpwtation from Spanishl: Mr, President, 1 should like to congratulate you, on behalf of my delegation, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August in your aapacity as representative of
the People’s Republic of China. We are certain that your
knowledge and experience will enable you, as President of
the Council, to perform your duties successfully. We &O
wish to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Barton, the worthy representative of Canada, a
supremely peaceful and peace-loving country, for the wise
manner in which he conducted our historic deliberations
last month.

58. France warmly welcomed the application by Solomon
Islands for admissionto membershipin the United Nations.
The French recall that when, in December1766, the Count
of Bougainville left for a tour of the world on the frigate La
Boudeuse, he passedthrough the Magellan Straits and
visited Tahiti, Samoaand the New Hebridesbefore reaching
Solomon Islands.
59. The archipelago, formerly under United Kingdom
sovereignty, is now reaching a new stagein its history.. As
an independent and sovereign State, it will now be making
its own contribution to the activities of the international
community. There is no doubt that in requestingadmission
to membership in the United Nations Solomon Islands is

52. Faithful to the traditional policy of Venezuela in
support of the self-determination and independence of all
peoples and the elimination of the last vestiges of CO~Onialism and in the light of the background information on
5

peace and

Solomon Islands in the years ahead. We welcome future
co-operation with Solomon Islands in the United Nations.

60. Our Organization strives for universality and is duty.
bound to accommodate all States that fulfil the required
conditions, as is indeed the case for Solomon Islands.

67, Let me conclude by expressing our warm wishes for
lzappiness and prosperity to the people of Solomon Islands.

showing its will to work for international
prosperity in the spirit of the Charter.

68. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Allow me, Sir, at the
outset to offer you my delegation’s compliments on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August. We are confident that the Council
will benefit from your personal qualities of prudence,
wisdom and understanding, and your skill and experience as
a diplomat are guarantees of the successful outcome of our
meetings.

61. My country has already indicated its wish to establish
diplomatic relations with the new State, which is its
neighbour in the Pacific. France is ready to have relations
of friendship and co-operation with it in all fields. That is
why France unhesitatingly voted in favour of the admission
of Solomon Islands as the 150th Member of the United
Nations.
62. Mr. VON HASSELL (Federal Republic of Germany):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to congratulate YOU
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month. We are glad to work under
your wise leadership in the auspicious deliberations on the
admission of a new Member to the United Nations. The
relations between the People’s Republic of China and my
country are high& valued by my Government. We are
pleased to note the extent to which these relations have
been developed in recent years.

69. My delegation wishes also to express to the representative of Canada, Ambassador William H. Barton, its
varm and most cordial appreciation and gratitude and its
admiration for his devotion and statesmanlike efforts in
presiding over the Council during the month of July.
70. My delegation is delighted to support the application
by Solomon Islands for admission to membership in the
United Nations.
71 I I should like to state that it is my delegation’s firm
belief that the achievement of the universality of the
United Nations is an essential condition for the fulfilment
of the task of promoting world peace and co-operation,
entrusted to our Organization by its Charter.

63. I should also like to express the gratitude of my
delegation for the efficient way in which Ambassador
Barton of Canada conducted our deliberations on a very
complex issue last month. We appreciate the important
progress achieved by the Council under his presidency.

72. Mauritius has constantly favoured the progressive
completion of the process of the self-determination of
peoples all over the world, and we take this opportunity to
congratulate both the United Kingdom and the people of
Solomon Islands on this happy day.

64. My delegation voted in Favour of the draft resolution
recommending the admission of Solomon Islands to membership in the United Nations. We welcome its independence as a further step in the process of decolonization,
giving effect to the principle of the self-determination of
peoples. The Federal Republic of Germany was among the
first to recognize Solomon Islands as a sovereign State. To
this effect, the President of the Federal Republic of
Germany addressed a message to Solomon Islands on 7 July
1978. My Government feels that the region of the South
Pacific is becoming more and more important. This fact will
be underscored by the admission of Solomon Islands to the
United Nations. Its admission will bring us closer to the
Organization’s aim of universality.

73. At the same time, the increasing number of Members
of the United Nations is in our view the best evidence of
the most significant and positive development in the history
of mankind. We feel it is a privilege to have been in a
position to contribute with our vote in the Council to the
fulfilment of the aspiration of the new State in recommending that it should be allowed to join this international
Organization. When a new State joins the United Nations, it
brings to it a wealth of particular values and a variety of
experience which are in our view important, indeed
essential, for the work and the world.wide range of the
Organization.

65. The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the fact
that regional co-operation in the South Pacific is being
constantly enhanced within the framework of the South
Pacific Forum, The progress of Solomon Islands itself
towards independence demonstrates goodwill and fruitful
regional co-operation. These are necessary prerequisites for
peaceful development promoting political stability in the
interest of the community of States and particularly of the
people of Solomon Islands.

74. My delegationwas glad to cast a positive vote on the
draft resolution recommendingto the General Assembly
the admissionof SolomonIslands,and we look forward to
friendly co-operation with that new State both on a
multilateral and on a bilateral basis.

66. The States in the South Pacific, including of course
Solomon Islands, need assistance for their development.
The Federal Republic of Germany is ready to make its
contribution towards their economic and social development. We hope that Solomon Islands will become a party to
the Convention of Lome. The Federal Republic of Germany looks forward to developing its relations with

75. Mr. JAIPAL (India): I wish, on behalf of my delegation, to extend to you, Sir, our warm greetingsandgood
wisheson your assumptionof the office of Presidentof the
Security Council for this month, and to expressOUT
conviction that your amiablepersonality, your good sense
and your wide experience will be of great value to the
Council duringthis month and later on too.
6

76. My delegation was glad to associate itself with the
adoption of the draft resolution recommending to the
General Assembly that Solomon Islands should be admitted
to membership in the United Nations. We are looking
forward to welcoming this new Member at the next session
of the General Assembly.

7,250,OOOAustralian dollarsfor developmentalassistance
to
Solomon Islands during the three financial years ,976 to
1979 on a wide range of projects, from medicalteamsto
technical assistanceand training awards.Weare particularly
interested in respondingto the request of the Government
of Solomon Islandsto help develop its cattle industry.

77. We were happy to learn from the British delegation
how these Pacific islands came to be called the Isles of
Solomon by a Spanish explorer. This is an important
clarification in case the descendants of King Solomon
should entertain any wrong notions.

84. In conclusion, I am confident that the membershipof
Solomon islands and its participation in the work of the
United Nations can only strengthen the Organization. At
the sametime as it is seekingmembershipin the United
Nations, Solomon islandsis also assuming
its new role asan
independent memberof our region, wherewe welcomeit as
a member in the South Pacific Forum. As I mentioned
earlier, Solomon Islandshasachieved independenceas the
consequenceof an orderly constitutional processwhich is
an example to others participating in the process of
decolonization. Australia has close and friendly ties with
the Solomons, and we look forward confidently to the
further developmentof this relationshipin the future.

78. I should like to take this opportunity to extend to the
Government and people of Solomon Islands our congratulations on their attainment on 7 July this year of political
independencefrom British colonial rule. The British GOVernment also deservesour congratulations for having
brought yet another Territory to that stage of political
evolution when it is in a position to join this Organization
of sovereignnation-Statesas an equal Member. In doing SO
in this case,the British have certainly put SolomonIslands
firmly on the world map, thereby rectifying the inaccuraciesof well-meaningSpanishcartographers.

85. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fkom Chinese):The
next speakeris the representativeof PapuaNew Guinea. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

79. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):The
next speakeris the representativeof Australia. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

86. Mr. MATANE (PapuaNew Guinea): I amhonoured to
be granted this opportunity to addressthis particular
meeting of the Security Council which is consideringthe
application of the newly independent State of Solomon
Islandsfor admissionto membershipin the United Nations.
My delegation is very happy indeed to speak on the
application of Solomon Islandsbecausethe newly independent country is geographically our closestneighbour and
alsoa Pacific nation.

80. Mr. ANDERSON (Australia): I shouldlike to beginby
thanking you, Mr. President,and the other membersof the
Security Councilfor allowing me to take part in this debate
on the admissionof Solomon Islandsto membershipin the
United Nations.

87. The entire membership of the Security Council is
aware of the ideals of newly independent nations. The
adoption of the resolution recommendingthe admissionto
membershipof Solomon Islandsis in line with the view that
nations have equal status, whether they be developingor
developed, It wasnearly three years ago,in 1975,when my’ .
country, Papua New Guinea, attained the statusof sovereignty and independence.Since our admissionto membership in the United Nations in that sameyear we have
benefited greatly from this august international Organization. During our short period of associationwith the United
Nations, we have also come to appreciatethe fact that it
provides a forum where problems of the entire world or of
individual nations are given equal consideration.Webelieve
that the more new nationsjoin the better it will becomefor
the recognition of problemsaffecting mankind.

81. It is always a pleasureto welcomea new Member to
the United Nations. For an Australian representative,it is
particularly satisfying when the new Member is one of
Australia’s neighbours,and when its application is consideredat a meetingof the Security Council presidedover
by the distinguishedrepresentative of another member
country of the Asian-Pacificregion.
82. As a neighbour with long and close ties with the
Solomonsand as a member of the Committee of 24,
Australiahasfollowed closely the processof decolonization
which led to the independence of Solomon Islands on
7 July this year. The processwaspeacefuland harmonious,
andthe United Kingdom, the former administeringPower,
deserves
commendationfor the way in which it responded
to the wishesof the people of the Territory. This was
demonstratedparticularly during the Constitutional Conferencein London in Septemberlast year, when agreement
wasreachedon a new Constitution, on new regulationson
land titles and citizenship and, of most importance,on the
terminationof colonialrule on 7 July 1978.

88. Papua New Guinea attaches great importance to its
relations with the international community, in particular its
relations with the South Pacific nations, as we seesimilarities in social and economic situations and,above all, we
share the sameocean. Wein the South Pacific, becauseof
our small land area and population, were left almost
unnoticed by the world community until recently, when
our leaders started to describe the needsof the region in
various international meetings, especially at the United
Nations. We are equally glad to say that there is an
increasing awarenessof the existence of the South Pacific
region.

83. The task facing Solomon Islandsdoesnot end with
independence;in many ways it has only begun. We are
therefore pleasedto note that the United Kingdom will
continue to co-operate with and provide developmental
assistance
to the Government of Solomon Islands.My own
Governmentwill also continue to help. It has allocated
7

89. The situation in the Pacific area was notably summarized by the Honourable Lester Wolff, Chairman of the
International Relations Sub-Committee for Asia and the
Pacific of the United States House of Representatives. He
said:
“For too long our overriding concern with north-east
Asia’s security, our involvement in Indo-China and our
continuing interest in normalizing relations With the
People’s Republic of China have diverted attention from
the south-west Pacific. As a result, we have generally
failed to take note of the fact that, beginning with the
independence of Western Samoa in 1962, Nauru in 1968,
Fiji in 1970, Papua New Guinea in 1975 and most
recently the Solomon Islands on July 7 of this year, the
south-west Pacific has witnessed over a decade and a half
of decolonization and peaceful change. Certainly this
experience is unique in the twentieth
century, and
judging from all indications it will again be repeated with
the independence of Tuvalu, the former Ellice Islands,
later this year arid the Gilbert Islands in 1979.

93. Mr. SINGH (Fiji): Mr. President, I am deeply grateful
and appreciative to you and the other members of the
Council for allowing me to make a statement regarding the
application of Solomon Islands for membership in the
United Nations, which has just been approved by fhe
Council. I make my statement, first, as the representative of
Fiji and, secondly, as the Chairman of the Asian group.
94. Solomon Islands is a very close neighbour of ours and
is linked to us by custom, by culture, by tradition and by
bonds that stretch back for several hundred years. We both
belong to the South Pacific, a region that to date has been
relatively peaceful.
95. Corning from Fiji, we are aware that the location of
the island developing countries of the South Pacific is a
major disadvantage vis-l-vis the rest of the world, including
the bulk of the developing countries, As island economies
which are still a long way from self-sufficiency in their
primary needs, they are located far away from their main
trading partners. This has severe implications for their
economic development.

“Equally significant is the fact that, as functioning
democracies, the emerging island nations have made the
South Pacific the scene of ongoing and democratic
experiments in nation building. Yet, with the exception
of Nauru, serious development probiems and critical
policy choices confront the island Governments”.

96. For small territories of the Pacific, there is a need for
regional grouping. In this regard, we have been assisted in
considerable measure by our developed neighbours. Solomon Islands has contributed in no small measureto our
regional organizations,including the South Pacific Commission, the South Pacific Forum and its administrativearm
the South Pacific Bureaufor Economic Co-operation,all of
which are committed to the over-all progressand development of the region.

Congressman Wolff went on to say that:
“During the Sub-Committee’s January study mission to
Asia and the Pacific, Government officials in Papua New
Guinea and in Australia emphasized that the ability of the
south-west Pacific island Governments to provide for the
material well-being of their population is the key to
domestic stability and to insulating the region against the
destabilizing super-Power competition.”

97. The peopleand Government of Solomon Islandshave
a reputation in our part of the world for kindness,
franknessand loyalty. Though smallin termsof population
and resources,we believe that the country’s long and rich
tradition will be a sourceof enrichment to all of us whenit
joins the ranksof the Organization.

90. As I come to the end of my brief statement, 1 should
like to extend to the former administering Power, the
United Kingdom, the gratitude of my delegation and my
Government for its excellent efforts in leading Solomon
Islands to its independence. This reflects the readiness on
the part of colonial Powers to respond favourably to the
desires of the peoples of dependent Territories and their
eagerness to foster the Charter of the United Nations. My
delegation is hopeful that, in admitting Solomon Islands,
the United Nations will further fulfil its obligation, according to which the size or wealth of a nation is not a factor in
its becoming a Member of the Organization. What matters is
the pride of the nation and the determination of its people
to join in the co-operative goal of solving the problems
affecting the entire universe.

98. Finally, we believe that, with the accessionof Solomon Islandsto membershipof the world Organization,the
United Nations will havemoved astep closerto its ultimate
goal of universality. On this important occasion,we should
alsolike to expressour belief that the remainingdependent
Territories seekingindependencewill alsobe able to attain
their freedom in accordancewith the relevant provisions
enshrined in the Charter, as well as in the historic
Declaration on decolonization containedin GeneralAssembly resolution 1514 (XV),
99. Fiji associatesitself fully with those who have indicated their support for the admissionof Solomon Islands.

91. Along with those few remarks, my delegation thanks
the Security Council for the unanimous adoption of the
resolution on the admission of Solomon Islands to the
United Nations, We look forward with much interest to the
new contributions to world peace and security and the
social and economic development of mankind which will be
made by Solomon islands.

100. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):The
next speakeris the representativeof New Zealand,whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to makehis
statement.
101. Mr. HANNAH (New Zealand): Mr. President,first, 1
should like to thank you and the other membersof the
Council for inviting me to participate during the consideration of the application by Solomon Islandsfor admissionto
membershipin the United Nations. I should also like to

92. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Fiji, I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
8

congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of August. It is particularly
fitting that this application should be considered by the
Council under the presidency of the representative of
another nation of the Asian Pacific region.
102. 1 should like to add New Zealand’s voice to those of
previous speakers who have welcomed the Council’s decision to recommend to the General Assembly that Solomon
Islands should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations. As neighbours in the South Pacific region, New
Zealand and Solomon Islands have for many years enjoyed
a warm and friendly relationship, founded on a wide range
of common interests of both regional and bilateral significance. The progress of Solomon Islands to independence
under the positive guidance of the United Kingdom has
been observed with deep satisfaction by my Government.
New Zealand welcomed and marked the emergence of a
fully independent Solomon Islands into the international
community on 7 July by the immediate establishment of a
resident diplomatic mission and by doubling the share of
New Zealand’s development assistance programme allocated
to Solomon Islands. The entry of Solomon Islands into the
United Nations, coming after those of Fiji and Papua New
Guinea and, most recently, that of the Independent State
of Western Samoa, will add further to the interrelationship
between the United Nations and the vast Pacific region.
103. My Government looks forward to a long and fruitful
co-operation with the representatives of Solomon Islands,
not only bilaterally and in our regional affairs, but also now
in the activities of the United Nations, and we hope that
the General Assembly will facilitate this co-operation by
taking early and favourable action on the recommendation
of the Security Council.
104. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): As
there are no further names inscribed on the list of speakers,
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of CHINA.
105. On 7 July 1978, Solomon Islands proclaimed its
independence. On 24 July, Solomon Islands applied for
membership in the United Nations and declared its acceptance of the obligations contained in the Charter. The
Chinese delegation holds that, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter, Solomon Islands is
qualified for membership in the United Nations. We fully
support its application and are in favour of the Security
Council recommending its admission to the General Assembly.
106. The people of Solomon Islands have a tradition of
waging valiant struggles. Over the past few centuries, they
have fought dauntlessly against colonialism of all descrip-

tions. Since the Second World War, the struggle of the
people of Solomon Islands for national independence has
further mounted. The independence of Solomon Islands is a
result of the protracted struggle persistently carried on by
its people, as well as another new victory won by the
oppressed nations and peoples throughout the world in
their struggle for national liberation. The victory of the
people of Solomon Islands once again demonstrates that
countries want independence, nations want liberation and
the people want revolution and that this is an irresistible
historical trend of our time.
107. At present, the rivalry between the super-Powers for
world hegemony is becoming ever fiercer and is extending
to every corner of the world. That late-coming super-Power,
in particular, is doing its utmost to carry out infiltration
and expansion in the South Pacific region, However, its acts
have met with the firm opposition of the countries and
peoples of this region. We are gratified to note that, on the
occasion of the independence of the country, His Excellency Peter Kauona Keninaraisoona Kenilorea, Prime
Minister of Solomon Islands, solemnly declared that the
people of Solomon Islands would build their country and
enrich their own culture by taking “self-reliance”
and
“regional co-operation” as the guideline. We believe that,
after their independence, the people of Solomon Islands
will strengthen their unity with the other countries and
peoples in the South Pacific region and make positive
contributions
towards safeguarding the security of this
region. We sincerely wish the people of Solomon Islands
continued new successes in their just cause of combating
imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism, safeguarding
national independence and State sovereignty, developing
national economy and culture and building their own
country.
108. On the occasion of the proclamation of independence of Solomon Islands, Hua Kuo-feng, Premier of the
State Council of the People’s Republic of China, sent a
cable to His Excellency Prime Minister Kenilorea, expressing warm congratulations to him and informing him of the
Chinese Government’s decision to recognize Solomon Islands. Both China and Solomon Islands belong to the third
world, and the people of our two countries have always
sympathized with and supported each other. It is our hope
and belief that the friendship between our two countries
and peoples will develop and grow stronger in our common
struggles in the future. We are also convinced that, upon its
admission to membership in the United Nations, Solomon
Islands will make positive contributions to the realization
of the purposes and principles of the Charter, together with
all the other Member States that uphold justice.
The meetingrose at 12.20 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your
bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

or

from
bookstores
and distributors
write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc cntier. Informee-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC

l-IOJW’IHT’h

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

EIBAAHHfl

OPI-AHN

PUBLICACIONES

3AIJJiH

DE LAS

OlYbEARHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAIWH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventns,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S. 1.00

(or equivalent

currencies)

78-70005--February

1980-2,200
