S/2020/1290

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 22 December 2020 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2149 (2014)
establishing the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and resolution 2552 (2020) extending its
mandate until 15 November 2021, as well as Council reso lution 1996 (2011)
establishing the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and resolution
2514 (2020) extending its mandate until 15 March 2021.
As you are aware, tensions have been rising in the Central African Republic
ahead of presidential and legislative elections, the first rounds of which are scheduled
for 27 December 2020. A series of attacks has been carried out in the western part of
the country since the Constitutional Court announced its decision, on 3 December
2020, aimed at invalidating five prospective presidential candidates for failing to meet
the “good character” criteria provided for in the electoral code of the country. Am ong
those candidates ruled as ineligible to contest the presidential election was François
Bozizé, former President of the Central African Republic, who has been travelling in
the country since 1 December 2020.
The decision of the Constitutional Court has been used by some actors as a
pretext to push for a political transition, which they could not achieve through legal
or political means. Although his Kwa Na Kwa (KNK) party has denounced the
decision of the Constitutional Court, alleging political manipul ation, Mr. Bozizé has
since publicly acknowledged the prerogatives of the Court, called on his supporters
to remain peaceful and endorsed the candidature of Anicet Georges Dologuélé, as he
did during the second round of the election in 2016. However, the o pposition political
coalition, which includes the parties of Messrs. Bozizé and Dologuélé, subsequently
announced on 20 December 2020 the suspension of its campaigns, citing the impact
of insecurity on campaign activities, among other concerns, and calling for the
postponement of the elections until after the convening of political consultations with
all relevant national stakeholders.
Amid the increasingly tense political environment, security incidents have risen
significantly this month, with armed groups perpetrating violent and sometimes
coordinated attacks against the national defence and security forces, humanitarian
actors and MINUSCA. They further attempted to disrupt the electoral campaign
through physical attacks and intimidation of candidates. M ajor armed groups
signatory to the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic of February 2019, both anti-balaka and ex-Séléka armed groups,
announced on 15 December 2020 the formation of a coalition aligned with
Mr. Bozizé, which they called on other armed groups to join. Three days later, on

20-17753 (E)

301220

*2017753*

S/2020/1290

18 December 2020, simultaneous attacks were perpetrated against national armed
forces positions in Bossembele and Yaloké in Ombella-Mpoko Prefecture, and in
Bozoum, Ouham-Pendé Prefecture, triggering civilian displacement and fuelling
speculation about an imminent coup attempt. Subsequently, armed group movements
and attacks have continued to multiply in locations of strategic significance.
In all instances, and in support of ongoing political facilitation by my Special
Representative for the Central African Republic, Mankeur Ndiaye, MINUSCA
responded robustly in accordance with its mandate and the integrated electoral
security plan, deploying quick-reaction forces, as well as reinforcing its presence
along strategic routes and in Bangui, while also providing essential support for the
electoral process. While MINUSCA has in place detailed, appropriate and well exercised electoral security and contingency plans, the present scenario of a military
alliance in support of Mr. Bozizé, between anti-balaka and the same ex-Séléka groups
that ended his presidency in 2013, poses significant additional challenges. Moreover,
MINUSCA reinforcement has been necessary in those areas where the envisaged
deployment of national security and defence forces did not occur in accordance with
the integrated security plan due to financial or other challenges, or where national
personnel abandoned their posts.
Considering the current situation, and to mitigate the risk of overstretch, it
would be prudent to temporarily augment the capabilities of MINUSCA, including in
the context of inter-mission cooperation. Specifically, I recommend the temporary
redeployment, for a two-month period, of two infantry companies and two military
utility helicopters from UNMISS, with immediate effect upon the approval of the
Security Council, to enable MINUSCA to increase its capacity to reinforce security
in critical areas while maintaining the security of Bangui. The utility h elicopters will
be essential for harmonizing the layout of the aviation assets of MINUSCA, ensuring
national coverage and quick intervention to provide security and protect civilians.
Such an augmentation would also provide important reassurance to the peo ple of the
Central African Republic, who continue to suffer the most from the violent
intransigence of a few, and who deserve to have the confidence to exercise their
franchise in a peaceful and secure environment.
The Secretariat is undertaking discussions with the troop-contributing and host
countries, as required by Security Council resolution 1609 (2005) on inter-mission
cooperation. In order to ensure the immediate redeployment of personnel and as sets
from UNMISS to MINUSCA, I would appreciate if the Security Council could grant
advance approval for these proposed arrangements.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council at the earliest opportunity.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

20-17753
