UW-‘ED

! : .:
i ,
,I’
; :

NATIQNS

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 6 AUGUST 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l435)

. .,,.... . ... , ...., ,.. ... ., ,. ..

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8616);
(b) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/861 7);
(cl Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/872 1);
(d) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8724) . . . . . . . . . . .

SIPV.1435

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of fhe Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 6 August 1968, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Jo”aoAugust0 DE ARAUJO CASTRO
(Brazil).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. El-Farra
(Jordan), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel), Mr. A. Hilmy (United
Arab Republic) and Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq) took places at
the Security Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

2. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker on my list is the
representative of the United Arab Republic, on whom I
now call.
3. Mr. HILMY (United Arab Republic): Mr.President,
allow me at the outset to take this opportunity of
welcoming you, both in your capacity as Permanent
Representative of Brazil and as President of the Security
Council for this month.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1435)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8616);
(b) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8617);
(cl Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8721);
(d) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8724).

4. I would also wish to extend my delegation’s welcome to
Ambassador George Ball, the new Permanent Representative of the United States, whose participation in the
discussions will, we are confident, be constructive as well as
objective.
5. As for our esteemed friend Mr. Kutakov, the UnderSecretary-General, whom I consider a personal fiend and
who has been my neighbour for many years in the Special
Political Committee, I extend to him my delegation’s
warmest welcome.
6. We were subjected yesterday once more to one of
Mr. Tekoah’s harangues, to which by now, we assume, the
Council has become immunized. It contained, as usual,
more than its fair share of stale arguments, falsifications of
fact, distortions of history, not to mention a vague
reference to peace on earth-all of this quoted in a tone of
arrogance unbecoming to the serenity of this body and
incompatible with the decorum conventional to the community of nations. It is not my intention to try the
patience of the Council with a detailed refutation of all the
false allegations advanced by the Israeli representative; yet I
do have the firm intention of setting the record straight as
to the parts of his statement where the distortion was too
flagrant and the falsifications too glaring.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8616);
Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Repreu
sentative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8617);
Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8721);
Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8724)

7. The Israeli representative seems to be very fond of
referring, as he inevitably does, to the so-called Arab
aggression. Here I hasten to state that if aggressionthere be,
the reference should automatically be to Israel, to Israel’s
aggressionand to Israel’s aggressivedesigns.

The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken yesterday by the Council [1434th’meeting] I now
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representatives of Jordan, Israel, the United Arab Republic
and Iraq to take seats at the Council table in order to
participate, without vote, in the debate on the item under
consideration.

8.. Was it not aggression when a transplanted population,
people who seemingly had immigrated into the land of
peace to seek refuge from the Nazi tyranny and the rule of
terror, having scarcely set foot in Palestine, resorted
themselves to the rule of terror in order to evict the
indigenous population and so to replace them?
1

9. Was it not aggression when, not satisfied with what the
international community had, rightly or wrongly, allocated
to them, they continued to expand at the expense of the
original inhabitants of Palestine?
10. Was it not aggression when they invaded my country
and other Arab countries in 1967, occupying vast segments
of their territories, areas which amount to three times more
than the territory of Israel itself?
11. Is it not aggression when, despite the unanimous
endorsement by this very body of the principle of the
inadmissibility of acquisition of territory through the use of
force, Israel, in utter disregard of the principles of the
Charter and the collective will of the Security Council and
the General Assembly, is still holding the territories it
occupied as a result of its military adventure in June 1967?

the poor Palestinian people ? Are they to forsake their
rights so that others can impose theirs? Who is to guarantee
their inalienable rights as human beings? The United
Nations assumed the task for several years, adopting
resolution after resolution to preserve the minimum of
those rights. Yet in the final analysis they were the ones
~110 had the rawest deal, They have become homeless and
destitute, looking forward to a dark and bleak future. If the
Israeli representative has arbitrarily and presumptuously
arrogated to himself the right to speak on behalf of Jewish
communities living peacefully and decently in other countries, he is in no position to deny US the legitimate right to
seek redress for the injustices that have befallen OUT
Palestinian Arab brethren, for it is as a result of the actions
of the Israelis that over a million Arab refugees are living in
suffering and distress.
16. I felt obliged to make the preceding remarks in order
to set the record straight, but I am not going to be
distracted-though this might have been the intent of the
Israeli representative in introducing peripheraI and irrelevant remarks-from dealing with the matter under
consideration by the Council.

12. I submit that Mr. Tekoah has no right to speak about
aggression, unless he wishes to expand on those aspects of
lsraeli aggression which I have deliberately refrained from
invoking.
13. I am sure the members of the Council have noticed the
strong accent the Israeli representative has been putting on
the importance of the cease-fire and its respect. I do not
need to explain to the Council the nature of a cease-fire asa
temporary measure; nor do I have to recall the circumstances under which Security Council resolution
235 (1967) was adopted. Suffice it for me in this connexion to refer to the statement made by the then United
States representative that the cease-fire should be con”
sidered as a “first step” towards the establishment of peace
in the area. I for one would never disagree with his
statement but I hasten to add that the second step has been
already taken. It has been taken by the Security Council
when on 22 November 1967 it adopted its resolution
242 (1967), containing the basic elements of peace in the
Middle East. Yet I notice-without surprise, I must addthat never since the adoption of that resolution has there
been any echo of it in the various statements made by
Mr. Tekoah in the Security Council; nor have we been
informed that the Israeli Government has accepted, as have
the Arab Governments, its implementation. Should we
surmise that Israel had decided to ignore that resolution too
as it has ignored so many before and since? I submit once
more to the Council that this would be too simple a view to
take on a matter of such gravity. This is not just another
resolution; it is a resolution dealing with the fundamental
principles upon which our Organization is founded. Therefore, the Council cannot afford not to react, and react
sharply and vehemently, against an attack on those
principles.

17. The facts are simple and evident: Israeli armed forces
and air forces have penetrated deep into Jordanian territory, to within fifteen miles of Amman. The pretext, as
brazenly presented by the Israeli representative, was to
carry on a punitive expedition against so-called terrorists
basesin the area, resulting in the massacre of a substantial
number of civilians, including women and children. The
clarity of the facts has made it impossible for the Israeli
authorities to deny them; so instead they arrogantly boast
about them. Therefore, the problem is not in ascertaining
the facts; it resides in agreeing on the definition of certain
actions.
18. To undertake a carefully preplanned military attack
by one country against another, whether under a cease-fire
r&ime or otherwise, is obviously a case of aggression to
which the Security Council under the provisions of the
Charter should devote its attention. To disregard and
openly violate and defy resolutions adopted by the Security
Council in the discharge of its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security undoubtedIy
constitutes a serious threat to the peace and security which
the Security Council is in duty bound to maintain. On the
other hand, when the population of an occupied territory
rises to resist the continued presence of a procrastinating
occupier and oppressor who maintains his occupation and
oppression despite calls and exhortations to the contrary by
the world community, the people can only be defined as
freedom fighters. The label of “terrorists” should be
confined and reserved to those who not only refuse to
comply with the unanimous decisions adopted by this body
but also impose inhuman living’conditions upon the people
they continue to subdue militarily.

14. Israeli leaders have over and over again stated publicly
*hat they would hold on to the conquered territories and
that certain of their decisions are irrevocable. I have no
difficulty in believing that that is their intention; but the
question that arises in my mind is: “Will the Security
Council tolerate such a stance? “.

19. The continuous refusal by Israel to indicate its
readiness to comply with and implement resolutions of the
Security Council, the persistence of Israel in pursuing
mihriStiC policy to achieve its expansionistic designs, the
inhuman and racist behaviour of Israel towards the population in the occupied territories, the arrogance with which
Israel heeds the considered views of world public opinion,

15. We have been informed by the Israeli representative
that the Israeli authorities will spare no effort to guarantee
fie d&tS of hldiS
t0 live in security and are determined
to use eve?’ means to ensure that objective. But what about
2

can be conducive onlv to the increasing resentment of the
people living under i& occupation. Fo; they are the ones
who feel the brunt and sting of the Israeli presence.

23. Mr. CHAYET (France) (translated from French):
Mr. President, yesterday you expressed perfectly the feelings of the members of the Council about our President for
the month of July, Mr. Bouattoura, Permanent Representative of Algeria, whom we were very happy to see assume
that office. YOU also accurately interpreted our feelings
about Mr. George Ball, the new Permanent Representative
of the United States of America who is already so well
known
in international circles and whom we should like to
welcome in our midst, and also about the new UnderSecretary-General for Political and Security Council Affairs,
Mr. Kutakov, with whom my delegation has for many years
enjoyed warm relations.

20. Peace appears to be the concern of everyone around
this table, for the Security Council adopted a resolution last
November (242 (1967/l delineating its elements and its
modalities. The resolution mentions the need for a just and
lasting peace in the area. We have accepted this resolution
because we believe both in peace and in justice. Israel has
not, up to the present moment, manifested its acceptance,
though it continues to pay lip service to the cause of peace.
Are we to assume that what they want is peace without
justice and that that is why they are reluctant to declare
openly and without reservations their acceptance? Let me
assure you that this cannot be because peace ‘without
justice is an edifice without foundation; it will soon
crumble.

24. It would not be fitting for tie to add anything to or
detract anything from the statement you made yesterday,
Mr. President, on behalf of the’ members of the Council.
May I be allowed to tell you how pleased my delegation is
to welcome you to the United Nations as Permanent
Representative of Brazil and to find that, immediately after
your arrival, you are presiding over our work. Though
seemingly a newcomer you are in fact already held in great
regard in the United Nations both for your competence and
for your friendliness and courtesy. You have our full
confidence and you may rest assured that we are most
anxious to help you in your work.

21. The case for constructive reasoning is still within the
realm of the possible; but it is not incumbent upon us to
practise it. It should in all objectivity apply to those who,
to score a point, resort to massive military activities
believing that the rule of force is the rule of law. In the
light of the record of Israel over the past twenty years-a
record of intimidation, aggression and destruction-we
wonder if it is proper for an Israeli representative, his
country having earned with justice a long list of condemnations from the Security Council for what the Israelis have
destroyed, to come and preach to us a constructive
approach.

25. I should of course have preferred to welcome you in
happier circumstances than those which have led to the
convening of this meeting of the Council. Once again the
Middle Eastern region has just been the scene of bloody
incidents, and once again the Security Council has been
urgently convened as a result OF the grave events which have
just taken place there.

22. It is not the first time that Israel has perpetrated
brutal crimes against the Palestinian people, and it is not
the first time that an Arab country brings its complaint to
the organ primarily responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. However, it should be
admitted that the Security Council’s inaction did more
harm to a rightful cause. The Council’s reluctance to face
its Charter responsibilities and uphold the lofty principles
of the Charter by suppressing the aggressor and restoring
peace with justice convinced the aggressor that he could
persist in his policy with impunity. The Charter, however,
did lay down a whole Chapter, Chapter VII, which was to
be implemented whenever overt aggression was committed
and the Charter foundations are flagrantly flouted. On 24
March 1968 resolution 248 (1968) was unanimously
adopted. In that resolution the members of the Council
declared that:
“ . . . such actions of military reprisal and other grave

26. The French Government was deeply concerned and
moved when, on 4 August, it learned of the bombing of
Salt by the Israeli air forces, a bombing which has inflicted
new suffering on the already sorely tried population of the
region. We are told by the representative of Jordan that this
military operation, admitted by the Israeli Government,
resulted, in the space of three hours, in the killing of 34 and
the wounding of 82 persons and that it caused considerable
material damage. My Government deplores this damage
and, above all, the loss of human life. Moreover, it is
seriously alarmed by the constant occurrence of serious
incidents of this kind despite Security Council appeals and
decisions.
27. On 24 March 1968, the Security Council unanimously
condemned the military action launched by Israel against
Karameh on 21 March in flagrant violation of the United
Nations Charter and the cease-fire resolutions; it deplored
all violent incidents and declared that such actions of
military reprisal and other grave violations of the cease-fire
could not be tolerated. Yet, less than five days after the
adoption of that resolution, new incidents occurred,
causing blood to flow in the region and calling for mother
meeting of the Council.

violations of the cease-fire cannot be tolerated and that
the Security Council would have to consider further and
more effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure
against repetition of such acts.”
Since that time Israel has twice resorted to its policy of
retaliation and massive reprisals, and I hardly need to
remind the Council of the grave consequences which will
result from the Council’s continuous inaction. What is
needed is not another condemnation by the Security
Council. Israel has already a long list of those condemnations which is completely disregarded by its authorities.
It is high time to consider adopting “further and more
effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure against
repetition of such acts”.

28. On 4 June 1968, there was the attack against Irbid and
the neighbouring villages, for which the casualty rate was
59 killed and 121 wounded. Two months later to the very
day, there has been the bombing of Salt which the Council
is now meeting to consider.
3

29. My delegation, after listening to the statements by
both sides on this question, considers that such Operatbs
can by no means be justified as legitimate defence when
they are in fact reprisals. As the representative of France
has already emphasized in this forum, we have never
considered the concept of military reprisals acceptable. It is
condemned by our Organization and by the Charter.
30. Moreover, if there were still any need for proof, the
list of incidentswhich haveoccurredin the last few months
in that region would in itself prove the futility of such
actions. Whatever events provoked them, reprisalsinevitably spark off a tragic seriesof reactions and repression
which can only engenderhatred and resentmentand might
leadto the renewalof hostilities.

can deny the seriousnessOf their Complaints or of the
specific incident which is the principal reason for OUI
presentmeetings.
36. Once againthis was a violent incident to be added to
the long list of incidents and acts of reprisalthat have taken
place in that area. My delegation sincerely regrets the
military operation undertaken in Jordan on 4 August and
all the lossof life which ensued.

37. My delegation calls upon all those concerned to
observe the cease-firescrupulously and not to adopt any
position or undertake any action which might render the
already tenuous peacewhich somehowis maintained from
day to day in the Middle East even more unstable,
Obviously such acts of violence cannot help in any way to
31. We should decidedly embark on the oppositecourse, create a climate in which the Representative of the
the one that leadsto a peacefulsolution, the coursemade Secretary-General,AmbassadorJarring, could succeed in
the vital task which has been conferred on him. As the
possibleby Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22
Council knows, AmbassadorJarring has recently informed
November1967.My Governmentbelievesthat this text, for
the Secretary-General of his intention to continue his
which it voted, shouldform the basisfor a settlementin the
efforts to promote an agreement between the parties
Middle East and that all the principles embodiedin it
should be effectively carried out. That is why it closely concerned.I am sure all representativessharethe conviction
that, in the present circumstances, the only hope of
follows AmbassadorJarring’spraiseworthyefforts to fulfil
his mission.At a time when the SpecialRepresentativeis ultimately finding a peacefulsolution lies with Ambassador
striving to do just this, military operationslike the bombing Jarring and his mission. In the present situation, the
Council’sdecision may have a far-reaching impact on the
of Salt can only complicatehis task and endangerthe
vital task of the Representativeof the Secretary-General.
chancesof achievingthe just and lastingpeacethat we all
hope for. The Council should therefore condemn such
38. According to my delegation, these are the consideraactions. Above all, it should endeavour to prevent their
repetition by striving to carry out effectively the resolution tions which should guide members,fully aware as they are
of their responsibilities, in their quest for the most
of 22 November1967.
appropriate course of action for the Security Council to
32. Mr. BEAULIEU (Canada)(translatedfrom French):
take when it hasconcluded its discussions.
Mr. President,for personalreasonsI shouldfeel remissif I
were not to welcome you, on behalf of the Canadian 39. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
delegation,as PermanentRepresentativeof your country
Israel,who hasaskedto be allowed to speak.
and asPresidentof the Security Council for the month of
August. My delegation fully sharesthe confidence ex- 40. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I shouldlike to exercise briefly
pressedby other representativesthat under your en&&tmy right of reply.
ened leadershipand thanks to your long experience in
international affairs, the work we do should prove most 41. For twenty years the Middle East has been in the
useful. I can assureyou of my delegation’scomplete throes of a war of aggressionwaged by the Arab States
co-operation.
againstIsrael. The aggressive
character of this war, launched
in defianceof the United Nations, hasnever been in doubt.
33. The new representative of the United States of
In 1948 it was condemned in the Security Council by
America, AmbassadorGeorgeBall, is sowell known that we member States, including the United States, the Soviet
needhardly dwell upon his qualities.He bringsa wealth of
Union and others. The war is not over becausethe Arab
experience in international affairs and the problems of
States refuse to conclude peace with Israel, The war’s
governmentto our Council.Weknow that this will be most aggressivecharacter has not and could not have changed
valuableto him and will help him fulfil his oneroustask as simplyby virtue of the lapse of time. For nineteen years
PermanentRepresentativeof his country to the Security
the Middle East had only an armistice; for a year it hashad
Council.
a cease-fire. However, whether m the period of the
armistice or now at the time of the cease-fire,one salient
34. May I also take this opportunity to congratulatemy
factor has stood out in all clarity: the Arab States have
neighbouron my right, Mr. Kutakov, on his recent appoint- never abandonedtheir war. They have never ceasedto wage
ment as Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Security
it by alI meansat their disposal: political and economic
Council Affairs. His long participation in the work of our
warfare, naval blockade, bombardment of border villages,
OrganizationiS a guaranteeof his competenceand we wish and, aboveall, terror and sabotageraids.
him WerY success
in the accomplishmentof his task,
42. It is odd to find the Arab representatives and their
suPPortemattempting to describe,and even to justify, the
armed attacks of Jordanian military positions on Israeli
villages,and terror operations conducted agairist Israel, as
resulting from the hostilities of June 1967. Nothing could

35. The Canadiandelegationis deeplyawareof the human
tragedy that is beingenactedandhaslistenedvery carefully
to the statementsmade in the Security Council by the
distinguishedrepresentativesof Jordan and Israel. No one
4

forces to the saboteur camps in Jordan. Some of the raiders
killed and some of those captured wore Egyptian military
uniforms and carried papers testifying to their membership
in the Egyptian army. The New York Times, of 17 June
1968, summed up the situation as follows: “Reports from
Arab sources indicate that guerrilla action against Israel is
increasing with the blessing of Cairo and Amman”.

be further from the truth. The same methods were used by
the Arab States long before 1967. The same arguments to
justify them have been voiced by Arab representatives in
the Council for years. The allegation that Jordanian
artillery shells Israeli villages and that armed raiders from
Jordan attack Israel and Israeli citizens solely becausethey
are reacting to the failure of Arab aggression in 1967 is
without any ‘foundation whatever. These acts of hostility
are as old as the Israel-Arab conflict itself.

48. Of all the Arab States, Egypt is also most responsible
for the present situation in the Middle East. The events of
last year are still fresh in the minds of all of us. Today again
Egypt is in the forefront of Arab belligerency. After a
desperate attempt to appear in the eyes of the world as
somewhat less intransigent, the mask has fallen from Cairo’s
face. All reports about readinessfor peacehave been denied
by Egyptian Government spokesmen. All suggestions that
Egypt might be ready to move towards agreement with
Israel have now been shattered by Cairo, Egypt is again
what it was a year ago and more: an uncompromising
aggressorthirsting for the renewal of hostilities.

43. The fe&yeen are not a novel idea. El-Fatah is not a
new organization. The so-called Arab war of liberation is
not a new label for Arab terrorism against women and
children. Israel has confronted these attacks in the 194Os,
in the 1950s and in the 196Os, despite what the Arab
Governments would have us believe. These acts of aggression have been ruled illegal and as requiring immediate
termination, again and again. Even as far back asthe fragile
truce of 1948, the Security Council called for a stop to the
type of warfare the Arab States now try to passoff on the
world as justified.

49. Let us hear what President Nasser-not the Egyptian
representative in this debate-had to say on 23 July 1968:

44. In resolution 56 (1948) of 19 August 1948, the
Security Council decided that:

“The bases are clear and definite in United Arab
Republic policy: no negotiations with Israel, no peace
with Israel”-1 repeat, no peace with Israel-“no recognition of Israel. NO projects exist”, he continued, “for a
peaceful solution, and it does not seem to me that there
will be any in the future”. I repeat: “No projects exist for
a peaceful solution, and it does not seemto me that there
will be any in the future”.

“(a} Each party is responsible for the actions of both
regular and irregular forces operating under its authority
or in territory under its control;
“(b) Each party has the obligation to use all means at
its disposal to prevent action violating the truce by
individuals or groups who are subject to its authority or
who are in territory under its control;“.

“We add”, he said, “peace in this part of the world will
not be achieved by the mere elimination of the consequencesof the 5 June aggression”.

In later years, Security Council resolutions, reports of the
Secretary-General and of his late predecessor, declarations
by member States of the Council, condemned these acts
and called for their cessation.

Those who have been watching Egyptian action and
listening to Egyptian pronouncements for the last twenty
years know what it means. “The next point”, he said,
“concerns Palestinian fedayeen activities. We are fully
committed to offering every help to the fe&yeen action”.

45. Terror raids are an old method of Arab warfare against
Israel. They are as despicable as they are condemnable, as
dangerous now as in the past. They remain an inseparable
part of the general Arab war effort against Israel.

50. The speech by President Nasser is an event of great
international significance. It provides a brutally clear and
conclusive picture of Egyptian policy. It is a policy of total,
unreserved and uncompromising opposition to peace. The
policy of the United Arab Republic is in flagrant violation
of the United Nations Charter and of the basic principles of
international law. Nasser rejects the declared will of the
international community for the promotion of agreement
on the establishment of a just and lasting peace. That
statement, aswell as other indications that we have received
of Egyptian policy, destroys any possible illusion about
Egyptian moderation. Nasser’s policy is to have a new war
in the Middle East for the purpose of bringing about Israel’s
complete liquidation, He is against peace, against agreement, against negotiation, against the recognition of Israel’s
sovereignty.

46. In war, self-defence is not a matter of phraseology.
Those who kill, those who organize killing, those who
support and encourage murder and sabotage, know full well
that the attacked might hit back, and that when he does he
will not ask the killer, how, where and when to do it. It is
as simple as that, and no distortion of law, nature or
morality
can alter this fundamental tenet. Those who
support Arab terror operations, not to speak of armed
attacks launched by Arab regular army positions, must
understand that they lend support to the continuation of
Arab war against Israel. This war is an international crime
and those guilty of support to it cannot suggest sanctimoniousIy how to react or how not to react to it.
47. It is not surprising that the United Arab Republic
delegation should join the Jordanian representative in the
defence of continued war against Israel. Egypt, after all,
was the initiator tiany years ago of the warfare-by-terror
method. Today it is well known that Cairo organizes, trains
and arms terrorist commandos operating from Jordan. It
has transferred officers and men from the Egyptian regular

51. Egypt’s previous statements about readiness for a
peaceful settlement and acceptance of the Security Council’s resolution of November for the establishment of peace
have now been entirely repudiated. They were intended to
mislead world opinion. Nasser no longer attempts even to
do that.
5

liberal and sometimes strict in interpretation but I deflnitely agree with him that some limitations must be placed
on the debate so that it will be confined to the terms ef the
item under consideration. Therefore I appeal to the
representative of Israel to confine his remarks to the item
under consideration, all the more so since, as I understand
it, he asked for the floor in exercise of his right of reply. 1
am sure the representative of Israel will pay due attention
to my appeal. I now request him to resume his intervention.

52. In the light of the foregoing, it may not be surprising
to find the Egyptian representatives speaking out in favour
of the pursuance of warfare against Israel. We deny totally
their Government’s right to question the propriety of
Israel’s air action against the terrorist bases. A government
that used airplanes to bomb and gas innocent civilian
villages cannot be entitled to speak out about defensive air
actions directed against military objectives.
53. I should like to read here from a report of the
International Red Cross of 18 May 1967, only a year ago:

59. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Allow me to reiterate that
Israel as a Member of the United Nations, an Organization
based on the equality of all the Member States, will
question the title of any State that persecutes Jews or
discriminates against them to come before this Council to
speak on behalf of human rights. We shall question the right
of any State guilty of acts of aggression to come here and
express its view, its judgement, on Israel’s defence against
aggression. We and the world at large will not admit that
those who pursue a criminal policy aimed at the destruction
of a Member State of the United Nations and the
annihilation of its people masquerade here in the garb of
defenders of law and justice.

“The undersigned doctors, members of the International Committee of the Red Cross medical mission to the
Yemen, arrived at Gahar (North Yemen) in the Wadi
Herran, on May 15, 1967, following an appeal for
assistancefrom the inhabitants who claimed to have been
under gas attack by airplanes”-Egyptian airplanes-“on
the morning of May lo,1967 . . .
“1. Seventy-five persons died of poison gas ~1~0rtly
after the raid. They showed the following symptoms:
shortness of breath, coughing, pink foam at the mouth,
general edema, especially in the face . . .

60. The Security Council is confronted by a situation
which is clear: Arab war waged against Israel for twenty
years, pursued at present by continuous firing across the
cease-fire lines from Jordanian military positions, and in
particular the repeated and wanton shelling of Israel villages
and by armed terror attacks from Jordan territory, with the
connivance, aid and encouragement of the Jordanian
Government and its armed forces.

“. . .
“The undersigned doctors draw the following logical
conclusions from their findings :
“The cause of death in the caseof the corpse examined
was pulmonary edema. The over-all consistency of the
ICRC medical mission’s findings showsthat in all probability this pulmonary edema was caused by inhalation of
toxic gas.”

61. There is only one way for the Security Council to act
in order to contribute to peace in the area-not by focusing
on Israel’s defensive counter-action, but by ruling once and
for all that Arab warfare must end. Indeed Council action is
required, action to put an end to the shelling of Israeli
villages by Jordanian military positions and to the terror
raids conducted against my country and my people from
Jordanian territory.

54. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Algeria has
asked for the floor on a point of order.
55. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): My delegation is not in the habit of interrupting
the discussions in the Council. But, as Mr. Malik, the
representative of the Soviet Union, rightly pointed out
yesterday, some persons here would like to establish the
practice of Introducing irrelevant elements in the debate on
every occasion.

62. Mr. SHAHI (Pakistan): Mr. President, allow me, first
of all, to welcome you as the representative of Brazil on the
Security Council, as well as in your capacity as the
Council’s President for this month. Your great knowledge
and experience of the work of the United Nations and also
in foreign affairs is well known to all of us. We welcome
your presidency over our deliberations and are confident
that all of us will benefit greatly from your sagacity.

56. On this occasion, I am bound to recall the courageous
decision taken by Lord Caradon, the representative of the
United Kingdom, who wisely remarked that the speakers
who are invited to make statements before the Security
Council should make every effort to confine themselves
strictly to the subject under discussion.

63. Secondly, I should like to pay our sincere tribute to
Ambassador Bouattoura who guided the Council’s activities
during the month of July. Though there wasno meeting of
the Security Council during that month, Ambassador
Bouattoura conducted valuable consultations among the
Council’s members which we all know are no less significant
to the conduct of our meetings than presiding over our
formal deliberations.

57. In order to prevent the Council from reverting to this
kind of practice which my delegation would not like to see
become a habit in the Council, my delegation, with all due
respect, Mr. President, would urge you to request the
speakers who ask to be heard in the Council to observe
most ~~~~pulously the procedure which is accepted and
recognized by one and all.

64. Let me also say a word of respectful welcome to the
representative of the United States, Ambassador George
Ball, a statesman of high stature with whom we look
forward to co-operating in the achievement of the Councif’s
aims.

58. The PRESIDENT: With reference to the point raised
by the representative of Algeria, I wish to emphasize that
the practice of the Security Council has been sometimes
6

65. I have another pleasant duty to perform and that is to
extend our welcome to Under-Secretary-General Kutakov.
His work and experience render him eminently suitable for
the post to which he has been appointed, and we assurehim
of our full co-operation.

I
1
,

66. Last March the Council was confronted with a grave
situation caused by military action of a large-scale and
carefully planned nature taken by the armed forces of Israel
on the territory of Jordan. After intense consultations and
careful consideration of all aspects of the matter, the
Council adopted resolution 248 (1968) which condemned
this military action, called upon Israel to desist from acts or
activities in contravention of resolution 237 (1967) requiring Israel to ensure the safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the occupied areas and declared that such
actions of military reprisd could not be tolerated. The
Council also pledged that it would have to consider
effective steps envisaged in the Charter to ensure against
repetition of such acts.
67. Hardly had a week passed when Israel, in utter disdain
of the Council’s resolution, launched a heavy and concentrated bombardment of the east bank of the Jordan by land
and air. This time, at the 1412th meeting of the Council,
the President stated the consensus of the members of the
Council that they were deeply concerned at the deteriorating situation in the area and that the Council would keep
it under close review.
68. Two months later Israel launched yet another major
aggressive action on Irbid in the territory of Jordan. The
tragic assassination of Senator Kennedy prevented the
Council from considering that matter.
69. Today we are confronted with the fourth large-scale
act of aggression by Israel against Jordan in the last four
months. The untold sorrow, the grievous loss of life caused
by this latest act are too plain to need any description. But
this incident is not merely another in a long chain. It is
incomparably graver than the earlier incidents. It has caused
a tumult in the area which, if not controlled by the
Council, will destroy whatever little chances of restoring
peace still exist. The question is, what is it that the Council
can and should do in the face of this consistent and
sanguinary pattern of military actions by Israel which has
finally led to the present intolerable situation?
70. Some of my colleagues have preceded me in this
discussion. There is one common denominator in their
statements. All have deplored this latest action of Israel.
This is a natural humane reaction. But if it is to be
meaningful, if it is to contribute to a real amelioration of
the situation, if it is to revive some prospect of peace in the
area, it cannot be allowed to remain a mere expression of
sentiment. It has to be formulated in such terms in a
pronouncement of the Council as to have a deterrent effect
on Israel.
71. There are, however, two trends in the discussion here
which, in the sincere opinion of my delegation, impede the
Council’s objectivity and may render our deliberations
totaIly infructuous. We would respectfully urge that these
trends be abandoned.

72. The first is the tendency to be overimpressed with the
fact that the Council is faced with charges and countercharges from the parties and has no independent knowledge
of the truth. I would beg to remind my colleagues that
confusion is unwarranted in this case.The military action
by Israel which has brought us to these meetings is
admitted by Israel itself. No better testimony of the
attitude behind this action’ could be available than is
presented in the statement of the representative of Israel
himself. It is true that Israel offers a long catalogue of the
acts in violation of the cease-firewhich are alleged to have
been committed by Jordan. But the fact that whenever
Israel launches an aggressive action it keeps handy a
catalogue of such violations is all too familiar not only to
the Council but even to the world press.The Cotid would
be showing a singular lack of judgement if it were bemused
by such tactics.
73. The second trend is more facile and more destructive
of a movement towards peace. It is the tendency to equate
the military actions of Israel with all other violations of the
cease-fire, and, in so doing, to strike a posture of justice and
even-handedness in disregard of the human realities of the
area. To equate the small, sporadic and spontaneous acts of
resistance of the people of the territories occupied by Israel
with the carefully planned and large-scalemilitary actions
of the armed forces of Israel is to ignore a startling disparity
of magnitude and quality. Moreover, it is to confer a right
on the perpetrator of an aggression,the illegal occupier of
another’s ‘territory, equal to that of the victim of that
aggression. In the present case, it amounts in effect to
nothing less than condoning the actions of military reprisal
by Israel. The right of reprisal is nothing more than a revival
of the law of the jungle. It will be a sad day when the
Council finds itself accepting this law in camouflage.
74. This is the compelling consideration of justice involved
in this case. But it is not a matter of ethics or of the
standards of the Charter alone. From even a hard-headed
political viewpoint, it is totally, unrealistic to think that
there is a vicious circle of violence and counter-violence
between Jordan and Israel for which both parties are
equally responsible. On the one side we have actions of
large-scale violence committed by a Government which has
a mighty arsenal at its disposal. On the other side we have a
defenceless Government which has shouldered the burden
of accepting a mass of people brutally evicted from their
homes. Is it realistic to expect that Jordan should wagewar
against its own people, who in desperation are struggling
with the pitiful means at their disposal, for nothing more
than to regain their homes? Short of waging such war,
there is no means for Jordan to prevent the so-called
violations of the cease-fire.
75. On 24 March 1968, when we adopted resolution
248 (1968), I stated:
“The Government of Jordan has stated that it is in no
position, in spite of its best efforts, to control the
activities of resistance movements. We cannot permit an
interpretation of operative paragraph 3 that would, in the
event of any future incident, enable Israel to claim the
freedom to launch any military attacks against Jordan or
any of its other neighbours. It is alwaysnotoriously easy,
as is borne out by the history of two world wars in this

Council of 22 November 1967, then I will buy that record.
Now, he oainted a picture to YOU of us asthe aggressors. He
mentioned 1948-that we waged war on Israel; so the Arabs
are aggressors.But I should like to know one thing: before
May 1948, where was Israel? There was no Israel, But
when the Irgun Zvei Leumi, the Haganab, the Stem-all
those territorist gangs-murdered the Palestine civilians, the
indigenous people, and expelled them, how can he come
here and say those people are the aggressorsand the Israelis
are the victims?

century and by that of colonial wars, to stage incidents
and to use them as pretexts for launching wars of
aggression. We cannot be a party to binding Jordan to
unjust conditions which it is not in a position to fulfil,
and, in the event of non-fulfilment, to expose it to the
mortal danger of a massive armed attack.
“Pakistan must therefore reject any such interpretation,
for it not only would destroy the very foundations of
international relations and the United Nations order, but
would condemn small and weak States to live in fear and
trembling before their stronger neighbours.” [1407th

83. He mentioned something about poisonous gas in
Yemen, which wastotally irrelevant; it is not the issue here.
We refuted it earlier, and I am not going to go through it
again. But I should like to give him a dose of his own
medicine.

meeting, paras. 62 and 63.1

I have repeated this statement because it closely applies to
the present situation.
76. In conclusion, I must say that my delegation has
appreciated the many references to the Jarring missron
which have been made in this debate. All the representatives except one have expressed anxiety that the latest
developments should not adversely affect the progress of
Ambassador Jarring’s efforts. We note this exception and
we believe it is of no small significance. But leaving it aside
for the moment, my delegation is convinced that the
situation in the Middle East will not ripen towards even a
temporary solution unless a measure of balance is introduced into it. Such a balance cannot be introduced unless
the derangement caused by Israel repeatedly inflicting
death and destruction on the Arabs is effectively checked.
It is this thought which, we believe, needs to be uppermost
in our minds.

84. In 1948, in Gaza, two Israelis were caught with two
vials near the main well which supplies Gaza with water,
The chief bacteriologist flew there from Cairo and analysed
them. Those vials contained a dysentery bacillus and a
typhoid fever bacillus, type A and B. Those two Israelis
were Yemenite Jews, who looked exactly like their cousins,
which is how they were able to reach that well.

85. That is bacteriological warfare. If someone has his
house made of glass he should not throw stones at his
neighbours. So he thinks that after the expulsion of a few
million people-Palestinians-and
making them live as refugees on seven cents a day is proper, those people must be
stamped asaggressors.
86. In 1956 a contractor who was cleaning the road in
Mitla Pass at 5 o’clock one afternoon sawairplanes fly over
him; parachutes dropped and about 62 of his poor
labourers were annihilated by the Israeli paratroops. They
were armed with picks and shovels. At that time we were
ready to defend ourselves against another attack by two big
Powers. We were turning our back to Israel and we were
stabbed in the back. In that we also were aggressors.

77. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the United
Arab Republic has asked to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.
78. Mr. HILMY (United Arab Republic): It is obvious that
the tactics of Mr. Tekoah are to divert us from the issue
before us. But since he has given a lot of information about
my country which is complete distortion I find myself
obliged to invoke my right of reply.

87. When in 1956, the Israeli Prime Minister declared the
annexation of Sinai and they sang in the Knesset we were
also aggressorsin this war.

79. The statements of Mr. Tekoah now are like a record
that has been played time and again. After listening to the
first phrase, one expects what is coming. It is a record that
has been repeated so many times that it is worn out now. It
is showing some cracks, and those cracks repeat the same
phrase many times, even in the same statement. It is
fashionable to put the statements of Israeli representatives
on records; I have seen some of them displayed for sale on
Fifth Avenue; I believe the record costs three dollars.

88. Now, coming back to 1967, when my President gave
his word of honour to the representatives of two major
Powers that he would not attack Israel, that he had given
his orders to the armed forces to stand down, and that he
was all for a peaceful settlement. He went even further and
sent his deputy here to the United States to talk on
peaceful terms. What happened then? Mr. Tekoah’s predecessor, Ambassador Rafael, came to this very CounciI and
said, “We saw an hour later hundreds of Egyptian airplanes
coming to destroy Israel, so we had to go to war to defend
ourselves”.

80. If Mr. Tekoah has another record to give us-saying
that he accepts the rights of the Palestinians to live in
peace, as he says his own people should have the right to
live in peace-then I will buy that record.
81. If he says that Israel will forever be a minority if they
decide to stay with us in our part of the world-and even
inside their own country they will be a minority, and a
minority needs the protection of the majority, and they ask
for that protection-then I will buy that record.

89. That would have been quite a phenomenon because
the flying time of a modem jet between Israel and Cairo is
about twelve minutes; to the Suez Canal area it is less.
Mr. Rafael did not explain that phenomenon-how there
wasnot a single Egyptian airplane destroyed over Israel or
even en route to Israel. They were all destroyed on the
ground. People forgot that statement. He calls us aggressors.

82. If he declares here that his Government is willing to
accept and implement the resolution of the Security
8

1

I

90. Now the representative of Israel talked about the
speech of President Nasser. I have here a verbatim record.
The President said:
“We have accepted the Security Council resolution, But
Israel did not accept it. At present there are no plans for
peaceful solution and it seems there will be no such plan
in the future. Hence, our position vis-a-vis a political
solution of the present crisis in the Middle East is clear.
We shall not give up one inch of our occupied territories.”
I do not know why Mr. Tekoah objects to that.
91. I do not wish to go further with this, becauseI should
like to confine the discussion to the issue before us. I
reserve the right to deliberate further in exercising my right
of reply should that be necessary,

carefully the instructive clarification we have just heard
from the representative of the United Arab Republic. He
said that he hopes for-1 understood him to mean that he
aspires to-the time when the people of Israel will be a
minority in their country. The situation could not be
clearer.
94. I appreciate this clarification on the part of the
Egyptian representative who explained to the Security
Council again what Egypt’s goal is-the denial of sovereignty and freedom to the people of Israel and the land of
Israel. That is the situation that confronts us, those the
dangers that Israel has to cope with. That is the real
problem in the Middle East conflict.

92. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Israel
in exercise of his right of reply.

95. The PRESIDENT: I have no more names on my list of
speakers. I wish to thank the representatives of the United
Arab Republic, France, Canada and Pakistan for their kind
and generous words in my regard.

93. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I shall say only that I would
suggest that the Council members study and weigh very

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLlCATlONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Notions
Unies
rant en venta
dons
ler librairies
et les ogences
diporitaires
du monde entier.
Informez-vow
aupr&r
de votre libroirie
ou adresser-vous
6:
Notions
Unier, Section
der ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.

KAK

IlOJY~MTb

M3AAHMR

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OPi-AHM3AuUH

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicocioner
de lar Nocioner
Unidar
ert6n
en todor
porter del mundo. Consulte
a su librero
Ventor, Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

OEbEAHHEHHblX

en vento
o dirljore

Piice: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

HAuHfi

UNIDAS
en librerias
a: N&ones

in other

y cosos dislribuidoror
Unidor,
Secci6n

currencies)

de

35337-October

1972-2,050
