UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/86
30 January 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

LETTER DATED 30 JANUARY 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached letter dated 30 January 1998 which
I have received from the Chairman of the International Monitoring Committee
established pursuant to the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) (see annex).
Attached to the letter is the third periodic report of the Member States
participating in MISAB, as requested by the Security Council in its resolution
1136 (1997) of 6 November 1997. I should be grateful if you would bring the
letter and its enclosure to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.

(Signed)

98-01911 (E)

010298

010298

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/86
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 30 January 1998 from the Chairman of
the International Monitoring Committee addressed
to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the third report, covering
the period from 5 January to 4 February 1998, requested by the Security Council
in paragraph 7 of its resolution 1136 (1997) concerning the situation in the
Central African Republic.

(Signed) Gen. Amadou Toumani TOURÉ
Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee

/...

S/1998/86
English
Page 3

Appendix
Third report to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1136 (1997) concerning the situation
in the Central African Republic
(2 February 1998)

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
At its 3829th meeting, the Security Council unanimously adopted its
resolution 1136 (1997), which was essentially a continuation of its earlier
resolution 1125 (1997). The Council requested the Member States participating
in MISAB, namely, the International Monitoring Committee to supervise the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements, which represents them, to provide
periodic reports to the Council at least every month through the SecretaryGeneral.
2.
This third report describes developments in the situation in the Central
African Republic from 5 January to 4 February 1998.

II.

POLITICAL LEADERSHIP

3.
The International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, chaired by General Amadou Toumani Touré, is the body that
directs the actions of MISAB, since it receives the necessary political guidance
directly from the heads of State concerned, and especially from the President of
the Gabonese Republic, who is Chairman of the International Mediation Committee.
4.
MISAB is under the patronage of President El Hadj Omar Bongo of the
Gabonese Republic, senior head of State of the International Mediation
Committee. It is under the political authority of General Touré, Chairman of
the International Monitoring Committee.

III.

LOGISTICAL AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT TO THE
INTERNATIONAL MONITORING COMMITTEE

5.
It should be noted that since its establishment by the heads of the States
members of the International Mediation Committee, the International Monitoring
Committee has received logistical and technical support from the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).

IV.

LOGISTICAL SUPPORT TO THE MISSION

6.
As indicated in the previous reports, MISAB receives logistical support
from the participating States, France and the Government of the Central African
Republic. It also received support previously from the Organization of African
Unity (OAU).
/...

S/1998/86
English
Page 4

7.
In its previous reports, the International Monitoring Committee had
occasion to welcome the establishment of a Trust Fund to provide financial
support for MISAB. It regrets, however, that this Fund has not received any
contributions that could have provided long-term support for the Mission's
activities.

V.

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BANGUI AGREEMENTS

8.
The Bangui Agreements of 25 January 1997, the outcome of strenuous efforts
by the Committee on Consensus-building and Dialogue, endorsed and chaired by
General Amadou Toumani Touré, Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee, constitute the indispensable basis for the establishment and
strengthening of peace and the achievement of national reconciliation, a
necessary stage in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Central African
Republic.
9.
The implementation of these Agreements was planned in accordance with a
timetable established by the International Monitoring Committee and accepted by
all. This timetable is being implemented, even if the dates initially mentioned
have been adjusted. It must be acknowledged that there has been a certain delay
in the full implementation of certain provisions deemed important by one or
another of the parties. This is due, in particular, to various incidents which
have lined the perilous path of the national reconciliation process. It is
worth recalling here that the 24 provisions of the Agreements were grouped under
seven main headings in the timetable established by the International Monitoring
Committee, namely:
(a)

Formation of a government of national union;

(b) Adoption of an amnesty law covering those who committed offences in
the context of the third rebellion;
(c)

Disarmament;

(d) Implementation of the recommendations of the General Meeting on
National Defence;
(e)

Situation of former heads of State;

(f) Suspension, then abandonment of the judicial enforcement of the
parliamentary audit;
(g)

Organization of a national reconciliation conference.

Provisions fully implemented
10. Of these provisions, those relating to the formation of a government of
national union, the adoption of an amnesty law covering offences in the context
of the third rebellion and the situation of former heads of State can be
regarded as fully implemented, even if the decree enforcing the above-mentioned
law has yet to be promulgated.
/...

S/1998/86
English
Page 5

Provisions almost fully implemented
11. Disarmament is proceeding, even if certain concerns persist as to the
possible importing of military weapons. The disarmament operations in the town
of Bangui took place in accordance with a methodology described in the previous
reports. The results speak for themselves:
(a)

Heavy weapons:

92.12 per cent;

(b)

Light weapons:

56.76 per cent;

(c)

Munitions of various types:

451,709 units;

(d)

Explosives and detonators:

26,672 units.

12. Considering the various factors mentioned in the previous reports, it is
easy to understand why the recovery of all light weapons remains an elusive
goal, despite all the means and strategies employed. While some hope remains
for the fruitful continuation of disarmament operations, both in Bangui and in
remote areas of the country, it would be illusory to think that the recovery of
light weapons will be as extensive as that of heavy weapons.
13. Reports, or rather, rumours, circulate persistently, alleging that a
quantity of weapons difficult to estimate was imported into the country on
various dates by figures belonging to both the presidential majority and the
opposition. Despite the willingness of the International Monitoring Committee
and MISAB to recover these weapons, if they exist, very few reliable signs or
indications support the authenticity of these claims. None of the
investigations or searches carried out in this connection have yielded any
results so far. Such rumours darken the atmosphere considerably in this
country, where peace is still fragile. In any event, the International
Monitoring Committee and MISAB believe that the disarmament operations are not
yet finished, and are continuing to devote painstaking and patient attention to
them.
14. It is clear that the accounts relating to weapons recovery pertain only to
arms and munitions taken from the State armories. This is why the International
Monitoring Committee and MISAB have remained vigilant and have not ignored any
information provided to them concerning weapons caches.
15. The provisions concerning the parliamentary audit have had varying degrees
of success, and a new parliamentary procedure is being carried out on the basis
of a reworked draft. It is to be hoped that this draft will not be rejected as
well. The International Monitoring Committee made a modest contribution to the
preparation of this draft in order to ensure that all the legitimate concerns
expressed by deputies during the first reading have been taken into account. A
decision is expected no later than 4 February.

/...

S/1998/86
English
Page 6

Provisions being implemented
16. As to the provisions concerning the implementation of the recommendations
of the General Meeting on National Defence, the Commission on the Restructuring
of the Defence and Security Forces, chaired by the Minister of Defence under the
supervision of the Chairman of the International Monitoring Committee, filed its
report on 29 January 1998. This Commission provides the framework in which
compromise solutions acceptable to all can be worked out for the main
recommendations in dispute. These are the recommendations relating to the
"dissolution" of the Section d'enquête, de recherche et de la documentation and
the Centre national de recherche et d'investigation and those relating to the
"reduction of the staff" of the Presidential Guard. As the work of the
Commission on the Restructuring of the Defence and Security Forces proceeded,
the idea of redefining the respective functions of the Section d'enquête, de
recherche et de la documentation and of the Centre national de recherche et
d'investigation to make them consistent with respect for human rights began to
take precedence over outright dissolution, which the opposition continues to
demand, and keeping these entities intact, as the authorities intend. In the
end, the Commission on the Restructuring of the Defence and Security Forces
decided on:
(a) Dissolution of the Section d'enquête, de recherche et de la
documentation and assignment of its members to their original units;
(b)

Dissolution of the Centre national de recherche et d'investigation;

(c) Establishment of a documentation bureau to take charge of national
security;
(d) Strict implementation of Presidential Decree No. 94/87 of 9 March 1994
concerning the Presidential Guard, which conferred on the Guard functions
accepted by all (excluding abuses, which were noted and deplored), and,
consequently, restriction of the number of members of that unit.
A formal decision by the head of State in this matter is expected at any moment.
It is likewise understood that the exercise of restructuring the defence and
security forces would take into account the problem of the members of the
Presidential Guard. Moreover, the project initiated by UNDP on demobilization,
retraining and reintegration of the Central African armed forces, financing for
which remains open to all other potential donors, has recently been launched
with the arrival in Bangui on 10 January 1998 of the project head, Mr. Gonzales.
This project should help the army to become more capable of operating as a truly
republican army, and would thus fulfil a number of recommendations made by the
General Meeting on National Defence.
17. Lastly, in the framework of implementing the provisions concerning the
organization of a national reconciliation conference, many activities that were
recommended during the memorable meetings of the Committee on Consensus-building
and Dialogue have been scheduled by the preparatory committee and are being
implemented, despite the various difficulties encountered by the organizers. In
this context, thanks to logistical and financial support from UNDP, the
International Monitoring Committee and the Ministry of Human Rights, National
/...

S/1998/86
English
Page 7

Reconciliation and Democratic Culture have, with the support of the various
ministries and technical services concerned, organized the following activities:
(a) Awareness-raising seminars in various regions of the country between
18 November 1997 and 31 January 1998;
(b)

A youth meeting in Bangui on 13 and 14 January 1998;

(c)

A Central African women's forum on 16 and 17 January 1998;

(d) A forum on compensation for damage caused by the rebellions, to be
held on 23 and 24 January 1998.
18. A forum to assess the implementation of the Bangui Agreements and one to
assess the military situation will be held during the second week of
February 1998. The conclusions of these various seminars and forums will
constitute an undeniable contribution, a data bank on the crisis, that will be
made available to the conference participants.
19. The national reconciliation conference, initially scheduled for the period
from 10 to 14 February 1998, has been postponed until the end of February
(specifically, the week of 23-28 February) in order to make it possible to
provide better working conditions. For the time being, the preparatory
committee for the conference is tackling the final preparations, namely:
(a) Preparing various summaries which will serve as working documents for
the conference;
(b)

Drawing up a list of participants;

(c)

Solving various logistical problems;

(d)

Organizing technical aspects.

20. For various reasons, senior officials of the Groupe des onze partis
politiques de l'opposition (Group of Eleven) and the four groups of affiliated
trade unions decided to withdraw from the preparatory committee for the
conference. This situation is not likely to galvanize the current process. For
this reason, the International Monitoring Committee is now endeavouring to
negotiate a modus vivendi between these opposition figures and the authorities,
who have been accused by the opposition of resorting to acts contrary to the
spirit of the Bangui Agreements and of not wishing to implement certain
provisions of these agreements.
21. The International Monitoring Committee has spared neither time nor
patience in using its good offices to smooth out the difficulties which arise
almost daily. Everything proceeds as if all parties were attempting to score as
many points as possible prior to the national reconciliation conference,
forgetting that the conference is neither an end in itself, nor the culmination
of the normalization process in a country deeply marked by two years of a
multifaceted crisis, but an essential stage on the way to a lasting solution.
/...

S/1998/86
English
Page 8

22. One concern about the organization of the national reconciliation
conference is widely shared by various quarters, namely that a favourable
climate for reconciliation should be created, with the following necessary and
useful conditions:
(a) Full implementation of the various provisions of the Bangui
Agreements, in other words, completion of the activities included in the
timetable of the International Monitoring Committee (pursuit of disarmament
operations, settlement of the question of the parliamentary audit, indication of
political will to make use of the recommendations of the General Meeting on
National Defence);
(b) Continuation of the necessary and useful efforts (including a stepping
up of the diplomatic offensive) to find a solution to the financial situation,
which remains a cause of concern;
(c) Launching of initiatives designed to find a solution to the problem of
the victims of the rebellions;
(d) Reassuring indications of prospects of reconstruction, rehabilitation
and economic recovery.
23. The specific provision relating to the adoption of a new electoral code,
and its corollary, the creation of an independent electoral commission, is being
implemented; it is known that the relevant texts have already been prepared for
submission to the National Assembly for consideration and adoption. The
International Monitoring Committee, faithful to its mission, is paying close
attention to all these operations. It continues to do so in a spirit of
neutrality and impartiality in order to achieve credible results acceptable to
all.
24. Overall, there are no items on the timetable of the International
Monitoring Committee that have not yet been either fully or partially
implemented, even if many useless obstacles crop up frequently on the road to
their implementation. With a little more political will here and a little more
judgement there, the International Monitoring Committee, in cooperation with the
other political and social actors in the country, will strive to create the
necessary conditions for the further implementation of the Bangui Agreements.

VI.

COOPERATION WITH THE CENTRAL AFRICAN AUTHORITIES AND
THE VARIOUS GROUPS OF POLITICAL PARTIES

25. For several weeks, an uneasiness and a certain restlessness have been noted
within various political parties belonging to both the presidential majority and
the opposition. Several recent events are worth mentioning, as they seem to
illustrate fairly clearly a situation in which, with the elections a few months
away, the roar of ambitions is battling the impulse to settle accounts:
(a) The dismissal of Mr. Charles Massi, a member of the Mouvement de
Libération du Peuple Centrafricain (MLPC), from his post as Minister of
Agriculture and Livestock Farming for "misappropriation of public funds" and
/...

S/1998/86
English
Page 9

other acts of embezzlement, according to the official press releases, is
continuing to elicit reactions and to take on more political than judicial
overtones. The International Monitoring Committee, alerted by a letter from
Mr. Massi, who requested protection from MISAB, claiming that his life was in
danger, took care to draw the attention of the country's authorities to the
unfortunate slippage which this situation was likely to generate. The Committee
refrained from commenting on or appreciating the twofold measure taken with
respect to Mr. Massi, namely, dismissal and investigation, which it deems to be
a matter pertaining to the sovereignty of the Central African State. Mr. Massi
believes that the establishment of the Forum Démocratique pour la Modernité
(FODEM), a political association which he heads, is the source of his current
difficulties. It is important to emphasize here that a group of 11 deputies
from various parliamentary groupings took a stand in favour of Mr. Massi on
14 January 1998 in a document denouncing what they referred to as "the
harassment suffered by Mr. Charles Massi, former Minister of Agriculture and
Livestock Farming". The concern of the International Monitoring Committee is
and remains the preservation and strengthening of the hard-won peace.
(b) Likewise, the recent resignation of Mr. Kossi Bella, an MLPC deputy,
and the resounding support which he currently enjoys in Bangui, cannot fail to
raise questions for any informed observer of Central African politics. It
should be stressed that Mr. Kossi Bella is a founding member of the party headed
by President Patassé and that he seems to have a certain hearing within and
outside the party. The current political context in the Central African
Republic appears to be difficult, as it is full of unforeseen events. Greater
effort on the part of the International Monitoring Committee will be required to
make the Central African political class understand that the situation calls for
moderation, reflection, restraint, leniency, tolerance, acceptance of the right
to be different and forgiveness. All attitudes to the contrary threaten to
jeopardize everything. The Committee is counting on the patriotic spirit and
the good will of religious groups, women's organizations, youth associations and
other elements of civil society to exorcise the demon of hatred and vengeance.
(c) The recent withdrawal of the Parti Social Démocrate (PSD), led by
former Prime Minister Enoch Dérant Lakoue, from the Conseil Démocratique des
Partis Politiques de l'Opposition (CODEPO) (Democratic Council of Opposition
Political Parties) denotes a certain uneasiness among the various moderate
opposition parties.
(d) The confirmed withdrawal of the Mouvement pour la Démocratie et le
Développement (MDD), led by President David Dacko, from the Group of Eleven, and
the relatively moderate positions which this party has taken on various
questions, also indicate a new configuration on the Central African political
chessboard with which the International Monitoring Committee must henceforth
reckon in endeavouring to resolve the crisis.
26. The International Monitoring Committee met the President and head of State
of the Central African Republic on several occasions in order to provide him
with regular updates on the issues remaining to be resolved and questions
relating to security, which has recently been undermined by a revival of the
roadblock phenomenon, leading to criminal acts of extortion in some parts of the
country, and a resurgence of traditional urban banditry.
/...

S/1998/86
English
Page 10

27. While urban banditry is being addressed by the activities of the Central
Office for the Suppression of Banditry (OCRB), the roadblock phenomenon is
currently being combated only through rather modest means, including, in
particular, the organization of a type of self-defence force among the
populations at risk. In this connection, the International Monitoring Committee
recommended to the head of State and the Central African Government that
subregional cooperation with adjoining countries experiencing the same
phenomenon should be organized and strengthened. The mandate conferred on MISAB
does not allow it to be directly involved in the fight against insecurity of
this nature, which does not appear to be directly linked to the rebellion.
28. In view of the numerous difficulties that have arisen in the context of the
preparations for the national reconciliation conference, the International
Monitoring Committee remains in constant contact with all the political and
social actors in the country.

VII.

COOPERATION WITH INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

29. Pursuant to the Security Council's request to the Secretary-General in
resolution 1136 (1997) to provide a report within three months on the
implementation of that resolution, and following the stay in Bangui from 6 to
13 December 1997 of a multidisciplinary mission from the United Nations
Secretariat, a political delegation headed by the personal envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hédi Annabi, had an opportunity during its visit from
6 to 8 January 1998 to appreciate the evolution of the political, military,
security and economic and social situation. The results of the report which the
Secretary-General provided to the Security Council on this subject are eagerly
awaited here in Bangui, both by the Central African authorities and political
class and by the International Monitoring Committee and MISAB.
30. Everyone in Bangui (the political class, civil society, the military and
foreigners) is convinced of the need for the presence after 6 February 1998 of a
military and security force which would help consolidate the peace and stimulate
the process of national reconciliation. Everyone recognizes that even though
the elections are not an end in themselves, their smooth conduct can only help
stabilize the situation.
31. Despite the excellent results obtained in agricultural production (in both
cash crops and food crops), the Central African Republic, where industrial and
commercial activities have clearly been in a state of paralysis for several
months, is still experiencing difficulties in meeting its internal obligations
(wages and salaries, pensions, scholarships, the functioning of basic social
services and of the State apparatus) and its external commitments, in particular
the repayment of the arrears due to the Bretton Woods institutions.
32. Moreover, the thorny problem of arrears of wages and salaries, pensions and
scholarships provides a reason for the strike which is still taking place in
certain sectors, such as education. The greatest concern of the Central African
authorities is therefore to find the necessary resources to resolve this problem
of six months' arrears of wages and salaries and several further months' of
pensions and scholarships.
/...

S/1998/86
English
Page 11

33. The groups of affiliated trade unions, which hitherto have demonstrated a
great deal of understanding and moderation given the situation, are beginning to
show signs of irritation and impatience. Representatives of the trade unions
met the head of State on 23 and 28 January 1998 in order to express their
grievances, and received a few words of reassurance, for lack of any immediate
solutions to their problem, the sensitivity and seriousness of which are no
longer in doubt.

VIII.

DEPLOYMENT OF THE FORCE

34. There has been no significant change in the arrangements made since the
submission of the previous report. MISAB is continuing to ensure security in
all neighbourhoods of the Central African capital by occupying 20 surveillance
posts and is participating in joint security patrols in conjunction with the
Central African security and defence forces in all districts of Bangui.
35. Hold-ups, armed robberies and other criminal acts have diminished
considerably thanks both to the progress achieved in disarmament and the
constant vigilance instituted by the system of joint patrols. It is worth
repeating here, however, the reference made in paragraph 26 to the return of the
old form of urban banditry, which is being combated by the Central Office for
the Suppression of Banditry.

CONCLUSIONS
36. The International Monitoring Committee once again stresses the necessity
and usefulness of extending the implementation of Security Council resolution
1136 (1997) relating to the mandate of MISAB for a period of one to two months
after 6 February 1998. This period will enable the various actors concerned to
make all the arrangements necessary for the deployment of a multinational force
during the post-MISAB period in order to ensure the security conditions required
for the implementation of essential reforms and the organization of free,
democratic, peaceful, calm and transparent elections.
37. The International Monitoring Committee hopes to continue to enjoy the
logistical and technical support of UNDP in order to pursue its twofold mission
of ensuring the political direction of MISAB and monitoring the implementation
of the Bangui Agreements through continuing mediation until the relevant
Security Council decisions have been implemented.
38. In order to avoid any slippage or any risk of a return to square one which
might lead to social disruption, it is urged that all measures should be taken
at the appropriate levels, including the level of the Secretary-General, to
arouse a greater awareness among States, international organizations and
financial institutions with a view to providing the necessary assistance to the
development of the Central African Republic, as requested in paragraph 9 of
resolution 1136 (1997). It is well understood that all these measures will
complement the necessary efforts of the Central African authorities. Any
contrary approach could jeopardize the opportunity for this country to put the
crisis behind it once and for all, thus irreparably causing the failure of this
/...

S/1998/86
English
Page 12

original experiment with internal settlement which the current mediation effort
in the Central African Republic represents.
39. The International Monitoring Committee, as it has repeatedly affirmed, will
continue to spare no effort in urging all the parties to the Central African
crisis to work with wisdom and dignity for the effective implementation of the
Bangui Agreements. This is the price of real and lasting peace.

-----
