A /ES-11/PV.19

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Eleventh Emergency Special session

19th plenary meeting

Thursday, 23 February 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
Draft resolution (A/ES-11/L.7)
Draft amendments (A/ES-11/L.8 and
A/ES-11/L.9)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I will address the
additional co-sponsorship for all three draft documents:
A/ES-11/L.7, A/ES-11/L.8 and A/ES-11/L.9.
First, I should like to announce that, since the
submission of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.7, and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, Cabo Verde,
Chile, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Jamaica,
Myanmar, the Niger, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Samoa,
Singapore, Suriname, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uruguay and Vanuatu.
Next, I should like to announce that, since the
submission of draft amendment A/ES-11/L.8, and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the

following country has become a sponsor of the draft
amendment: Nicaragua.
Finally, I should like to announce that, since the
submission of draft amendment A/ES-11/L.9, and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
following country has become a sponsor of the draft
amendment: Nicaragua.
The President: Delegations wishing to make a
statement in explanation of vote before the voting on
the draft resolution or either of the draft amendments
under this agenda item are invited to do so now in one
intervention. Before giving the floor for explanations
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): We
would have liked today’s vote to be on a draft resolution
celebrating the end of a war and the advent of a
lasting peace. Instead, we are witnessing a continued
deterioration of the security situation, an escalation
of the conflict and violence that threatens to be even
more deadly given the war rhetoric and military
resources deployed. That scenario is further clouded by
the threat of nuclear weapons and the likelihood of a
nuclear accident.
We were shocked and puzzled as to the reasons that
provoked the war. A year later, we remain confused as to
why the conflict continues without the clear prospect of
a way out of the crisis either through direct negotiations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05827 (E)

23-05827

A/ES-11/PV.19

23/02/2023

or through third-party mediation. Peace has become a
controversial notion, subject to suspicion.

we can hardly point to a country that is unaffected by
the consequences of the war.

Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.7, which is before this
meeting of the eleventh emergency special session
today, seeks to clarify the means of achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace. That is why it
deserves our support, for, despite that bleak horizon,
we must never give up, and we must work tirelessly
to promote a just and lasting peace on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
Violence must give way to dialogue and diplomacy.

Nigeria is committed to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. It abhors violations of the Charter.

(spoke in English)
International peace and security can be achieved
only through the compliance of all States with
their obligations under the United Nations Charter.
Chief among those are the obligations to respect
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of other States, as described in Article
2, paragraph 4, and to refrain from the threat or use
of force. Wars of aggression cannot be tolerated, and
neither can efforts to acquire territory or change
borders by force of arms.
All such flagrant violations of basic international
norms must be called out, denounced, resisted and
opposed by all law-abiding States. Djibouti did that one
year ago, and we are doing so again today. There can be
no fatigue when it comes to violations of the Charter and
other fundamental breaches of the international order.
That is the reason that Djibouti will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us today.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): In the recent
past, the global community has endured many disasters,
the most acute ones being in Ukraine, Pakistan,
Türkiye and Syria. The causes and the remedies vary.
Yet all have been accompanied by the loss of thousands
of lives, properties and displacement. Many countries,
entities and individuals have stepped up in support of
human beings who found themselves in such conditions.
That is the kind of solidarity that the United Nations
advocates, provides and organizes.
Nigeria continues to express concerns over the
ongoing war against Ukraine and regrets the inability
of the international community to broker peace
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine, both
of which are members of the General Assembly. The
humanitarian crisis is worsening, and cities and towns
in Ukraine are being destroyed. Even beyond Ukraine,
2/12

Despite the continuation of aggression against
Ukraine, Members of this Organization must prioritize
ending the war and, thereafter, working towards
sustainable peace between the Russian Federation and
Ukraine. Nigeria commends the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the Republic of Türkiye in ensuring grain
supplies to countries that needed them most and in
ensuring humanitarian access. We should deepen that
approach by focusing on stopping the war, preventing
further loss of life and the destruction of towns and
cities, causing terrible displacement. Countries and
entities that have influence on the two countries need to
work with the United Nations to achieve that objective.
We all have some responsibility in that regard.
It is Nigeria’s firm belief that the cause of peace
in our world will be eminently enhanced if, among
other things, we overcome the desire to invade and
occupy and the tendency to assume it right that some
countries are merely security zones or zones for control
by others. Our Charter has long guided us, even with
some of its structural limitations. Of all the elements
of the Charter of our Organization, the most important
ones are the principles of respect for the sovereignty
of States and the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes.
While Nigeria strongly believes in the need to hold
all parties accountable for the crimes committed, we
register our reservation about paragraph 9 of the text
of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.7, entitled “Principles
of the Charter of the United Nations underlying a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine”. The
most urgent accountability is for us to use whatever
resources, other than violence, that we have at our
disposal to ensure that this war stops.
Nigeria is not fully sure that paragraph 9 is really
helpful in stopping the war. It may harden positions and
make getting to a solution more difficult. In addition,
not only are the mechanisms for the investigations
and prosecutions unclear in the text, but it is also not
difficult to see how the Assembly will be bogged
down for years to come over which acts of aggression
by some other Members should be treated in the same
manner or which ones should be prioritized. It is in the
23-05827

23/02/2023

light of those and other considerations that Nigeria will
vote in favour of the draft resolution but expresses its
reservations about paragraph 9. We may well decide at
an appropriate time to have a focused and honest, if
difficult, discussion about accountability in all cases
of unilateral action, occupation and settlement against
sovereign States, with a determination to put an end
to such acts and achieve genuine reconciliation. The
solidarity that we have seen in recently giving comfort to
victims in Ukraine, Türkiye, Syria and Pakistan should
give us hope that that is both necessary and possible.
In conclusion, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations, particularly concerning the inviolability of
borders and the peaceful settlement of disputes, Nigeria
will vote in favour of the draft resolution. While
expressing reservations about paragraph 9, Nigeria
affirms what we all signed up to, and, in view of the
consequences of the war in Ukraine for Ukrainians and
for the rest of the world, we urge focused attention first
on the cessation of the war.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): My delegation is deeply distressed
by the year-long conflict, death and devastation in
Ukraine. It has posed an extreme danger to international
peace and security. The sorrows and ramifications of
the conflict are untold, be it death and devastation in
Ukraine, the disruption of the global supply chain, food
insecurity or inflation worldwide.
Peaceful coexistence, mutual respect for
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-aggression,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
are the fundamentals of Nepal’s foreign policy. The
United Nations Charter unequivocally stipulates that
all Member States shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations.
Furthermore, the Charter says that all Members
shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security, and justice, are not endangered. The security
and stability of one and all countries are founded on
those very principles.
Nepal’s position has been clear from the very
beginning of this conflict. Based on the foundation of
the United Nations Charter and international law, Nepal
has stood for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine and the protection of its civilians. Nepal

A/ES-11/PV.19

has clearly pronounced that no solution can be reached
through hostilities and conflict.
As provided for by the United Nations Charter,
dialogue and diplomacy are the tools for resolving
disputes and differences. As a peace-loving country,
Nepal reiterates its call for the immediate cessation of
hostilities and the creation of conditions for dialogue
and diplomacy.
We urge that all the efforts by the parties in
conflict, as well as by the international community,
be channelled to create conditions for peace. Draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.7, entitled “Principles of
the Charter of the United Nations underlying a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine”,
is before us today. The draft resolution could have
articulated the primacy of negotiation and dialogue and
created conditions for just and lasting peace in Ukraine,
which we believe is fundamental to the achievement of
durable peace in Ukraine.
Nevertheless, we believe that the draft resolution is
intended to protect the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence of Ukraine and to bring about peace
in Ukraine.
In that context, with the firm belief in the United
Nations Charter and the settlement of international
disputes through peaceful means, my delegation will
support the draft resolution that is before us.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): South Africa continues
to express its deep regret that the war in Ukraine,
which tomorrow marks its first anniversary, continues
to destroy innocent lives and critical infrastructure, as
well as displacing millions. This is a war of which the
impact has resonated across the globe, affecting the
livelihoods of the most vulnerable and heightening the
current debilitating global food, fuel and financial crises.
South Africa wishes to stress its unwavering belief
in the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We believe that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States should be sacrosanct.
That also applies to Ukraine.
We also affirm through our resolve that urgent
actions are needed to end the war. However, it is a sad
indictment of our efforts that we, as the international
community, have been unable to come up with concrete
proposals to create the conditions to do so. As South
Africa has stated before here in the General Assembly,

23-058273/12

A/ES-11/PV.19

diplomacy and dialogue are the only path that will lead
to a sustainable and peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Today we consider yet another draft resolution on
the war in Ukraine, which comes amid an influx of arms
to the region, perpetuating greater acts of violence and
increased human suffering. Together with the threat of
nuclear war, that makes peace seem less attainable.
Over the past year, the Assembly adopted a series
of resolutions on Ukraine. As we asked the Assembly
before: are our ways and actions focused on the
maintenance of peace or on creating further divisions
that make the attainment of immediate peace less likely?
While we support the focus of current draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.7, on the principles of the Charter
and international law, it certainly brings us no closer to
laying the foundations for a durable peace and bringing
an end to the devastation and destruction. What we
need is a firm and equivocal commitment to peace from
all parties.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): Thailand reiterates
its unequivocal adherence to the Charter of the
United Nations, both in letter and spirit, as well as to
international law, as the non-arbitrary point of reference
for standards of conduct of nations.
Thailand upholds the people’s right to live in
safety, with their basic well-being universal and
non-negotiable. Humanitarian considerations must not
be politicized or discriminatory.
We urge the United Nations to dispense its best
and most earnest effort in preventive diplomacy to
safeguard those basic human rights around the world,
and not to become a part of the morality play that turns
very complex situations into simple binaries of good and
evil, followed by finger-pointing and condemnations.
The utmost effort should be made to create
conducive environments for engagement and dialogue
to settle disputes once they erupt, rather than adding
fuel to the fire. The Hippocratic oath should apply in
all United Nations endeavours — “First, do no harm”.
On the one-year anniversary of the war in Ukraine,
we urge all members of this organ to do the right thing
by the world at large and by the 8 billion people who
are simply bystanders but who are bearing the brunt
of the war in very many different ways. For the peace
settlement process to start, we must try to understand
the root causes of the conflict in an objective and
non-myopic manner, devoid of power and morality4/12

23/02/2023

play elements. The world is vast and rich enough for
countries with diverse ideologies and political forms of
Government to coexist peacefully, if we learn to respect
differences and heed our respective existential.
More weapons escalate fighting. More fighting
exacerbates human suffering. More sanctions intensify
human pain and have never led to regime change.
Condemnations bear no positive weight on altering
behaviour or conduct.
Thailand calls on all parties to step up
diplomatic efforts to engage in dialogue to achieve
a peaceful negotiated settlement as a way out of the
Ukraine conflict. The war in Ukraine represents an
unprecedented and most dangerous challenge, which
threatens the geopolitical, financial, economic, security
and collective balance of the world at large.
It was said that diplomacy is the continuation of
war by other means. Wars cannot be settled by the
deployment of more lethal weapons, not unless total
destruction and human casualties are the only objectives
and the only option available. Wars can be settled only
by engagement and dialogue and by pragmatism, not
ideology, and not by the winner-takes-all mindset. As
in Isaiah 1:18, it is now time for all nations to come and
“reason together”.
Ms. Ferreira (Angola): Draft resolution A/ES11/L.7, which we are about to adopt, is being discussed
at a time when, over a period of more than 12 months,
the conflict in Ukraine has claimed incalculable human
lives and caused multiple losses of material goods. We
consider document A/ES-11/L.7 to be progress in view
of the fact that the international community is showing
clear signs of support for the process of seeking a
peaceful solution to the conflict and making efforts to
bring the parties closer together for a lasting peace in
the eastern European region.
Meanwhile, as the General Assembly is the mostly
representative organ of our Organization, we think that
it is important that the intergovernmental process be
inclusive. It is therefore imperative that the document
include everyone’s contribution so that Ukraine and
Russia can coexist peacefully, in a more stable stronger
region and an increasingly peaceful world.
Angola will abstain in the voting. We are of the
opinion that paragraph 9 is not conducive to creating
an environment conducive to the start of peaceful
negotiations. We do not see difficulties with the
other paragraphs.
23-05827

23/02/2023

The Republic of Angola defends the notion of
accountability for crimes committed by any of the
parties. However, we do not think that this is the right
time to include such a paragraph in the draft resolution
or to undermine the Secretary-General’s efforts and
initiatives to promote a lasting and comprehensive
peace between the two countries.
We would like to reiterate that the Republic
of Angola is of the opinion that conflict resolution
between Russia and Ukraine can be achieved only
through dialogue. The General Assembly must therefore
maintain its interest in preserving the principles of
peaceful coexistence among Member States,
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil has decided to
vote in favour of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.7, which
is before us, because of the urgent need for the General
Assembly to reaffirm its unwavering commitment to
upholding the core principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, while underscoring the
need to reach peace.
We commend the facilitators for the inclusive
negotiations. In our view, the most important element
of the draft resolution is the call for the international
community to redouble its diplomatic efforts to achieve
a just and lasting peace in Ukraine.
We also appreciate the important humanitarian
element of the draft resolution, including the call
for full adherence by all parties to their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Every possible
measure must be adopted to minimize the suffering of
the civilian population.
It is high time to start peace talks rather than fuel
the conflict. Brazil considers the call for the cessation
of hostilities in paragraph 5 as an appeal to both sides
to halt violence without preconditions. No alleged
difficulties to implement our call to stop hostilities, as
set forth in that paragraph, must be seen as an obstacle
to starting negotiations. This draft resolution must be
construed as an important step towards paving the way
for peace.
The conflict, which started a year ago, has imposed
immense suffering on civilians. It also entails a number
of consequences for many countries, especially in the
developing world, due to its impacts on food, fertilizer
and energy prices. The time has come to open up the
space for dialogue and to begin reconstruction. Brazil
stands ready to participate in the efforts for a lasting
solution to this conflict.

A/ES-11/PV.19

Mr. Abd Karim (Malaysia): Malaysia has been
closely following the ongoing conflict in Ukraine.
We are deeply concerned over the increase in civilian
casualties and in the number of displaced persons, as
well as the destruction of civilian infrastructure, which
continues to this day.
In any armed conflict, it is always the affected
civilians — men, women, the young and the old — who
suffer the most. As such, we urge all parties to fully
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
At the same time, Malaysia wishes to see an
immediate end to the hostilities and the start of peaceful
negotiations. Malaysia believes that, for meaningful
dialogue and negotiations to begin, all sides must take
the legitimate security concerns of both Ukraine and
Russia into consideration given the complex geopolitical
context. Those must be addressed through dialogue and
peaceful means, in accordance with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the rule of law.
Malaysia has upheld, and will continue to
uphold, the principles of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States. Staying
faithful to those principles, Malaysia will vote in favour
of the draft resolution.
Malaysia regrets what we see as the inability or
unwillingness of the Security Council to discharge its
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. The General Assembly has adopted six
resolutions related to the ongoing conflict, but the
situation on the ground remains the same, if not worse.
In that regard, Malaysia calls on all the parties concerned
to take immediate steps to de-escalate in order to
prevent further loss of lives and destruction. Today we
have heard calls and appeals for a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace from fellow delegations. Malaysia
strongly echoes these calls and appeals.
Finally, Malaysia wishes to register our
disappointment over the fact that there were no openended discussions with Member States at large. We feel
that there should be more open-ended consultations so
that the larger membership of the United Nations would
be able to engage with the penholders to add their
views, especially since this is the sixth draft resolution
on the issue. Malaysia reiterates its commitment to
the peaceful settlement of disputes, guided by the
principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter

23-058275/12

A/ES-11/PV.19

and international law in the interests of maintaining
regional and international peace and security.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I will be brief. Before we vote on the main draft
resolution (A/ES-11/L.7), allow me to address the draft
amendments proposed by Belarus (A/ES-11/L.8 and
A/ES-11/L.9). They have been put forward by a State
that has facilitated Russia’s invasion, that provided the
staging ground for the early attempt to topple Kyiv,
and that is among a small number of States that have
consistently voted against upholding Ukraine’s rights
under the United Nations Charter.
The draft amendments attempt to create a false
equivalence between Russia, which the General
Assembly and the Secretary-General have made clear
is engaged in a full-scale invasion, and Ukraine, which
is exercising its right of self-defence against that
aggression. Put simply, these draft amendments are an
attempt to undermine the Charter. They are not aimed
at peace, but at defending the aggressor. They are not
proposed in good faith.
We therefore urge Member States to vote against
these draft amendments so we can move to vote in
favour of the draft resolution that genuinely seeks a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine, in
line with the United Nations Charter.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
I wish to address the question concerning the
majority required for the adoption of the draft resolution.
In the light of Article 18, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the
Charter of the United Nations, is there any objection
to taking action on draft resolution A/ ES-11/L.7 by a
two-thirds majority of the members present and voting?
I see no objection. The two-thirds majority of
members present and voting is therefore required for
the adoption of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.7.
The two thirds majority of members present and
voting is therefore also required for the adoption of
the draft amendments A/ES-11/L.8 and A/ES-11/L.9.
Before proceeding to take a decision on draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.7, in accordance with rule 90 of the rules of
procedure, the Assembly shall first take a decision on
draft amendments A/ES-11/L.8 and A/ES-11/L.9 one
by one.
We first turn draft amendment A/ES-11/L.8.
6/12

23/02/2023

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Mali, Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Zambia
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, China, Congo,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt,
El Salvador, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia,
Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Uzbekistan, Yemen
23-05827

23/02/2023

The draft amendment was rejected by 94 votes to
11, with 56 abstentions.
The President: We turn next to draft amendment
A/ES-11/L.9.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Angola, Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Honduras, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Zambia
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Colombia,
Congo, Djibouti, El Salvador, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Mexico,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, South

A/ES-11/PV.19

Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Uzbekistan, Yemen
The draft amendment was rejected by 91 votes to
15, with 52 abstentions.
The President: Since draft amendments A/ES11/L.8 and A/ES-11/L.9 were not adopted, we shall
proceed to take a decision on draft resolution A/ES11/L.7, entitled “Principles of the Charter of the United
Nations underlying a comprehensive just and lasting
peace in Ukraine”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United

23-058277/12

A/ES-11/PV.19

States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen,
Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Eritrea, Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Burundi, Central African
Republic, China, Congo, Cuba, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Namibia, Pakistan, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Tajikistan, Togo, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Viet
Nam, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.7 was adopted by 141 to
7, with 32 abstentions (resolution ES-11/6).
The President: Before giving the floor in
explanation of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
By virtue of its firm commitment to the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, Cuba defends
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States and the self-determination of peoples. We
are unequivocally opposed to the use or threat of the
use of force, and we support the peaceful resolution
of conflicts.
Almost a year ago we warned before this General
Assembly that history would hold the United States
Government accountable for the consequences of
an increasingly offensive military doctrine beyond
NATO’s borders that threatens international peace,
security and stability (see A/ES-11/PV.3). Today in
Ukraine, instead of easing tensions, the confrontation
on the ground is being exacerbated by the increasing
flow of arms, aggressive rhetoric and unilateral
sanctions that contribute to extending the conflict.
Cuba abstained in the voting on resolution ES11/6 because it considers that the resolution does not
promote or contribute to dialogue and negotiation with
the participation of all parties involved with a view
to achieving a real and lasting peace. Fulfilling this
objective is now the most urgent priority.
8/12

23/02/2023

We cannot continue to stoke a conflict that every
day causes deaths and injuries and great material
damage. We reject any attempt to manipulate resolution
ES-11/6 in future as a legal basis to justify the eventual
creation of tribunals for national and international
prosecutions. The General Assembly does not have a
mandate to do that.
Cuba will continue to advocate tirelessly for a
serious, constructive and realistic diplomatic solution to
the current crisis in Ukraine by peaceful means and with
unrestricted adherence to the norms of international
law that guarantees the security and sovereignty of all,
as well as regional and international peace and security.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted in favour of resolution ES-11/6 pursuant to its
firm commitment to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter, especially those related to
the peaceful settlement of international disputes and
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States Members of the United Nations. That stance is
resolutely and consistently reflected in Egypt’s firm
positions on all international resolutions.
Accordingly, Egypt would like to affirm the
following. First, today’s vote coincides with the one-year
anniversary of the outbreak of the crisis in Ukraine,
whose humanitarian and economic repercussions
have affected everyone, and not simply the warring
parties. Developing countries, including Egypt, are
suffering directly from this ongoing crisis, which has
severely affected their economies through its negative
impacts on food security and energy security as well
as its disruption of supply chains. Unfortunately, the
international community continues to be lax in seriously
addressing the economic and social challenges posed to
developing countries resulting from the crisis and has
failed in working together to arrive at an appropriate
solution thereto.
Secondly, Egypt reaffirms the need to work
urgently on resolving the Ukrainian crisis at the
earliest opportunity. We would recall the sincere appeal
made by the Egyptian President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi
at the inauguration of the twenty-seventh session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Sharm
El-Sheikh in which he underlined the need to end the
Ukrainian war and look for the means to urgently
settle it.
23-05827

23/02/2023

Thirdly, Egypt had hoped that the resolution adopted
today would propose mechanisms to resolve the crisis
and launch serious and comprehensive negotiations
without preconditions with a view to settling it. Egypt
would like to urge all relevant international parties
to actively search for the appropriate mechanism
to expeditiously resume negotiations on ending the
dispute — one that would address the root causes of the
crisis and guarantee a response to the security concerns
of all parties and safeguard their respective national
security in an equal, fair and sustainable manner.
Fourthly, Egypt once again urges all parties that
are involved directly or indirectly in the crisis to avoid
any escalation and refrain from taking any measures
that would prolong the crisis or exacerbate it, with a
view to stopping the bloodshed and the human suffering
in the conflict zone and to ending the humanitarian
impact of the crisis that has affected innocent people on
continents thousands of miles away from the conflict.
In conclusion, Egypt hopes that the current crisis
will serve as a reminder to everyone internationally of
the need to stop using double standards in dealing with
situations of this kind, in accordance with international
law. We emphasize that using double standards will lead
only to the erosion of international law and the toppling
of the entire system of international legitimacy.
Mr. Madut Agok (South Sudan): South Sudan
takes the floor in explanation of vote after the voting.
South Sudan voted in favour of the resolution ES-11/6
just adopted.
Since the inception of the conflict a year ago, South
Sudan has maintained and continuously cast a vote in
abstention. As a country that emerged from the longest
civil war on the African continent and is implementing
a peace agreement that many in this Hall helped to
deliver, we join the vote in favour of the resolution
for the singular reason that this conflict needs to stop.
Its devastation has been experienced far and wide.
Therefore, through our vote, we strongly call for a
peaceful and speedy settlement through a negotiation
mechanism agreed upon by the parties to the conflict.
It is our considered belief that there is no military
solution to a conflict that has led to the destruction we
have witnessed.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): One year after the war began
in Ukraine, we are no closer to peace. Death, suffering
and destruction continue to mount. The impact of the
war has gone beyond the borders of the countries in

A/ES-11/PV.19

conflict. Indonesia voted in favour of resolution ES11/6 because we believe that upholding the principles
of the United Nations Charter and international law,
including the peaceful resolution of disputes, respect
for human rights and the rule of law, are fundamental
to resolving the ongoing conflict in Ukraine.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, we deeply regret
that critical elements that we constructively suggested
in the drafting process are missing in the final draft.
In this regard, we believe that the resolution adopted
today may not have achieved the intended goal, which
is to help bring the countries at war closer to peace. The
resolution is missing the spirit needed to realize peace
in Ukraine, and it does not call on the international
community to create the conditions conducive to ending
the war. Most notably, the resolution is missing the
call for the two parties in conflict to pursue dialogue
and diplomatic means and enter into direct peace
negotiations. Ultimately, the two parties themselves are
the ones that can and must prevent a further downward
spiral and end the war. We are also concerned that the
resolution failed to avoid a zero-sum-game approach to
resolving the underlying problem. Such approach will
only deepen the divide between the conflicting parties.
The General Assembly is the most inclusive
organ of the United Nations. Its resolutions reflect the
collective voice and statement of 193 States Members
of the United Nations. It is therefore fundamental that
its resolutions be factually correct, accurate, inclusive
and balanced. General Assembly resolutions are not
social media content. The credibility of our august
institution is put on the line if resolutions put forward
by the General Assembly spin factual information. The
resolution adopted today was leaning very closely in
this direction.
We must continue to work towards a world where
aggression and violence have no place and where the
principles of international law and human rights are
respected. We must not apply double standards in
addressing situations of conflict in all parts of the
world, whether it be the war in Ukraine, in Palestine or
in any other part of the world. Indonesia stands ready
to support all efforts aimed at achieving peace and
stability, and we call on the international community
to do so as well.
Mr. Tlalajoe (Lesotho): Lesotho is taking the floor
in explanation of vote after the adoption of resolution
ES-11/6, entitled “Principles of the Charter of the
United Nations underlying a comprehensive, just and

23-058279/12

A/ES-11/PV.19

lasting peace in Ukraine”. We must always remember
that we come together as peace-loving States that accept
the obligations contained in the United Nations Charter
and, in the judgment of the Organization, are able and
willing to carry out those obligations.
In everything we do, pursuing international peace
and stability should be our goal. Needless to say, Article
2, subsection 3 of the United Nations Charter enjoins
all Member States to settle their international disputes
by peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security and justice are not endangered.
Based on this premise, Lesotho disassociates itself
from the seventh preambular paragraph and operative
paragraph 5 of resolution ES-11/6.
The resolution clearly states the principles to be
followed to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in Ukraine. However, the conflict in Ukraine
shows no signs of abating. Lesotho firmly believes
that respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of Member States, as
enshrined in the United Nations Charter, is sacrosanct
and must be upheld by all Member States at all times
for the attainment of sustainable international peace.
Lesotho’s vote was therefore motivated by a genuine
desire for peace.
The situation in Ukraine raises serious concerns,
with political, economic and security ramifications
for Europe and the rest of the world. The manner in
which the resolution is framed creates further distance
between the warring parties and does not indicate any
immediate steps for diplomatic solution or endeavours
that would hasten a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating that Lesotho
would like to see the international community
constructively support the parties in the search for
sustainable peace.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): India continues to remain
concerned over the situation in Ukraine. The conflict
has resulted in the loss of countless lives and in misery,
particularly for women, children and the elderly, with
millions becoming homeless and forced to seek shelter in
neighbouring countries. Reports of attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure are also deeply concerning.
We have consistently advocated that no solution can
ever be arrived at that comes at the cost of human lives.
In this context, our Prime Minister’s statement that this
cannot be an era of war bears repetition. Escalation of
hostilities and violence is in no one’s interest. Instead,
10/12

23/02/2023

an urgent return to the path of dialogue and diplomacy
is the way forward.
India’s approach to the Ukraine conflict will
continue to be people-centric. We are providing both
humanitarian assistance to Ukraine and economic
support to some of our neighbours in the global South
under economic distress, even as they stare at the
escalating costs of food, fuel and fertilizers, which has
been a consequential fallout of the ongoing conflict.
The overall objective of today’s resolution seeking
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in line with
the United Nations Charter is understandable. We also
note the emphasis on increasing support by Member
States for diplomatic efforts to achieve peace, as
well as support for the Secretary-General’s efforts to
promote a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
Ukraine. However, reports from the ground portray
a complex scenario, with the conflict intensifying on
several fronts.
Today, as the General Assembly marks a year of
the Ukrainian conflict, it is important that we ask
ourselves a few pertinent questions. Are we anywhere
near a possible solution acceptable to both sides? Can
any process that does not involve either of the two sides
ever lead to a credible and meaningful solution? Has the
United Nations system, and particularly its principal
organ, the Security Council, based on a 1945 world
construct, not been rendered ineffective to address
contemporary challenges to global peace and security?
India
remains
steadfastly
committed
to
multilateralism and upholds the principles of the United
Nations Charter. We will always call for dialogue and
diplomacy as the only viable way out. While we take
note of the stated objectives of today’s resolution, given
its inherent limitations in reaching our desired goal of
securing lasting peace, we were constrained to abstain
in the voting on it.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan abstained in
voting on resolution ES-11/6. I wish to explain the
reasons for our abstention.
Pakistan is deeply concerned by the conflict in
Ukraine, which has caused and is causing immense
human suffering in Ukraine and massive damage to its
infrastructure, economy and society. We acknowledge
the considerable effort made by the resolution’s
sponsors to moderate its tone and language. Pakistan
fully supports the resolution’s call for respect for the
principles of sovereignty, sovereign equality and
23-05827

23/02/2023

territorial integrity of States and non-acquisition of
territory by the threat or use of force. States cannot
be torn apart by the use of force. Pakistan regrets that
these principles have not been universally applied
and respected, for instance, in the situation of foreign
occupation and the ongoing attempt to illegally and
forcibly annex Jammu and Kashmir.
Pakistan also endorses the resolution’s call on
Member States and international organizations to
redouble their support for diplomatic efforts aimed
at achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in Ukraine. While the hostilities continue, there
is an ever-present danger of a further military and
geographical escalation of the war. There is therefore
an imminent threat to global peace and security.
While my delegation agrees with and endorses
the principles and general provisions contained in
resolution ES-11/6, there are some provisions that are
not consistent with Pakistan’s principled position on
some of the elements covered in it. As a country that
has seen and suffered the consequences of prolonged
conflict in our neighbourhood, we attach the highest
possible priority to an immediate cessation of hostilities
and resumption of a dialogue to achieve a just and
durable solution through direct or indirect negotiations,
mediation or other peaceful means. In that regard, we
see an important role for the United Nations and the
Secretary-General, among others, under Chapters VI
and VIII of the Charter of the United Nations for efforts
aimed at de-escalation, renewed negotiations and
sustained dialogue for a peaceful diplomatic solution.
Consistent with our position on resolution ES-11/6,
we also abstained in the voting on the draft amendments
proposed to the resolution by Belarus in documents
A/ES-11/L.8 and A/ES-11/L.9.
Pakistan continues to hope that in a constructive
approach, the parties will soon accept a mutual and
speedy cessation of hostilities. We also hope for a
resumption of dialogue on a durable settlement of the
conflict, based on the principles of the Charter and past
agreements, and bearing in mind the legitimate security
interests of all States.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
Some delegations have asked to exercise their
right of reply. I would like to remind members that
statements in right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for

A/ES-11/PV.19

the first intervention and five minutes for the second,
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kim In Chol (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): My delegation is taking the floor to exercise its
right of reply in response to the provocative statement
made yesterday by the representative of South Korea
(see A/ES-11/PV.17). We categorically reject South
Korea’s outrageous outburst, which merits no comment.
However, now that South Korea has provoked us, let me
say a few words.
We reiterate that we have never recognized the
Security Council’s unlawful resolution 1718 (2006)
imposing sanctions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and which was cooked up by the
United States and its vassal forces. We want to once
again make it clear that we have never had any arms
dealings with Russia and have no plan to do so in the
future. South Korea’s reckless remark is intolerable, as
it is simply aimed at trying to tarnish the image of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by fabricating
non-existent stories, and is a grave provocation that has
to be countered.
It is clear that if the United States had not infringed
on Russia’s legitimate security interests and accelerated
NATO’s gradual eastward advance, the present situation
in Ukraine would not have arisen. The United States
and other Western countries are currently wrecking
global peace and regional security, while handing
Ukraine military hardware worth astronomical sums of
money in total disregard for Russia’s security concerns.
We would like to draw Member States’ attention to
the fact that the Secretary General of NATO flew to
South Korea in January to pressure it to deliver passive
military support to Ukraine. It is an open secret
that South Korea is seeking to supply Ukraine with
ammunition and weaponry in the face of mounting
pressure from the United States. It is only a matter of
time before South Korean military hardware turns up
on the battlefield in Ukraine.
South Korea’s allegation is aimed at distracting
the attention of the international community from its
criminal record. We have already made it clear that we
will not deal with South Korea, which should be aware
that if it continues to provoke us groundlessly, far from
alleviating its security-related unease, it will find itself
facing an extreme security crisis.
We want to take this opportunity to stress that the
courageous people of Russia have the will and capability

23-0582711/12

A/ES-11/PV.19

to defend their country’s security and territorial
integrity without any outside military support.
Mr. Mathur (India): I am taking the floor today
to say that this time India has chosen not to respond to
Pakistan’s mischievous provocations. Our advice to the
representative of Pakistan is to refer to our numerous
past replies. Pakistan has only to look at itself and
its own track record as a State that harbours and
provides safe haven to terrorists with impunity. Such
an uncalled-for provocation is particularly regrettable
and certainly misplaced at a time when after two days
of intense discussions, we have all agreed that the path
of peace can be the only way forward for resolving
conflict and discord.
Mr. Ajmal (Pakistan): In exercising our right of
reply, we would like to make the following points.
India continues to state a factually incorrect
position in this forum year after year. Jammu and
Kashmir is an internationally recognized disputed
territory and not an integral part of India, as has been
claimed. Repeating a mistaken position does not make
it acceptable at any point. The focus of today’s debate
is on people and on the crisis at hand. And one of the
inalienable rights of the people enshrined in the very
first Article of the Charter of the United Nations is the
right to self-determination.
In the case of the Kashmiri people, the right to
self-determination has been recognized and promised
to them by the Security Council through its relevant
resolutions. For more than seven decades, through
force and fraud, India has prevented the Kashmiris
from exercising that right and holding a United Nations
supervised plebiscite to enable them to determine their
destiny. India has imprisoned the entire Kashmiri
leadership, illegally detained thousands of Kashmiri
youths, as well as women and children, summarily
executed young boys, violently put down protests and
burned down entire neighbourhoods and villages.
Jammu and Kashmir, illegally occupied by India,
remains the most militarized zone in the world. Almost
900,000 security forces have been deployed by India to
curb the Kashmiri people in their legitimate struggle.
But such measures have served only to intensify their
struggle for their right to self-determination. Even
in the face of the worst atrocities, as evident from
the thousands of unknown, unmarked mass graves
in Jammu and Kashmir, its innocent people remain
firm in their claim to their right to self-determination.
12/12

23/02/2023

Pakistan will keep exposing India’s brutalities and
informing the international community of the plight of
the Kashmiri people.
Mr. Kim Dongjoon (Republic of Korea): My
delegation is speaking in right of reply to make a few
comments about the remarks by the representative of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
I will be brief but very clear. We believe that his
statement distracts from the very reason we are all here,
which is about our desire for international peace and
stability, our respect for justice and international law
and our commitment to the core principles and values
of the Charter of the United Nations. My delegation
believes that everyone here knows which country is
violating its duties under the Charter and international
law. Needless to say, it is the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We would also like to reaffirm that
any arms trade with the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea constitutes a blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions.
Mr. Kim In Chol (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): My delegation feels compelled to take the
floor a second time to respond to the statement by the
representative of South Korea.
We will not repeat our position, but we want
to take this opportunity to firmly condemn South
Korea’s attempt to incite a fratricidal confrontation
in this forum. We condemn in the strongest terms the
fact that the Security Council is being transformed
into a tool for implementing the hostile policies of
the United States and South Korea and other vassal
forces, without mentioning a single word about the
joint military exercises of the United States and South
Korea now taking place in and around the Korean
peninsula. They represent a serious infringement on the
security interests of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. We warn South Korea that if it continues
with its baseless accusations in support of the United
States’ hostile policy towards the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, it will inevitably face a major
security disaster. South Korea must bear in mind that
its continued submissiveness to the United States will
lead to its self-destruction.
The President: In accordance with the terms
of paragraph 11 of resolution ES-11/6, which we just
adopted, the eleventh emergency special session is
temporarily adjourned.
The meeting rose at 4.10 pm.
23-05827
