THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
th

MEETING:
NEW

16 DECEMBER 1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . _. .

1

,.. .. .. .. ..... ........... . . . . . . . . . . . ..

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/l2463 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . _ _ . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2055)
Adoption of the agenda

S/PI’.2055

j

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2055th MEETING
Held in New York

on Friday,

16 December

President: Sir Harold E. WALTER (Mauritius).

Parties, the Cease-fire will be maintained in Cyprus and the
situation will continue to be quiet.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

5. 1 shall make every effort to help to bring about a
resumption of the intercommunal talks as the best available
method of achieving a just and lasting settlement of the
CYPms problem. AS I have repeatedly indicated, I consider
it essential to ensure that, when the talks are resumed, they
will result in a genuine negotiating process. My Special
Representative, Mr. P&rez de CuCllar, has just completed
visits to Ankara and Athens in the course of which he
discussed the problem of resuming the talks in the most
effective Way possible. In this connexion, 1 wish to inform
the Council that I myself plan to visit the area in the not
too distant future with the same purpose in mind.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2055)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary.General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/12463 and Add.])
The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.

1977, at 10.30. a.m.

6. Before concluding, I wish to pay a warm tribute to
Ambassador P6rez de CuBllar, who made a distinguished
contribution during his tenure as representative of the
Secretary-General in Cyprus. Naturally, I shall inform the
Council as soon as I have designated a successor.

_

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

7. Mr. CHOU N& (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
In our statement at the meeting of the General Assembly of
8 November,1 the Chinese delegation already expounded in
a comprehensive way its Government’s position on the
question of Cyprus. I am not going to repeat it here. In
view of the fact that the draft resolution contained in
document S/12489 mainly concerned the question of the
United Nations i;orce, on which we have always held a
different position in principle, the Chinese delegation did
not participate in the vote on this draft.

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-Geneml on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/12463 and Add 1)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2054th meeting, I invite the representatives of
Cyprus, Greece and Turkey to paRicipate in the debate
without the right to vote.

8. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr. President, let
me first say how pleased we are to see YOU here today
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council. 1
welcome you both as a distinguished Minister for External
Affairs of a fellow member of the Commonwealth, a
country which is bound to mine by long historical ties of
friend&p, and as a personal friend. We are very conscious
of the special effott that you have made Yourself in coming
to New York to preside over the Council and are Pleased
that this meeting should be taking place under your wise and
skilful leadership, We are grateful also for the great
diplomatic skill which you demonstrated in bringing us to
the agreement which was reached last night.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rossides (CJ~pms),
Mr. Papoulias [Greece) and Mr. Tiirk?nen (Turkey) took
places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
f hive bctn informed that the
Secretary-General wirhem to make a statement and I now
call on him.
3. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The Security Council
yesterday adopted resolution 422 (1977) which extends the
mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP) for another six months and requests me
to continue my mission of good offices. I shall of course
use my best efforts to carry out the provisions of that
resolution and to keep the members of the Council
informed,

g, Before turning to the subject of today’s debate, 1
Phould also like to say that we were saddened indeed to

4. 1 am confident that, thanks in good part to the efforts
of UNFICYP and with the continued cooperation of the

1

14. The financial problems faced by UNFICYP add vet
,
another element if urgency to the need for an early
settlement of the political problems.I set out in the debate
in the General Assembly last month2 our views on the
Cyprus question and will not repeat them now. Weentirely
agree with the Secretary-General’sview that the intercommunal talks under the auspicesof the United Nations still
provide the best available method of achieving a just and
lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem. The presenceof
UNFICYP shouldprovide an opportunity, not a substitute,
for such a settlement. Despitethe disappointmentsof the
past year, we believe that the next few months may
neverthelessprovide a real opportunity to makeprogress.In
the past, too many suchopportunitieshave beenmissed.It
is of great importance, therefore, that any new one should
be seized.

learn of the kidnapping yesterday of the son of the
President of Cyprus. We very much hope that he will be
released soon and returned unharmed to his family.
10. The United Kingdom voted in favour of the resolution
which we adopted yesterday because we agree with the
judgement of the Secretary-General as expressed in his
latest report, namely, that the continued presence of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus remains
indispensable at the present time in keeping the peace in
Cyprus. We therefore support his proposal that the mandate
of the Force should be extended for a further six months.
My Government hopes to maintain the British contingent at
its present strength during this period and we shall continue
to meet its full cost. We shall also continue to Supply
UNFICYP with logisticsupport.

11. I wish to thank the Secretary-Generalfor once again 15. Finally, I should like to conclude by expressingour
providing us with an excellently clear and comprehensive gratitude to the Secretary-Generalhimself for his continureport on the operationsof the United Nations in Cyprus
ing efforts in what must often have seemeda thanklesstask.
over the past six months.1 should alsolike to convey our
We believe that the role which he and his Special
Representative in Cyprus have played has been and will
most sincere gratitude to the Commander of the Force,
Major-General Quinn and to his officers and men for the
continue to be of the greatestimportance.
excellent job which they are doing in not always easy
16. Mrs. HOUNGAVOU (Benin) (interpretation from
circumstances.
French): Mr. President, my delegation would like once
12. At the sametime, I should also like to say how sorry
again to expressits appreciationfor the work done during
we are to seeMr. P&z de CuCllarrelinquishing his post as the last two weeksby your representative,our brother and
Special Representativeof the Secretary-General. He has friend, Ambassador Ramphyl, whose absencewe regret,
servedwith great distinction and I should like, on behalf of
Thanks to his skill and diplomatic experience,Ambassador
my Government, to pay him a specialand personaltribute
Ramphul led the Councilin its work of taking an important
for all hisefforts in the causeof peacein Cyprus.
decision for Africa, namely, the setting up of a Security
Council Committee entrusted with the task of ensuringthe
13. Turning now to someof the lesspositive aspectsof the
effective application of resolution 418 (1977) imposingan
Secretary-General’sreport, I wish to emphasizemy Governobligatory embargoon armsto South Africa. Wewould like
ment’s seriousconcernabout the critical financial situation
to express, through you, our profound and fraternal
of UNFICYP. In spiteof repeatedappealsby the Secretarysympathy to AmbassadorRamphul and we wish him a
General for additional funds, there has been virtually no
prompt recovery and return to the Council.
real improvement in the situation and the deficit has now
reached$56.7 million. Wehave already seenone result of
17. My delegationis very pleasedat the honour you have
this situation in the decisiontaken by the Secretary-General done us by comingyourself in your capacity asMinister for
a few months ago not to replacethe Finnish battalion. The
External Affairs of Mauritius, to presideover the proceedSecretary-Generalhaswarnedin his current report that any
ings of the Council in this discussion.Thanks to your
further deterioration in the financial situation may jeopardauthority, the Council wasable to prevail upon the parties
ize the continued functioning of the Force. As one of the
to agree to the draft resolution which we adopted yestertwo troop-contributing memberson the Council, I should day.
also like to support what the Secretary-General has said
about the difficulties facedby someof the troop-contribut18. The position of my country, the People’sRepublic of
ing Governmentsasa result of the financial burdensplaced Benin, on the subject before the Council is well known. 1
on them and to recall the concern which we have already
have no intention of going into details with regard to its
expressedat the disproportionateburden which is borne by
position. Nevertheless,having participated for two yearsin
relatively few countries. We have supported the appeals the deliberations of the Council on this subject, my
made by the Secretary-Generalover the past few months
delegation now believesit to be necessaryto highlight a few
and are pleasedto seethat these have met with some particular points.
response,though the contributions collected still fall short
of UNFICYP’s requirements.We find it most regrettable
19. Strict respect for the sovereignty and particularly for
that many countries,someof which are closely concerned the territorial integrity of a sovereignState, a Member of
with the Cyprus problem,continue to turn a deaf ear to the
the United Nations, is for us a cardinal principle of
Secretary-General’sappealsand, in spite of voicing their
international life. That principle is enshrinedin the Charter
support for the continuation of UNFICYP, do little or
of the United Nations. Failure to respectthat key principle
nothing to facilitate this in practice. It would be tragic if
automatically entails the implementation against the
UNFICYP’s ability to continue operating effectively and to
offending State of the measuresprescribedin the Charter,
play the essentialrole that it does in Cyprus were to be
2 Ibid., 62nd meeting.
prejudicedfor lack of funds.
2

---.-~~

C-I

-

:lS thOSf2
iI1 Chptel’
VII. Hence, there is a political and
juridical machinery provided for in order to settle questions
like the Cypriot
Ckki
Where,
without
any doubt,
there
is on
the OM hand the State which has been the victim of
aggression, that is the State of Cyprus, and, on the other,
the aggressor, int~mtiOIld
imperialism and the zealous
lackeys of iInperidiSt
policies in that part of the Mediterranean.

SllCh

20. For the

24. MY delegationvoted in favour of extendingthe Force
for anothersix monthsin the hopethat further extensions
would not be necessasry.
Wehavethe right to expectsome
real progresssoon towardsthe settlementof the two
outstandingissues,namely, the territorial and constitutional aspectsof the bi-zonalStateof Cyprus.The differing
views of the two communitieson theseissuesare not
unbridgeable
and I trust that they will respondpositivelyto
outside suggestions
and advice in the form of arbitral
proceduresto resolveterritorial questionsand to benefit
from the practical constitutional experienceof other
federalStatesto resolvetheir differenceson constitutional
issues.

years in which Benin has sat on the
has noted wit]1 bitterness
that this body has been systematically blocked and
rendered unable to play its role of a defender of international justice. The periodic report of the Secretary-General
~ZIScottstat?tly sounded the alarm each time the mandate of
the United Nations Force has been renewed, but the longer
the crisis persists the greater the risk of its becoming
complicated. This is :1 very disappointing picture and my
delegation ]J~~ICS that the Council will be able to overcomc
its political inertia and Fact up to its responsibilities.

SeCUrity

CWZlCil,

tW0

IJJY ddegation

25. I mustmakeit clear,however,that my delegationwe]
increashlg]yresistattemptsto exploit the presence
of the
United NationsForcein Cyprusin orderto perpetuatethe
statusquo and to preventthe emergence
of a realisticand
pragmaticpolitical solution,
26. Weshouldlike to placeon recordour appreciationof
the work of the Secretary-General,
who hascontinuedhis
peaceefforts under difficult circumstances.
We have no
doubt that he will persistin his endeavoursand good
offices. But we feel that he deservesand needsthe
supportingactions especiallyof the big Powersand also
of those who are in a positionto exert their beneficent
influenceon the partiesconcerned.

21. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr, President,my delegationis

appreciativeof the fact that you have found it possibleand
convenient to take SOIJN time off from your onerousduties
as Minister for External Affairs in order to presideover the
Council and to assistUS in extending the mandateof the
United Nations Peace-keepingForce in Cyprus. Your
presencehere today is further proof of the active role that
your country has been playing in the Council.Your skilful
handling of the present difficult item has evoked our
admiration. I am surethat you are gladto learn that it was
also during this month, during the presidency of the
representativeof Mauritius, that the Council decidedto set
up a Committee to supervisethe observanceof the arms
embargoagainst South Africa, which is, if I may sayso,an
additional feather in your country’s cap. Welook forward
to further co-operation with Mauritius duringthe next year
in the Council.

27. Wewishalsoto recordour appreciation
of the work of
AmbassadorPBrez de Cut%ar,who functioned as the
SpecialRepresentativeof the Secretary-General
with great
distinctionfor morethantwo yearsandisnow returningto
his own country. Weextendto him ourgoodwishesfor the
future.

22. l should like to recall that the draft resolutionadopted
last night was formulated by the Secretariat-by Mr. Gleisp
ner, in fact-at my own suggestionthat what wasneeded
was nothing more than an updating of the reso]ution
adoptedsix months ago[ressollt&rt 410 (1977/j and that
this updating could be safely entrusted to the neutral and
non-political Secretariat. I am happy that my suggestion
wasaccepted by the Council and that the representativeof
Mauritius, who was President of the Council before your
arrival,Sir, requestedthe Secretariatto producea re-draft. I
am sure that the Council is grateful to you for having
persuadedthe parties concerned to accept the renewalof
the mandateof the Force for six more months.
23. Incjde~~tally,my &legation is of the view that it is not
necessary
for the partics concernedto be consultedand to
approveevery singleword or sentenceor paragraphin the
draft resolution renewing the mandate of the Force,
especiallyWIUN
they have no bearing whatsoeveron the
mainpoint, which is the continued presenceand functioning of the Force in cyprus on the samebasis.Weshould
bear this fact in mind for the future. In our view, it is
sufficient to IX~VC a separate,simpleresolutiondealingwith
the extension of the Force, as distinct from resolutions
relatedto the other aspectsof the Cyprus problem.

28. We should like to add our tributes to thoseof the
others who have commendedthe Force Commander,
Major-GeneralQuinn, andhiscontingents.
Wemustalsonot
fail to thank the countries-Australia,Austria, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Sweden and the United
Kingdom-that havegenerouslycontributedtheir men and
equipmentto constitutethe Force,
29. Before concluding,I shouldlike to extend,on behalf
of my delegation, to the Presidentof Cyprus and
Mrs. Kyprianou our deepsympathyand concernover the
kidnappingof their sonby certainmisguided
terrorists.We
hope and pray that he will soon be releasedsafe and
unharmed.
30. Mr. LEONAF3 (UnitedStatesof America):Mr. President I shouldlike first to extenda very warmwelcometo
you landcongratulateyou on the wayyou arefulfilling the
task that you have assumed
asPresidentof the Security
Council, In particular, I shouldlike to expressdeep
gratitudefor the leadership
that you havedemonstrated
in
facilitating a solution of the problem on the Council
agenda.
31. The action of the Councilyesterdayin renewingthe
mandateof the United NationsPeace-keeping
Force in
Cyprus
underscores
our continuinginterestin encouraging
a
peacefulresolutionof the Cyprusproblem.Our action is

3

to him-most
sincerely, I know-by all parties to the
conflict. Whatever their differences, the parties clearly have
found Mr, PBrez de Cuellar to be fair-minded and dedicated
in his efforts to find solutions to the problems that afflict
Cyprus. We wish him all continued success in the years
ahead.

based on the belief that only the maintenance of peace and
stability in the island will permit the two communities to
resume the negotiating process on a constructive basis in
the near future. The progress made to date towards the
establishment of a joint committee to trace missing persons
is a positive indication that there is a willingness on both
sides to resolve their differences through negotiation. It is
our hope that the earIy conclusion and implementation of
this agreement will promote a spirit of accommodation that
will inspire the intercommunal talks when they resume.

37. Finally, I would extend our thanks and admiration to
Under-Secretaries-General Urquhart and Guyer and their
hard-working staffs, as well as to the officers and men of
UNFICYP, for the highly professional manner in which
they discharged their duties during the past six months.

32. During the past six months, UNFICYP continued to
carry out its mandate in an exemplary manner. In his
report, the Secretary-General has ably and accurately
described the highly professional work of this peacekeeping force. He has also highlighted the severe financial
difficulties with which it must contend. The LJNFICYP
deficit has continued to grow and now exceeds $56 million.
This has placed an inordinate financial burden on the troop
contributing countries, which are necessarily reimbursed
behind schedule and some of which absorb large parts of
their expenses.

38. I should not want to close these remarks without
expressing our deep regret over the shocking news of the
abduction of President Kyprianou’s son. We fervently hope
that he will be released promptly and that the perpetrators
of this outrageous act will be brought swiftly to justice.
39. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation ITorn French):
Mr. President, I am particularly pleased to welcome you
here and to express our great satisfaction at seeing you
preside over the Security Council, a fact that proves, among
other things, the importance attached to the United
Nations by your Government and by you. I also take this
opportunity to recall the major contribution made by our
colleague, Ambassador Ramphul, to the debates, consultations and decisions of the Security Council, in particular
with respect to the important issue of the arms embargo
against South Africa. Your country, Sir, is an example of
the important role that small and medium countries can
play in the international arena by means of a constructive
contribution to the solution of international problems.

33. UNFICYP’s precarious financial situation exists in part
because countries that have a special responsibility to
maintain international peace are not willing to pay their fair
share of the costs. My Government urges them to consider
their larger interests in stability in the eastern Mediterranean and on that basis to contribute their share of
UNFICYP’s costs.
34. The financial crisis facing UNFICYP has reached a
point where realistically we can speak only of “managing”
the deficit in order to permit the Force to continue to
perform its vital function. We strongly urge all Member
States to ask themselves whether they can afford not to
give financial support to this international effort to
maintain political stability in Cyprus and in the eastern
Mediterranean. The United States, for its part, will continue
to support this important international peace-keeping
operation.

40. I should also like to express our feeling of sadnessand
to extend our deepest sympathy to the President of Cyprus
for the kidnapping of his son by terrorists.
41. Romania has joined with other members of the
Council to support the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for a further
six-month period. We realize that this action by the Council
is, under present circumstances, essential, particularly in
view of the precariousness of the situation in Cyprus and
the lack of any tangible progress towards its political
settlement. Indeed, the presence of the Force is an essential
element for the maintenance of a climate of calm and
moderation and consequently for the beginning of serious
negotiations between the two communities in pursuit of a
lasting settlement of the dispute that separates them at
present.

35. We would echo the caution that British Foreign
Secretary David Owen expressed in the General Assembly
this years to the effect that United Nations peace-keeping
involvement should not become an excuse for political
inactivity or a substitute for serious negotiation. Mr. Owen
reminded us that the United Nations did not enjoy infinite
resources and that its commitment in Cyprus could not be
taken for granted. The parties, with the help of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, must
come to grips with the central political issues that must be
resolved in a peaceful settlement. The Secretary-General
must be supported in his efforts to achieve a resumption of
serious negotiations as soon as possible.

42. In this connexion, my delegation attaches particular
importance to two provisions of the resolution adopted by
the Council on the extension of the mandate of the Force
[resolution 422(1977)]. On the one hand, the Council
reaffirms once again its support for General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX), which, inter alia, called for the
continuation of negotiations between the two Cypriot
communities with a view to reaching a mutually acceptable
political settlement. On the other hand, the Council urges
the parties concerned to act with restraint by refraining
from any unilateral action likely to affect adversely the
prospects of a just and lasting settlement of this problem.

36. I should like to conclude by expressing our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his continuing efforts to
promote a lasting settlement of the Cyprus dispute. I wish
also to pay a special tribute to his Special Representative,
Mr. Perez de Cuellar, whose departure will be deeply
regretted. I would note the significance of the tributes paid
3 Ibid.,

9th

meeting.
4

Moreover, the General Assembly, in its resolution of
9 November hst [resolution 32/15/, also cdled for the
urgent res~~mptiOl1 in a meaningfuland constructivemanner
of the negotiations between the representativesof the two
COlTlIlWnitkS.
The Assembly also requested
that
these
negotiations should be conducted freely on an equal
fooling on the basis of comprehensiveand concrete
proposalsOf the partiesconcerned.

under its Presentterm. Thisis why 1 should]jke to take this
OPPortunity to expressto all my Colleagues
sitting in this
important body of the United Nationsmy deep gratitude
and my satisfactionat the spirit of friendly
co-operation,
mutual understandingandfriendshipthat they haveshown
towardsmeasthe representative
of Romania.
48. I shouldalsolike to expressthe warmgratitudeof the
Romanian delegation to the Secretary-General,to his
assistants,
to the staff of the secretariatof the Council,to
the interpreters and to all thosewho, in their work, have
assisted
us with professional
competenceandwith devotion
throughoutour two-yearterm on the Council.

43. These provisions contained in Security
Council and
General Assembly resolutionsinvite the padies to t&e a
positive attitude and to act in good faith so asto ensure
their Llrgellt
implementation. By the same token, they
reflect the widespread opinion that the extension of the
mandate of the force should not be regardedasan end h
itself. The presenceof the Force shouldbe usedto facilitate
and actively and effectively promote harmony betweenthe
parties. In our view, resumption of the negotiationsfor a
just and durable settlement in Cyprus can no longer be
postponed. TO evade or further postpone the momentof
decision is not calculated to bring about the mostfavourable conditions for a just and equitable solution of the
problem.

49. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): 1
thank the representativeof Romaniafor the very kind
wordshe addressed
to me.Wecanonly regrethisdeparture,
but that is life. We wish him good luck in his other
activities.
50. Mr. von HASSELL (FederalRepublic of Germany):
Mr. President, I take pleasurein welcomingyou to the
Security Council. It showsthe importanceof our debate
that YOU have taken the trouble to join usin New York.
The resultsyou were ableto achievein sucha short time
amply justify your reputation asa skilful negotiatoranda
gifted diplomat.

44. Romania has always supported settlement of the
Cyprus problem through negotiations between the two
communitiesin the island. We areparticularly interestedin
a lastingpeacein Cyprus becauseour country is closeto the
area of conflict. The President of my country, Nicolae
Ceausescu,and PresidentJosip Broz Tito of the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia stressedin a joint communiqueadopted at their meetinglastweek

51. I shouldlike to expressmy sympathyto the delegation of Cyprus concerningthe eventsof the lastfew daysat
Nicosia. My country is, obviously, especiallysensitiveto
crimes of this kind. I do hope that this day will bring a
happy outcomeof this regrettableaffair.

“the need to adopt measuresconcerningthe immediate
settlement of the Cyprus problem by negotiations
between the two Cypriot communities,in conformity
with United Nations resolutions and on the basisof the
assuranceof full respect for the sovereignty, independence,territorial integrity and policy of non-alignmentof
the Republic of Cyprus”.

52. My delegationhasvoted for a further renewalof the
mandate of the United NationsPeace-keeping
Force in
Cyprus in order to prevent the presentsituation from
deteriorating.It considersthis situation,however,far from
beingsatisfactoryand would like to repeatits view that all
efforts shouldbe.madeto reachaviableandfair solutionto
the seriousproblemof Cyprusin the nearfuture.

45. I take this opportunity to expressonce againto the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, our great appreciation and gratitude for his perseveringefforts to ensurethe
resumption in the near future of the negotiationsfor the
solution of the problem of Cyprus. Any newinitiative that
he may deem appropriate and effective in breaking the
present deadlock will, asin the past, be fully supportedby
my country. 117this activity we seethe affirmation of the
increasinglyeffective role that the Organizationis calledon
to play in the solution of international problems.

53. In this context, I shouldlike to thank the Secretary
General for his excellent report of 1 DecemberI977
[s/12463]. However, I deeplyregretthat he wasobligedto
report
that no progresshad been madein the last six
months. In fact, he speaksof the disappointingresultsof
his efforts.
54. The Governmentof the FederalRepublicof Germany
firmly supportsthe opinion expressed
in the report of the
Secretary-Genera] that negotiations between the two
communitiesare the best availablemethodof achievinga
just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus question. It
therefore holds the view that anew effort towardsthis end
shouldbe madenext year. It sincerelyappeals
to the parties
directly involved to co-operatewith the Secretary-Genera]
and to give proof of their willingnessto negotiate concretely and substantively on all major aspectsof the
problem.

46. I shou]d also like to assureour colleagueand friend,
Ambassador Javier PBrezde CuBllar,of our admirationfor
the devotion and talent that he has SO generouslycon%+
crated to 111smission as Special Representativeof the
Secretary-General in Cyprus. I am certain that future
negotiations will bea the sealof his appreciablecontrlbution 10 the cause of peace in Cyprus and in the Mediterraneanarea.

55. The Federal Republic of Germany,both within the
European
Communityandindependently,hascontinuously
endeavouredto contribute to a solutionof the questionOf

47. In conclusion, I shouldlike to say a few morewords*
It is quite probable
that this meetingof the Councilwill be
the last in which my country will participate as a member
5

tion, which was unanimously adopted by the General
Assembly, is of cardinal significance for the solution of the
Cypms problem. It is no accident that the provisions of
resolution 3212 (XXIX) were confirmed in decisions on the
question of Cyprus taken during subsequent sessions of the
General Assembly, including the present session, and
adopted by an overwhelming majority.

Cyprus by helping the parties to come together and by
lending its full support to the invaluable efforts of the
Secretary-General. My Government appeals to the parties
not to miss any opportunity, but rather to concentrate on
their common interests instead of insisting on their continuing differences.
56. My delegation is gratified by the statement of the
Secretary-General that the situation in Cyprus has been
quiet during the last six months. It would like to express its
deep appreciation and gratitude to the officers and men of
UNFICYP who have demonstrated exemplary dedication.

64. Unfortunately, we have once again to note that the
decisions adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly designed to bring about a settlement of the
Cyprus crisis have so far not been implemented. This
cannot fail to arouse serious concern.

57. My Government sincerely appreciates the valuable
contributions of the countries which provide troops for
UNFICYP. The Federal Republic of Germany has always
tried to accept a fair share of the burden by substantially
contributing to the financing of the Force.

65. The position of the Soviet Union on the question of
eliminating the explosive hotbed of tension in Cyprus is
well known to members of the Council. We should once
again like to state that the Soviet Union, from the very
beginning of the outbreak of conflict in Cyprus, has
consistently believed that the means of bringing about a
settlement should be sought on the basis of unreserved
respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, as well as for its policy
of non-alignment. This presupposes the withdrawal from
the island of foreign troops and the elimination of foreign
bases.

58. I should particuIarly like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Under-Secretaries-General, Mr. Brian Urquhart and
Mr. Roberto Guyer, and their excellent staffs, for their
untiring efforts to keep the situation under control.
59. My special tribute on this occasion goes to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus, Arnbassador PCrez de CuCllar, who has just completed his difficult
and important mission. He exerted tireless efforts and great
diplomatic skills to reduce tensions and remove difficulties.
If for some time the Secretary-General has been able to
report to the Council that the situation in Cyprus has
remained calm, it is to a large extent due to the dedicated
work of Ambassador Perez de CuBlIar.

66. The Soviet Union opposes any attempt to solve the
problem of Cyprus within the narrow circle of the members
of NATO. The Soviet Government has repeatedly stressed
the danger of attempts to exploit the difficult situation in
which the Republic of Cyprus folds itself, as a result of
outside intervention, in order to impose decisions which are
quite extraneous to the interests of the Cyprus people.
67. The development of the situation in Cyprus strikingly
vindicates the substance and the timeliness of the proposal
of the Soviet Union to consider the Cyprus problem within
a broad international forum and to convene for this
purpose, within the framework of the United Nations, a
representative conference.

60. I would conclude, Mr. President, by thanking you and
Ambassador Ramphul for your intensive work and skilful
negotiations which have been so instrumental in preparing
the ground for the extension of UNFICYP’s mandate and
the adoption of our present resolution.
61. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President, on
behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union, permit me to
welcome you cordially to the presidency of the Security
Council as a distinguished statesman from the State of
Mauritius with which the Soviet Union enjoys friendly
relations. I should like to mention particularly the services
of Ambassador Ramphul in the exercise of the presidency
of the Council. We wish him a speedy recovery.

68. The Soviet Union believes that the two national
communities in Cyprus should be given the opportunity
themselves to solve the question of their internal arrangements within their State, which would take judicious
account of the interests and rights of both the Greek and
Turkish communities, without outside interference. We
take a favourable view of the understanding arrived at
between the late President of the Republic of Cyprus,
Archbishop Makarios, and the leader of the Turkish
Cypriot community, Mr. Denktag, on questions pertaining
to a solution of the Cyprus problem, and we believe that
that understanding is of great significance. However, it has
not yet been followed up. In this regard, the delegation of
the USSR would like to stress the need for further efforts
to re-establish a spirit of mutual confidence and COoperationbetweenthe two communitiesin the island.

62. Before turning to the substance of the matter, I should
also like to express my sincere hope that the family of the
President of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr, Spyros
Kyprianou, will soon be safely reunited.
63. Yesterday the Security Council adopted a resolution
once again renewing for a further six-month period the
stationing of United Nations forces in Cyprus. As has often
been pointed out by the delegation of the Soviet Union, the
question of the extension of the mandate is intimately
linked with the substance of the Cyprus problem, This also
flows from the resolution just adopted, which reconfirms
resolution 365 (1974) by which the Council endorsed
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), That resolu-

69. As wasstressedby ComradeA. A. Gromyko, member
of the Politburo of the Central Commiteeeof the Communist Party and Foreign Minister of the USSR, when he
spokein the GeneralAssemblyat its presentsession:
“It is clear that there [in Cyprus] a mostintricate knot
has been tied, but given goodwill it can be untied by
6

peaceful means. The Soviet Union is prepared to facilitate
this, and our relevant proposals remain valid.“4
70. The delegation of the Soviet Union made no objection
to the extension of the mandate for a further six-month
period, inasmuch as the Government of the Republic of
Cyprus had duly given its consent. However, we did this on
the understanding that the financing of those troops would
be carried out under the previous conditions, that is to say,
on a voluntary basis.
71. In conclusion, the delegation of the USSR wishes to
express the hope that a further extension of the mandate
will be used by the parties for the intensification of efforts
to bring about a settlement of the Cyprus problem on the
basis of ensuring the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and its policy of
non-alignment, as is provided in the relevant decisions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly.
72,. Mr, LAPOINTE (Canada): Mr. President, let me first
congratulate you on the impressive manner in which YOU
have discharged your heavy responsibilities as President of
the Security Council. We Canadians, who pride ourselves on
the bicultural nature of our institutions, have been able to
recognize in you a perfect example of what many of USare
st.ill striving to achieve. We are extremely pleased to have
you amongt us and wish you the best of success in your
endeavours to give leadership to your own country as well
as,to the international community at large.
(The speaker continued in French.]

UNFICYP and to other peacekeeping operations,
Canada
supports the principle of freedom of movement
as -an
essential condition that must be met if peace-keepmg
activities are to be fully effective.
76. Although the situation in Cyprus has remajned
calm,
the underlying tensions remain for the simple reason
that
no progresshas beenmadein resolvingthe fundamental
pofitical differencesbetweenthe parties.It ia a matter of
Particular disappointmentto us that, during
the period
since the last mandaterenewal,no intercommunal discussions have been held, We have noted with concern an
apparent return to the unfortunatepattern that developed,
not only following the 1974conflict but also during the
decade before, when there was a failure by the two
COmnlUnitieS
to cometo gripswith the differences which
led to UNFICYP’SdeploymentThat raisesthe question of
whether UNFICYP’s contribution to a settlement
by
creating conditionsin whichnegotiationscould be pursued
by the partiesis perhapsbeingmorethan offset by the fact
that the Force, in its presentconfiguration, may, by
shielding the parties, removethe incentive which they
might otherwisehaveto makeearnestefforts to deal with
the issuesthat divide them,MaintainingUNFICYP
for 13
years without any appreciable
politicalprogress is certainly
cause for seriousdisappointmentand reflection.
As we
pointed out [2013th meeting]on the occasion of the last
mandaterenewal,it shouldnot beexpectedthat UNFICYP
will be maintainedin Cyprusindefinitely. Unless progress is
made towards settlingthe dispute,the danger of conflict
will remainandperhapsintensify,aswill the possibility of a
further exacerbationof internationalrelations well beyond
the islandof Cyprusitself.
77. The financialsituationof UNFICYP also continues to
be a matter of seriousconcern.Its deficit currently
stands
at $56.7 million and is increasingby several million
annually. Even the high-levelappealsto selected Governments mentionedby the Secretary-General’s
report, which
Canada and a numberof other troop contributors
SUPported, have failedto improvematters.Furthermore, as the
Secretary-General’s
report pointsout, the published figures
do not includethe full costsbeingborneby troop-contributhg nations. In Canada’s
case,for example, the “extra
costs” for which we bill theUnitedNations-and for which
we have beenreimbursed
only to 31December 1974 owing
to the Force’sdeficit-representa& a Small fraction of the
costswe absorbfor maintaining
our contingent in Cyprus. 1
call upon all Member States,particularly the.se in the
European region, to give strongfinancial backmg to the
Force to enableit to continueits mission in favour of a
peaceful settlementof this very serious,prolonged dispute.
Without this support,UNFICYPandthe concept of shared
responsibJity by the United Nations membership
for
peace-keeping
operationswill beseriouslyundermlned.

73. Canada has voted in favour of the Security Council
resolution to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus to 15 June 1978. My
Government has also authorized me to announce that
C:anada is prepared to continue its participation in the
Force at the present manning level for the period of the
renewed mandate. Canada has participated in UNFICYP
since its inception and this will bring the length of our
involvement in Cyprus to over 13 years at the conclusion of
the present mandate.
74. The military situation on the island during the last
six-month period has been a relatively quiet one, characterized by a low level of incidents along the cease-fire line.
This is important, as the primary responsibility for peace
and quiet in Cyprus rests, of course, with tha two
communities. UNFICYP, however important its presence
may be, can only assist in this objective.
75. As a troop-contributing nation, Canada is also pleased
by the co-operative working relations existing between the
Force and officials of the communities, as noted by the
Secretary-General in his report. Unfortunately,
as the
Secretary-General notes also, this fails to extend to freedom
of movement in the northern part of Cyprus, where
UNFICYP’s access has been seriously limited. As I have
stated previously in the Council, with reference both to

78. Finally, I wish to recordmy thanks to the United
Nations Secretariat,the ForceCommander,Major-General
JamesQuinn, and all personnelof the Force, for the very
commendablemannerin which UNFICYP continues to
function. MemberStatesshouldbe proud of them. Special
thanks alsois owed to Ambassador
Perez de CuBlIar, who
yesterday relinquishedhis appointment as the Special
Representativeof the Secretary-General
in CYprUs.
We has
sewedthe causeof peaceadmirably.

4 Ibid., 8th meeting, para. 144.
7

84, As in the past, my delegation feek bound to point out
79. As this is probably the last meeting of the Council this
that
restrictions have been placed on the freedom of
year, I wish to say good-bye to our colleagues who are
movement
of the Force in the northern part of Cyprus and
about to leave us. I should like to express the full
that it is in that same part of the island that relations
appreciation of my delegation for the friendship and
between the two communities, where they live side by side,
co-operation extended to us by our colleagues from Bemn,
remain
a matter of concern.
Romania, Panama, Pakistan and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in the course of this year. We wish them great success
8.5. On the other hand, there was no SeriOUS violation of
in their future tasks.
the cease-fire to be regretted. Thus, the Force has dis80, Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation from
charged its task in the best conditions. I should like to pay
French): Sir, may 1 first express to you my delegation’s
a tribute to its Commander, Major-General James Quinn, to
great pleasure at seeing you once again at the United
its officers and to its constituent contingents. In the
Nations, this time to preside over the debates of the
fulfilment of their essential mission, as well as in their
Security Council. You are doing so with authority and skill
humanitarian and very valuable activities, we would assure
and it was with full confidence that we greeted your
them of our full gratitude and confidence.
accession to the presidency. You have just concluded
negotiations on a very delicate matter. We extend to YOU, as 86. In conclusion, I wish to extend the deep sympathy of
my delegation to the President of the Republic of Cyprus,
well as to your Permanent Representative, Ambassador
Mr. Kyprianou, and his family in this moment of trial of
Ramphul, who has made a major contribution to the work
which we are all aware. The French authorities express the
of the Council since Mauritius joined it, our wishesfor full
hope that the events to which I am referring will have a
successin the exercise of your mission.
happy outcome very soon indeed.
81. In the report he submitted on 1 December /S/12463/,
the Secretary-General, after having stressedthe precarious87. As it is probable that we are meeting hers for the last
ness of the situation in Cyprus, once again considered that
time this month, I should like to associate myself with the
the presence of the united Nations Peace-keeping Force in
remarks already made by expressing the gratitude of my
Cyprus remained essential to check the potentially dandelegation to all thos of our colleagues whose term of
gerous situation in the island. The Security Council did not
office is about to end. I have had the benefit personally not
hesitate yesterday to endorse that view by renewing the
only of their spirit of co-operation but also of their advice,
mandate of the Force for a further six-month period
which was most welcome to me as a newcomer. I thank
[resolution 422 (1977)]. Thus, the Security Council has
them all for this and also wish them every successin their
made possible the maintenance of calm in the island and
activities in the United Nations.
has facilitated the search for a peaceful settlement. My
delegation is gratified by this. However, this, it need hardly
88. The PRESIDENT (interpret&on from Frenchl: I can
be said, is not enough to ensure the return of peace. assurethe representative of France that I am very gratified
Nothing, indeed, can be undertaken in the direction of a
by his words of appreciation of the work of the delegation
just and durable settlement without the firm resolve of the
of Mauritius in the Council.
two communities, individually and collectively, to seek a
solution to their own problems. That is why peace requires,
89. Mrs. HYDER (Pakistan): First, Mr. President, I should
in our view, the resumption of intercommunal talks. Since
like to take this opportunity to exprcra my delegation’s
June last, the results of efforts to that end have been
pleasure at seeing you preside over the meetings of the
disappointing. My delegation would like today to renew the
Security Council while it is seized of the question of
appeal made by the Council on 15 September last to the
Cyprus. The Council has indeed been fortunate in having a
representatives of the two communities to resume as soon
person of your eminence, skill and vast experience to guide
as possible their negotiations under the auspices of the
its deliberations. The adoption of the rerolution without
Secretary-General (resolution 414 (1977)]. Those construcdissent yesterday was to a lrrge extent due to your tactful
tive negotiations should be based on detailed and concrete
and patient handling of a difficult situation.
proposals. The terms of the appeal are clear and we hope
that, after the important stage marked by the Nicosia
90. We are sorry to learn that Ambassador Ramphul is
meeting of last February, no one will refuse to assume, as indisposed and, through you, we should like to convey to
soon as possible, the responsibilities incumbent upon him.
him our appreciation for the way in which he conducted
the proceedings of the Council earlier this month and our
82. I should like, in this connexion, to welcome the
best wishesfor a speedy recovery.
efforts made by the Secretary-General to promote the
resumption of negotiations, and to reiterate the full
91. Yesterday, the Council adopted a resolution extending
confidence my Government has in him. I should like, also,
the mandate of the United Nations Peace.keeping Force in
to pay a tribute to the work of his Special Representative,
CYPrUS for another ix months and requesting the Secre
Ambassador Perez de Cuellar, whose presence here I
taly-General to continue the mission of good offices
welcome and to whom I express, together with our
entrusted to him in paragraph 6 of its resolution
heart-felt gratitude, our deep regret at seeing him relinquish
367 (1975).
his duties.
83. Before concluding, I should like very briefly to
comment on a few elements contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.

92. The Secretary-General’s report clearly states that the
presence
of UNFICYP remains indispensable in
keeping the potentially dangerous situation in the island
conthmd

8

under COntrOl,
supervising the cease-fire, maintaining
the
status qU0 in the area between the lines and helping to
resolve incidents and other problems arising between the
parties. In helping to maintain calm in the island, the Force
also facilitates the search for a peaceful settlement,
93. In view of these considerations, my delegation suPported the resolution extending the mandate of UNFrCyp.
94. We should like to associate ourselves with other
speakers in paying a tribute to the two parties, which have
displayed great understanding and flexibility, thereby
making it possible for the Council to adopt this resolution.
95. I also wish to place on record the deep appreciation of
my delegation for the services rendered by UNFICYP and
to pay a special tribute to Mr. PBrez de Cubllar, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus, for his
contribution to the peace-keeping efforts in the island.
96. From the report of the Secretary-General, we have
noted with satisfaction that, despite recurring difficulties,
UNFICYP has succeeded in keeping the situation around
the cease-fire lines quiet and that there have been no serious
breaches of the cease-fire during this period. However, as
the Secretary-General has noted, the tensions in the island
have shown no signs of abating and the underlying political
differences between the people of Cyprus are no nearer
solution. We feel that the extension of the UNFICYP
mandate should provide the impetus for setting up efforts
to find a settlement, instead of making the Council
oblivious of this need because of the outward calm it has
been able to restore.
97. My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General that
the negotiations between the representatives of the two
Cypriot communities are the best available method of
achieving a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus
problem. In this context, my delegation would like to
express our deep appreciation of the work done by the
Secretary-General and his untiring efforts in this direction.
98. It is to be regretted that it has not proved possible,
either at Vienna or at the subsequent consultations held at
Nicosia by the Secretary-General, to move the Parties
towards a resolution of their conflicting positions. MY
delegation hopes that the parties concerned will make every
effort to overcome the obstacles that stand in the way of
genuine negotiations for a just and durable settlement of
the Cyprus problem based on the fundamental and legitimate rights of all concerned.
99. Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela) (interpretation
from
,Spa~zishJ: Mr. President, the Venezuelan delegation is very
pleased at seeing you presiding over the work of the
Council, especially in connexion with the delicate matter
before US. We should like to express to You our aPPrecjatjon for your coming to New York despite the many
actjvjtjes that require your presence in Mauritius. We feel
fortunate in being able to count on Your qualities as an
excellent diplomat which are reflected in the results of our
work today.

100. We have before us the report of the SecretaryGeneral in which we are told that, in vjew of the present
cjrcumstances in c~pms, the presence of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus remains indispensable jn keeping
the Potentially dangerous situation in the island under
control, supervising the cease-fire, maintaining the status
@o in the area between the lines and helping to resolve
incidents and other problems arising between the parties, In
extending the mandate of UNFICYP for a new six-month
Period, it was our wish to contribute to the maintenance of
calm in Cyprus, whose population is our main concern.
However, the Secretary-General has warned us that underlying tensions have shown no sign of abating and the political
differences separating the various sectors of the Cypriot
population are no nearer solution,
101. The delegation of Venezuela continues to hope that a
just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem will be
reached through negotiations between the representatives
of the two Cypriot communities, with the constant
participation of the good offices of the Secretary-General,
to whom we should like to address words of encouragement
and gratitude.
102. We also express our gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus, Ambassador
Javier Pdrez de CuBlIar, who today ends his mission, which
in our view was discharged in a praiseworthy and distinguished manner, as well as to the Commander of the Force
and the military and civilian personnel accompanying him
in his selfless task.
103. Before concluding, Mr. President, we should like
through you, to express to the Government of Cyprus our
regret at the kidnapping of the son of the President of that
country and our hope that he will soon be free.
104. Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, the delegation of Panama would
very much like to thank you for your efforts in coming
here to preside over the proceedings of the Security Council
in the second part of the month of December.
105. We should like to register our pleasure at the fact
that around this table today there are three distinguished
ladies, delegates from Africa, Asia and Latin America, who,
because of their professional expertise, are an effective
demonstration of the new role being played by women in
the third world.
106. Mr. President, your presence to conduct our proceedings is a very positive phenomenon and we congratulate You
upon your success, thanks to your distinguished qualities as
a negotiator, in seeing to it yesterday that the parties and
the Council approved the draft resolution prepared, with
the co-operation of the Secretariat, by Ambassador
Ramphul. The Council recognizes and appreciates his work
as the architect of resolution 421 (1977), adopted unanimously, creating a Committee having the task of ensuring a
total arms embargo against South Africa. Your work and
that of your predecessor are a measure of the great Prestige
and international standing of Mauritius in the international
arena.

107. The delegation of Panama voted in favour of resolution 422 (1977), which was adopted by the Council last
night and in accordance with which the stationing in
cyprus of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force, established by resolution 186 (1964), has once again been
renewed for a period of six months ending 15 June 1978.
The affirmative vote of Panama was motivated by the hope
that, during the period of the renewed mandate of
UNFICYP, it would prove possible to find a just and lasting
peaceful solution.
108. Furthermore, my delegation has noted the opinion
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report to the
effect that
“the underlying tensions have shown no sign of abating
and the political differences confronting the people of
Cyprus have been brought no nearer to a solution”
(S/12463, para. 621.
Evidence of that atmosphere of tension and conflict, which
has been corroborated by the opinion of the SecretaryGeneral, is the deplorable event of the kidnapping on
Wednesday, 14 December, of Lieutenant
A&leas
Kyprianou, son of President Spyros Kyprianou of the
Republic of Cyprus. We express the sincere hope that the
feelings of civilized peoples will prevail and that Lieutenant
Kyprianou will be returned safe and sound to his family,
thus avoiding a deterioration of the distressing and unfortunate situation which still afflicts the island.

treaties were signed with the unanimous blessing of the
peoples and Governments of Latin America and also of the
rest of the international community. Those treaties, which
have already been approved by the Panamanian people by a
proportion of 2 to 1 in a national plebiscite effected in the
presence of the United Nations, will now be submitted for
the approval of the United States Senate, for which a
majority of two thirds of the Senators present and voting is
required.
112. Just as in the case of Cyprus, psychological barriers
and ethnic prejudices must be overcome in order to reach a
peaceful solution. In the process of ratifying the Panama
Canal treaties, the responsible circles in the United States,
who deserve our wholehearted gratitude, will have to carry
out coherent and sustaining action in order to overcome the
mental resistance, anachronisms, misguided concepts and
obstacles on the part of those who still cling to the
colonialist thinking of the beginning of this century and to
the obsolete doctrines of foreordained destiny, gun-boat
diplomacy, the policy of the “big stick” and the function
of the standard bearers of civilization in both the north and
south of the American continent.
113. In the face of those manifestations of reaction, which
are opposed to the changes called for by the spirit of our
times, the demands of contemporary man for the solution
of existing problems in accordance with the ideals of peace
and justice of the international community are daily
becoming more insistent.

109. The Secretary-General goes on to say:

114. There is a new outlook making its way in the world,
in particular in our continent. In the Declaration of
Washington, signed on 7 September 1977, the heads of
State, heads of Government and other representatives of
the American republics, including the Prime Minister of
Canada, stated that

“I continue to hold to the view that the negotiations
between the representatives of the two Cypriot communities . . . are the best available method of achieving a
just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem.”
[ibid , pat-a. 70./

“the Panama Canal Treaty is based on the recognition of
the sovereignty of the Republic of Panama over the
totality of its national territory”
1
and that

That view is in keeping with the wishes expressed by the
Council in resolution 414 (1977) of 15 September and with
a similar appeal issued by the General Assembly in
resolution 32/15 of 9 November, which was adopted by an
overwhelming majority of 116 votes in favour, with only
6 against.

“settlement of the Panama Canal issue represents a major
step toward strengthening of relations among the nations
of the Western Hemisphere”.5

110. It is clear that psychological barriers exist which so
far have barred the way to substantial progress in the
negotiations, barriers which should be overcome by coherent action on the part of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General.

115. It is encouraging that a new generation of leaders
from all geographical and political latitudes in the hemisphere have been giving their support to the new Panama
Canal treaties, inasmuch as they believe that those instruments will contribute to the creation of a climate of
cordiality and understanding between the United States and
the countries of Latin America, whose interests in the
Canal, from the standpoint of its position as a universal
artery of trade and friendship, are identical. For this reason,
it is logical to hope that the Torrijos-Carter treaties will in
due course receive the approval of the United States Senate,
in accordance with the constitutional procedures of that
country. When that happens, Panama will have to wait until

111. With regard to the psychological barriers, Panama
also has accumulated a certain amount of experience. My
country needed 13 years of negotiations in order to
overcome psychological resistance on the part of the
Executive Branch of the United States Government so as to
arrive at the formulation of the new Panama Canal treaties.
Those treaties are the result of a compromise between the
two nations. Both nations made concessions in order to
reach a peaceful solution of the problem. Thanks to the
fighting spirit and antiAcoIonialist vocation of General
Torrijos, on the one hand, and the democratic spirit and
moral conscience of President Carter on the other, the new

5 See The Department of StateBulletin, vol. LXXVII, No. 1999,

p. 502.
10

I

the Year 2000 in order to obtain, with regard to the panama
Canal, what the Egyptians obtained 20 years ago with
respect to the Suez Canal.

122* In the course of the process of solving the conflict, as
it has been envisaged by the Security Council, tms body
would also be empowered to appoint a commission of
inquiry composed of some of its members to identify and
evaluate new situations that may have arisen since the
foreign mvaSiOn and to take any additional measures that
the Council may deem necessary, in accordance with the
Powers which, I repeat, are granted it under Article 3g of
the Charter. In our judgement, taking into account the
circumstances and most particularly the appeal issued by an
overwhelming majority of the members of the General
Assembly, the Council should take those measures before
the expiry of the new six-month period of the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus.

116. With regard to the question of Cyprus, my delegation
is very mush concerned, as is the international community,
witI1 the findings of the Secretary-General to the effect

that:

“The efforts to achieve a solution of the underlying
problems confronting the two communities have continued to yield disappointing results. Thus, it has not
been possible since 3 June to continue the intercommunal
meetings at Nicosia under the auspices of my Special
Representative, despite the agreement to that effect
reached at the conclusion of the first round of the new
SeriCS of intercommunal talks at Vienna and recorded in
the communique of 7 April.“(Ibid.,
para. 69.1

123. In conclusion, my delegation would like to express
its sincere gratitude for the distinguished services rendered
to the United Nations, UNFICYP and the people of Cyprus,
as Well as to the ideals of the United Nations, by
Ambassador Perez de Cuellar, a distinguished diplomat
from Peru, with vast experience and great qualities of mind
and heart, who yesterday concluded his work as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus. For
more than two years, Ambassador Perez de Cuellar performed distinguished work as colleague and adviser in the
good offices mission entrusted to the SecretaryGeneral by
the Security Council. My delegation associates itself with
Mr. Waldheim’s eloquent expression of gratitude for the
meritorious services of Mr. PBrez de Cuellar, gratitude
which, I am sure, is shared by all members of the Council.
We hope that Mr. Perez de Cuellar, who is returning to his
country’s diplomatic service, will have great success in his
new post.

117. In the course of our informal consultations on the
renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP, some delegations
went beyond the procedural aspect and entered into
considerations of substance of the problem. My delegation
believes that this is the right moment to make a few brief
comments on the path to follow to arrive at a final solution
of the Cyprus problem.
118. The demographic situation and the ethnic composition in Cyprus, and also the internal political events in
the territories of the parties to the conflict, give no grounds
for considering now that the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral will lead to the acceptance of a formula for a just
and lasting peace.

124. Similarly, my delegation would like to express its
sincere gratitude to those Governments which have made
contingents available to UNFICYP and those which have
contributed voluntarily to the financing of the Force,
which is in difficulty. This is a fundamental operation for
the maintenance of peace that enhances the image of the
United, Nations in the world.

119. It should be pointed out, in this respect, that the
General Assembly, in resolution 31/12 of 12 November
1976, paragraph 5, expresses the hope “that the Security
Council will consider appropriate steps for the implementation of its resolution 365 (1974) of 13 December 1974”.
Similarly, the Assembly, in resolution 32/15 of 9 November
1977, paragraph 5, recommends that the Council should
keep the question of Cyprus under constant review and
adopt all practical means to promote the effective implementation of its relevant resolutions in all their aspects.

125. We also venture to express to the Force Commander,
Major-General James Quinn and, through him, to all the
officers and men and the civilian personnel of UNFlCYP,
how highly we appreciate their efforts and devotion to the
cause of peace and justice. We should like to assure them
that we shall always recall with gratitude and admiration
their outstanding work in the service of the cause of the
United Nations.

120. The Security Council, in the exercise of its duties and
also in response to the urgent appeal of the General
Assembly, taking account of the bleak outlook given to us
by the Secretary-General in his report, should not and
cannot delay any longer the adoption of measures under
the Charter to put an end to this conflict.

126. This may perhaps be the last meeting of the Council
for this month. Panama will conclude its tenure of office in
this
at the end of 1977. I should therefore like to
t&e this opportunity to express to the statesmen with
whom we shared mstltutional responsibilities over the last
two years in this body our cordial gratitude for the many
proofs of friendship, co-operation, solidarity and under=
that they have so generously afforded mY country,
my delegation and me personally a

121. In the light of the fact that the Security Council has
already clearly determined that the foreign military occupation of the Republic of Cyprus should cease and respect
should be shown for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment of the Republic of
Cyprus, the Council is now in a position to exercrse the
powers granted it under Article 39 of the Charter, whereby
it is empowered to make recommendations or to decide
what measures shall be taken in accordance with Articles 41
and 42, to maintain or restore international peace and
security.

organ

standing

127. The PRESIDI~T
AS there are no more names on
the list of speakers, I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of MAURITIUS.
11

128. The purpose of our meetings was to consjder a
further examination and extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus-the operative words being “peace-keeping”-providing
the breathing
space for the parties to get together and find a just and
durable solution to the problem.
129. The report of the Secretary-General has been of
fundamental assistance in helping us to ascertain the facts,
The affirmative vote of my delegation on the resolution
adopted Yesterday is in keeping with out belief that the
United Nations Force in Cyprus must continue to discharge
the mandate entrusted to it by the Council. On the basis of
the recommendations
in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, everything seems to indicate that the most
reasonable course is to maintain the Force for the performance of its delicate task unti1 such time as negotiations
between the two parties in Cyprus produce sufficient
progress to render unnecessary its presence there.
130. My delegation wishes to avail itself of this opportunity to congratulate the Secretary-General, who in his
enlightened report gives us a clear picture of the present
situation in Cyprus and a detailed account of the events
that occurred during the period of the mandate that has
just expired.
131. I wish at this stage to answer the opening remarks
made by the representative of Turkey in his statement
yesterday-not
that I take umbrage at them, because they
do not deserve such consideration.
I can assure the
members of the Council that I am satisfied that at no
moment have my Permanent Representative or the Secretariat lapsed in any of their duties regarding protocol or
procedure.
132. Despite the emphasis placed by the Secretary-General
himself on his good offices, there has been no significant
progress between the parties, although it is to be hoped
that, in accordance with the wishes shares here, 1 am sure,
by the entire international community, the quest for a
negotiated settlement will go on.

I omit a few lines, so as not to tire the assembly, and
conclude:
“Why should you turn against this lesson of Your youth
and hate an evil for which you are the better? “6
135. Resumingmy functions as PRESIDENT, I now call
on the representativeof Greece who wishes to exercise his
right of reply.
136. Mr. PAPOULIAS (Greece): I do not intend to
indulge in polemicswith the representative of Turkey. In
his statement yesterday, he referred again to the question
of who committed or is committing aggression against
Cyprus. In view of the fact that there is a whole seriesOf
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions on the
matter-which, incidentally, Turkey has consistently
opposed-we may leave judgement to the appreciation of
the Council.
137. As regards the invoking by Mr. Tiirkmen of the
Treaty of Guarantee7 asjustifying the armed attack against
the Republic of Cyprus, suffice it to say that that is
contrary to Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter, to the
provisions of the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States, and to so many other international instruments. I would further point out that the Treaty of
Guarantee provides in its article IV that any action would
have “the sole aim of re-establishing the state of affairs
createdby the present Treaty”.
138. The return to the status quo ante was pledged by the
Turkish Government at the time of the armed attack
againstCyprus in July 1974. No stretch of the imagination
can make the Council believe that that pledge has been
honoured. I understand that my colleague from Turkey
wishesto passover this very important point in silence, but,
before speakingof double talk by others, he should first
look into his own files.

133. My delegation, during this period of goodwill among
men, wishes to urge the parties directly concerned in the
difficult problem that overwhelms Cyprus to continue the
dialogue in the hope that they can progress towards the
desired goal of a just and lasting peace and establish the
new order to which Cyprus has a right as an independent
and sovereign nation.

139. I fail to grasp the significance of his second remark
about the relationship between the communiqud recently
signedat Brusselsby the Foreign Ministers of Greece and
Turkey and my statement yesterday in the Council. We
have always stood for settling the Cyprus problem through
intercommunal negotiations under the auspices of the
Secretary-General,and that presupposesthat these negotiations must be serious and substantive. That still has to
happenafter three years. Let us hope it will.

134. It is amazing how the wind blows sometimes, how
the brothers of yesterday have become the enemies of
today in Cyprus. Is there no hope that men of goodwill will
renew their dedication to peaceful coexistence in their
motherland? Let them try to find the peace they deserve
and achieve the social justice every human being is entitled
to. Perhaps, in this connexion, I should turn to the source
from which I sometimes derive my inspiration and, in the
words of the poet, say to the two parties:

140. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Cyprus in exerciseof the right of reply.
141. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, in the first
place I should like to thank YOU and the other membersof
the Council for your sympathetic references to the tragic
events regardingthe kidnapping of the son of our President
and your wishesfor a happy outcome. They reflect the
wishesof the whole international community, I understand,
and the wishesof the people of Cyprus without exception.

“If it is too much to ask of frail mankind
To forgive those that trespass against US,
At least spareyourself the anguishof hatred
And, if you cannot pardon, yield to oblivion.“6

7 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 382, p. 3.

6 Quoted in French by the speaker.

13

142. I should like to thank those members of the Council
who made a significant contribution towards a just and
lasting solution of the Cyprus problem by making statements which went to the root of the problem, emphasized
the need for a solution and moved away from the
perfunctoriness of speeches without content.

146. That part has been lacking in the function of the
United Nations on Cyprus, although we have a plethora of
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council that all remain unimplemented. It goes to the very
root of the functioning of the United Nations in its very
purpose. Is the United Nations here merely to adopt, in an
academic discussion, resolutions which are not intended to
be implemented? That is a matter which is brought to the
attention of the Council by the two resolutions on Cyprus,
and aIso more generally by other resolutions with the same
tenor. Therefore it is high time the Council moved out of
its present inaction and became the principal organ of the
United Nations it is meant to be for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

143. First of all, I should like to thank the representative
of India for having made the important point that, jn
considering the adoption of the draft resolution to renew
the mandate, the parties concerned need not be consulted
on every detail of that draft. I agree with that view. We
must distinguish between the parties concerned, jn accordance with the original Security Council resolutjon
186 (1964), and the consent of the Government of Cyprus.
The party that must give its consent to the renewal of the
mandate is the Government of Cyprus. The concerned
parties may be consulted but they have no decjdjng voice
on the issue. That point was brought out very diplomatjtally by the representative of India, and it is time that it
was brought out because much time is lost unnecessarily in
renewing the mandate by giving extraordinary consideration, as though it required the consent of the parties
concerned, contrary to the provisions of resolution
186 (1964), which restricts consent to the Government of
Cyprus.

147. I am therefore very grateful to those members of the
Council who have felt it their duty as members of the
Council to bring this forward, for what I say here as a
non-member of the Council is merely an appeal by my
people, as I said yesterday, for application of the only
means of solving the problem.
148. Negotiations were meant to take place. We are fully in
favour of negotiations, but it was amply pointed out in my
statement that they must be meaningful and comprehensive, as the Secretary-General has demanded and still
demands before resuming the negotiations. As I said before,
we have to take a look at the negotiations. The SecretaryGeneral refuses to go to these negotiations because he
knows that they are meaningless and he knows why. But
those who press him to proceed, irrespective of what these
negotiations are, perhaps did not have time to look into the
facts of the case.

144. Next, I should like to refer to the importance of
statements in regard to the resolution which was overwhelmingly adopted by the General Assembly at its current
session by 116 votes [resolution 32/15/, and to the
recommendation that the resolution makes to the Security
Council for the due implementation of the Council’s own
resolution 36.5 (1974), endorsing Assembly resolution
3212 (XXIX). In the previous year there was the expression
of hope that the Security Council would consider appropriate steps for the implementation of its resolution
36.5 (1974). This year the Assembly comes again, more
emphatically, with a recommendation that the Council
should adopt all practical means to promote effective
implementation of the relevant resolutions. This surely is a
matter that should not be evaded. Mention was made in the
meeting of the renewal of the mandate being necessitated
because the problem was not solved in the manner provided
for in the Charter, as mentioned by the representative of
Panama, namely, by complying with Article 39, which
specifically says:

149. One can see the facts of the case. Mr. Celik was kind
enough to bring them out. He said that it was not possible
to have meaningful negotiations because of the attitude of
the Greek Cypriot side. He did not say what that attitude
was; but we know very well that the attitude which the
Secretary-General says prevents the progress of negotiations
is the lack of concrete and comprehensive proposals from
both sides.
1.50. As for the Greek Cypriot side, it is officially on
record that, on three distinct occasions, concrete and
comprehensive proposals were made on the territorial issue,
with maps, and on those three occasions there was
absolutely no response from the Turkish side, nothing
said-no mention at all-about the burning territorial issue
or imperfect constitutional provisions. There was nothing
concrete, so that the Secretary-General tired of this
situation.

“The Security Council shall determine the existence of
any threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of
aggression and shall make recommendations, or decide
what measures shall be taken in accordance with Articles
41 and 42.”

151. But the international community, particularly the
Security Council, should enter into this question. In this
connexion, I am very grateful to the President of the
Council for having read out to us that excellent poem in
French about the need for human feelings, the human
heart, the human spirit to come into play; for abandoning
hatred and moving towards love and the good relations that
existed between the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish
Cypriots, As I said yesterday-and I quoted the Secretary
General-those good relations still exist. And, at the last

145. Surely the question of Cyprus comes within that
defjnjtjon. The moment the Security Council becomes
seized of an item which involves a threat to peace, breach
of the peace or act of aggression, jt shall make recommendations and shall decide what measures shall be taken jn
accordance with Articles 41 and 42 which, as we all know,
provide for action to enforce the implementation of jts
resolutions.
13

157. I would ask you, Mr. President, to give a ruling on
this because it is an anomaly to allow this situation to
continue. If anybody speaking in the United Nations can
address the Members as he pleases, we shall come to a
situation similar to that of the Tower of Babel.

series of Council meetings on Cyprus, I recalled f2013th
meeting/ that the representative of the World Council of
Churches, when he went to Cyprus, even after the invasion,
found that there was in the hearts of the ordinary
rank-and-file Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots a willingness to conciliate and to work together. But they were and
are prevented from doing so by the policy of division and
partition of the Ankara rigime. Therefore, what you said,
Mr, President, was good. The people want it, and they have
it in their hearts to do it, but they are prevented by force.

158. Furthermore, Mr. Celik comes here as a person
supplying information and he says that he is the representative of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus-an entity
that is not recognized by the United Nations and rejected
by resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly; he comes with the brazen force of the aggressor
Power under whose direction he acts. NOW this is, again,
another anomaly that should be put right; surely in the
Security Council, order should prevail.

152. And now that Ankara is established in Cyprus as the
occupying Power in the invaded area, Mr. Celik, the dear
little man who was here, is merely the instrument of
Ankara. He could not be otherwise; he would not be here if
he were not the instrument of Ankara.

159. Since Mr. Celik had to bring forward his so-called
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus, I would ask: What is
the territory and what is the population of this State? The
territory is the invaded area, that is, nearly 40 per cent of
the territory of Cyprus, which has been occupied by force
and aggression, from which the indigenous population has
been forcibly ejected, creating 200,000 refugees, and’ in
order to supplement the population of that area, been
replaced by a crude Anatolian population imported from
the interior of Turkey, in a manner that overwhelmed and
destroyed the identity, civilization and level of culture of
the Turkish Cypriots. These have been submerged in an
influx into the island of aliens who are now, together with
the army, ruling over the occupied area and putting forward
representatives of the Turkish Cypriots. This is not a
situation that can be accepted by the international community.

153. Therefore we cannot ignore the facts. They are
unpleasant and I should like not to have had to state them.
But how can we have meaningful negotiations when we
know that there is the overwhelming presence of a Power
there with its army preventing conciliation, preventing
negotiation in a meaningful way, preventing co-operation
for the independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus or
for a viable State in that concept? There id but a semblance
of negotiations so as to consolidate, by faits accomplis and
unilateral actions, the aggressive occupation of part of the
territory of Cyprus contrary to the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.
1.54. Who says that the people of Cyprus if left alone
could not negotiate sincerely and come to a solution? No
one, But WC say that there must be freedom of negotiation,
not negotiation under the heel of the invader, the invader
who is there not merely to hold territory but to divide and
partition the island.

160. Therefore, I noted the idea proposed by the representative of Panama that a commission of inquiry should go
and see this situation. The question of Cyprus has become
an international problem because it makes it manifest that
Security Council resolutions are neglected and the occupying force takes advantage of the situation to proceed
further in its aggression, continuing now for three years.

155. That is the position that Mr. Celik, the dear little
man who came here and who is in reality the instrument of
Ankara, took when he said “Oh, we could not negotiate
because we heard them speak about a unitary State”. So,
anything that means unity, anything that means getting
together, anything that means conciliation is anathema.
That is what he has to say. But I shall repeat what I said in
my statement yesterday:

161. I shall conclude by saying that I repeat my appeaI
that, in order to solve the problem, we have to proceed to
implement the resolutions of the United Nations so as to
relieve the situation from the oppression of an army and
allow a spirit of harmony and co-operation to blossom in
the hearts of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot people
so that they can arrive at a solution in their negotiations, a
just and lasting solution that cannot be outside the
resolutions of the United Nations.

“Ankara tries to impose this illegal entity”-the
socalled Turkish Federated State of Cyprus- “and . . . puts
forward its representative /n/rr. Q&k] in order to provide
a means of creating confusion and eclipsing itself from
the scene of the drama, thinking that it can thus escape
its heavy responsibilities”[2054th
meeting, para. 46].
156. That brings me to say that when Mr, Celik came
here-perhaps under orders-he abused his position. I would
have raised a point of order yesterday, but I did not want
to take up the Council’s time when it was under such
pressure. He addressed the representative of Cyprus as “the
representative of the Greek Cypriots”. No Member of the
United Nations can do that. It is inappropriate. It would be
improper and an anomaly. This is even more so in the case
of a person who comes under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure merely to give information, and goes out
of his way to address a Member of the United Nations in a
derogatory way.

162. Therefore, by a logical exercise of reason and by a
sense of justice that derives in part from the exercise of
reason, we can see that there can be no solution otherwise,
because, if the party negotiating is the instrument of the
invader, he cannot proceed otherwise than for a continuing
occupation of the territory of Cyprus in keeping with the
narrowly conceived interest of Ankara, and therefore the
negotiations could not produce results. Let the negotiations
be freely carried out, as was said by a number of members
of the Council. The Soviet Union and others have said it:
they must be left alone, free of outside interference.
14

163. I see from an issued statement that Turkey has
announced that it is withdrawing 7,000 of its troops from
the island, but that does not make the slightest difference.
We are not relying on arms and weapons. We do not have a
big army there, so that if Turkey takes away a number of
its troops it does not make any difference. What is catled
for by the resolution is the withdrawal of Turkish forces
from the territory of Cyprus. If Turkey had announced that
it had withdrawn its forces from the area of Famagusta or
from some other area, I would understand it as being a
gesture of goodwill aimed at improving negotiations. But to
say that the army, instead of being 40,000, will be 35,000,
well, that would merely help the economy of Turkey and
not the situation in Cyprus. So we had better look at things
as they really are. If Turkey wants to make a gesture in a
move towards starting meaningful negotiations, it can do SO
by withdrawing
from a part of the territory, as was
suggested by the Secretary-General at, I believe, the first
round of talks.
164. Therefore, even to mention that Turkey is withdrawing a part of its-army does not mean anything. The
statement is significant in that it contains a paragraph that
says: “The army will remain until a final political solution
is found”. On what does a “final political solution” depend
but on the negotiations? And if one party, being the
instrument of Ankara, says “no” to the negotiations, there
will be none.

171. It is also a pity that Mr. Rossides . . .
172. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus):

Point of order.

173. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
Cyprus on a point of order.

of

174. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I did not want to raise this
point of order last night because of the late hour, but since
it is repeated now I request you, Mr. President, to inform
the person appearing here now under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure that while he is speaking here
he should address himself to all representatives of Member
States by their proper titles and not affix to them titles
imposed by others. Therefore, I request you to call the
speaker to order.
17.5. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Turkey on a point of order.

16.5. I apologize if my statement has been too long, but I
think that every word I have said reflects the actuality in
Cyprus. I hope that the Council will reflect on this matter
of helping to bring about a solution of the problem of
Cyprus by proceeding to some form of implementation of
its resolutions. Various means by which the Council can
proceed to that end are provided in the Charter.

176. Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey): I think that all countries
and all representatives and all persons speaking in the
Security Council or in the General Assembly have the
privilege of addressing other representatives of countries as
they wish, This has been an established practice in the
United Nations for a very long time. There was a time, I
remember, when a certain representative was described as
“this gentleman who represents only himself’. Some
countries are called an entity. Therefore, I think that I have
the right to address the representative who presumes to
speak on behalf of Cyprus as I wish, and the representative
of the Turkish community has the same right. On the other
hand, Mr. Rossides has just referred to Mr. Celik as “that
little man”. How does he expect Mr. Atalay to reply to
him?

166. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
Council that I have just received a letter dated 16 December
from the representative of Turkey in which he requests that
Mr. Nail Atalay should be invited to participate in the
consideration of the question on the agenda. I propose
therefore, with the consent of the Council, to invite
Mr. Atalay to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

177. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Cyprus on a point of order.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Atalay took a place
at the Council table.
167. The PRESIDENT:

170. It is sad that the Greek Cypriot representative
continues to distort the intercommunal nature of the
problem and even at this late hour refuses to look upon the
Turkish Cypriot community as a true counterpart to the
Greek Cypriot community in the Cyprus problem. If this
attitude prevails, how can it be possible for a meaningful
negotiation to be conducted between the two communities?

178. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): The point raised by the
representative of Turkey is that any Member of the United
Nations can address any other Member in whichever way he
likes, I, for my part, dispute that right because it is a
tendency towards anarchy and anomaly. I am perfectly
certain that if it were properly researched, it would be
found to be not so. No one who respects the proper order
of the United Nations would adopt that attitude. The
representative of Turkey may not wish to do so, but others
wish to respect the order and the propriety of the United
Nations. But his point was that this is a right of Members.
The person regarding whom I made the objection is not a
Member of the United Nations and, therefore, the point of
order of the representative of Turkey in itself does not
stand.

I call on Mr. Atalay.

168. Mr. ATALAY: Mr. President, I wish to express my
gratitude to you and, through you, to the other members of
the Council for allowing me to make my statement. It is
with reluctance that I speak and I shall be very brief.
169. My Minister, Mr. Vedat Celia, has already and
adequately replied, both last night and on previous occasions, to the allegations made by the representative of the
Greek Cypriot Administration which are nothing new to
this august body and are merely repetitions of what has
been said over the past three years.
15

179. The PRESIDENT:
Gentlemen, at the close of the
meeting you are raising a very delicate issue. If we try to
split hairs, this procedural wrangle might last for hours, I
certainly will take note of the objection raised by the
representativeof Cyprus and will leave it to the wisdomof
the legal pundits of the United Nations and the Security
Council to disentangleit,

187. Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey): First of all, I should like
to assure you, Mr. President, that when I raised the
question of procedure yesterday I meant no disrespectto
you at all. I have read again what I said and I am also
assuredthat I paid proper respect to you asan experienced
diplomat and as the distinguished Minister for External
Affairs of your country. I welcomed your arrival to New
York and also said that we were hoping to benefit from
your wisdom.

180. I now call on Mr. Atalay.
181. Mr. ATALAY: It is a pity that Mr. Rossideshas
chosen to indulge in his normal rhetoric which cannot
possibly help the solution of the Cyprus problem on the
basis of goodwill and mutual respect, At this time, I am
very sorry to say that the membersof the Council will agree
with me that a man of his age and experience could and
shouldhave done better.

188. The only point I should like to take up with regard
to the several rights of reply is the one raised by
AmbassadorRossides.Referring to what the representative
of India said, Mr. Rossidessaid that there was no need for
the concurrenceof parties for the extensionof the mandate
of the Force andthat the only party to be consulted should
be the so-calledGovernment of Cyprus. I think he should
read again the seventh preambular paragraph of the
resolution adopted yesterday by the Council [resolution
422 (197711.The resolution notes

182. As my Minister said last night, in the interests of
contributing to the establishment of an atmosphereconducive to meaningful negotiations, we must avoid acrimonious debates and political wrangles at international forums
at all costs.
183. 1 am also sorry to observe that Mr, Rossideshasseen
fit to repeat his familiar insults againstthe Turkish Cypriot
leaders. It should be pointed out that these leaders have
been elected by the Turkish Cypriot community through
their democratic elections and, therefore, representthe will
of the Turkish Cypriot community. Every such insult
againstthe Turkish Cypriot leadersis also an insult against
the Turkish Cypriot community as a whole. Surely, this is
not compatible with the alleged will to settle the problem
of Cyprus through negotiations between the representatives
of the two communities on an equal footing. If the Greek
Cypriot side genuinely desires friendship towards and
co-operation with the Turkish Cypriot community, the
least it can do is to refrain from insulting the Turkish
Cypriot community and its democratically elected leaders.
184. As regards the allegations of the Greek Cypriot
representative, Mr. Rossides,regarding mass colonization,
they have also been adequately answered on previous
occasions.It would suffice here to say that there is no
colonization in northern Cyprus. It is alsopertinent to state
that our case is not based on the population ratio of the
two communities, so we have no reason to increase our
population, There is agreement to establisha bi-communal
federation, and equality between the constituent States of a
federation is inherent in any federation, no matter what the
population of each State may be.

“the concurrenceof the parties concerned in the recommendation by the Secretary-General that the Security
Council extend the stationing of the United Nations
Peace-keepingForce in Cyprus for a further period of six
months”.
189. I think that concurrence is a prerequisite for the
extension of the mandate of the Force, and there is no
doubt on that issue. I think he misunderstood what
AmbassadorJaipal said, I stand to be corrected, of course,
if I am mistaken,but what AmbassadorJaipal said was that
we shouldadopt a simpleresolution so that there would be
no need to consult the parties on the wording of the
resolution, becauseit would be a procedural resolution,
addressingitself directly to the extension of the mandateof
the Force. Therefore, the only thing on which to consult
the parties would be whether they agreedor not to the
extension of the Force. That is how I understood what
AmbassadorJaipal said.
190. The PRESIDENT: I should like to make an appealto
my colleague, the representative of Cyprus, becauseno
further wrangling over words will help us. We are all aware
of the problems,I am making an appealto him becausethis
will only lead to the further exerciseof the right of reply
on the other side, and we shall never finish. Perhapswe can
do so now on this harmonious note. Everyone is aware of
all the facts of the problem concerning Cyprus and I can
assurehim that the whole Council has taken good note of
what he said; he must have noticed the undivided attention
with which the whole Council listenedto his statement and
to the other statements. I hope he will credit us with
sufficient wisdom to be able to differentiate, to appreciate
and to give the weight that eachdeservesto the different
argumentssubmitted to the Council. I beg of you to leave
us, as “members of the jury”, to evaluate the submissions
of both “learned counsels”.

185. I should like to reiterate that the Turkish Cypriot
sidewill continue to do everything in its power to facilitate
the solution of the Cyprus problem. It is our hope that the
Greek Cypriot sidewill reciprocate. As my Minister saidlast
night, provided we can avoid acrimonious debates in
international forums, and provided goodwill, realism and
common senseprevail, there is no reasonwhatsoever why
1978 should not be the year of a permanent settlement for
Cyprus.

191. I call on the representativeof Cyprus in exercise of
his right of reply.

186. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Turkey in exercise of his right of repIy.

192. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I only want
facts; we cannot leave facts uncorrected.
16

to correct

193. The person who spoke under article 39 said that the
present Turkish Cypriot leadershp had been elected by the
Turkish Cypriot community. This is contradicted by the
,facts, because the Turkish Cypriot community as we know
and understand it does not include the Turkish army. Yet
iall 30,000 members of the Turkish army were given
{citizenship in Cyprus and were entitled to participate in the
election. They did participate, and some of them even
became candidates. Those facts cannot be ignored or
whitewashed.
The influx or invasion of about 50,000
Anatolian Turks was carried out on various pretexts as, for
example, that those thousands were needed as workers-as
if there were not enough workers in Cyprus-or
with some
other excuse. It is well known and has been published in
international papers that their number was 50,000 or
40,000 and that they were given citizenship and the right to
vote. We have the figures for the amalgam of persons who
voted in ,the election of those people. They were not
Turkish Cypriots alone, but included many others.

198. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I circulated a letter to that
effect and no reply came to the contrary. Why did they not
reply to the letter I sent a month ago?
199. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Benin has
asked to speak in exercise of her right of reply.
200. Mrs. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation from
French): As this is the last meeting of the Council before
the end of Benin’s term, I should like to thank all members
for their understanding and co-operation. It was for us a
real pleasure to work with them. WC have drawn a wealth of
experience from that work, and this will help us to
discharge our diverse tasks in the various bodies of the
United Nations.
201. In conclusion, I wish to express the gratitude of my
delegation and my country for the solidarity shown with us
by members of the Council and the other members of the
international community throughout the various debates of
the Council on the aggression of which Benin was the
victim on 16 January 1977. The valiant peopIe of Benin
will always be grateful to them.

194. In a letter I sent to the Secretary-General about a
month ago, I gave all those facts and I received no answer in
contradiction of those facts. Now that speaker comes here
and says “We are elected”. We cannot allow this travesty
which is contrary to reality.

202. The PRESIDENT: Before I declare the adjournment
of the meeting, as we are reaching the end of the year-and
I hope very sincerely for everyone seated round this table
that there will be no emergency meeting before midnight
on 31 December-I
should like to thank all members of
the Council for their co-operation and the help they have
given to the Mauritius presidency. I can assure you that the
three days that I have spent here have been a very enriching
and fruitful experience for me. Many a meeting have I
chaired in other capacities, but here I notice the relevance
of the appeal of St. Francis of Assisi: “Oh Lord, give me
the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, the
courage to change the things I can change, and the wisdom
to know the difference”.

195. I am very glad that the point is left to the Legal
Department, but I want to emphasize that the point at issue
is whether a person who comes under article 39 is entitled
to address members of the Council otherwise than by their
title.
196. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
Turkey in exercise of his right of reply.

of

197. Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey): I just want to raise a
factual point, No personnel of the Turkish army took part
in the election. I think even the colleagues of Ambassador
Rossides will correct him on that point.

The meeting rose nt 1.40 p.m.

7

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world,
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans 10s librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
R : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
IEAK

IIOJIS’WCTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHEIn

OPTAHHSALIMH

PUBLICACIONES

DE

ODZEAHHEHHMX

LAS

Las publicaciones
de Ins Naciones
Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

2.00 (or equivalent

NACIONES

HAIWH

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

77-70iJOl-December

1978-2,200
