S/PV.7894

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7894

th meeting
Thursday, 9 March 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by the Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region
(2 to 7 March 2017)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-06228 (E)
*1706228*

S/PV.7894

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Council for the month of March, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on our collective
behalf, to Volodymyr Yelchenko and his excellent
team for their service in the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. I speak for all of
us, I am sure, in expressing our deep appreciation to
Volodymyr and his delegation for the great diplomatic
skill with which they conducted the Council’s business
last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to the
Lake Chad basin region (2 to 7 March 2017)
The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I should like to pay a particularly
warm welcome to the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, who is taking part in our
formal meeting today for the first time in her new
capacity. She is very, very welcome.
Also, as this is the first public meeting of our
presidency, I should like to remind Council members
and briefers that we will be using the red flashing
light system to encourage all speakers to keep to time.
When the light flashes, that is a sign to stop, not an
encouragement to keep going. For all Member States,
the light will begin to flash after five minutes, and for
today’s briefers, the light will flash after 10 minutes.
For each meeting, we intend that the total amount of
briefing time should not exceed 30 minutes.

09/03/2017

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom on the Council’s
visit.
As co-lead for the Council’s visit to the Lake Chad
basin, I would like to focus my remarks this morning
on the security situation, and my colleagues the other
co-leads will tackle the other two big themes of our
visit, which is the humanitarian and the longer-term
development and root causes. But before I do so, I would
like to thank, on behalf of all of us, the Governments of
Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, as well as the
United Nations, for having made this visit possible. I
wish also to thank all Council members for making the
most of the visit and an ambitious programme and for
keeping up with it.
If I had been talking to the Council about security
in the Lake Chad basin a week ago, I would have spoken
about the statistics — the numbers: 20,000 people
killed and 2.3 million currently displaced. What I could
not have done was tell Council members their stories,
the lives behind these numbers, the human cost of the
fragile security situation.
Last Friday, in Maroua, in northern Cameroon, with
my colleagues, I saw that cost in the eyes of a 15-yearold boy whose village had been attacked by Boko
Haram. He hid for days before being interrogated and
imprisoned by the authorities for two years on suspicion
of being a member of Boko Haram. Most of his friends
had already been killed. I saw that cost in the eyes of
a woman crying with her baby in her arms. I saw it in
others who spoke of the murder of their husbands or
sons, the kidnapping of their daughters, the burning of
their homes. We heard from civil society how women
were selling their bodies for sex just to eat.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

All these people brought home the horrifying
consequences of the chaos and insecurity wrought by
Boko Haram. I hope that together we brought some
much-needed focus to the suffering, which been
neglected for too long.

At this meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by the three co-leads of the Security
Council mission to the countries of the Lake
Chad basin — Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Nigeria — namely, France, Senegal and the United
Kingdom. The Deputy Secretary-General will then
brief us on the actions that the United Nations is taking
to address the security, humanitarian and development
crises in the region.

But amid the horror, we also heard of the bravery
and commitment of the people of the region as they try
to bring stability and security back to the Lake Chad
basin. We heard chapters from a success story on its
way to completion, and stories from the Multinational
Joint Task Force of liberating 20,000 hostages and
successfully winning back territory that will act as future
homes for the people of the region. But the story is not
over. Security is not yet entrenched; it is fragile in too

2/13

17-06228

09/03/2017

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

S/PV.7894

many places. Force commanders and generals outlined
continued attacks. Suicide bombings and improvised
explosive devices are still far too common. And Boko
Haram’s tactics are getting more barbaric — mothers
turned into suicide bombers with infants strapped to
them in addition to their bombs. Boko Haram are down
but not out, but make no mistake — their cruelty knows
no bounds.

I now give the floor to the representative of Senegal
to focus on the root causes and longer-term development.

It was clear that international support remains
vital to this fight. We visited Operation Barkhane
headquarters in D’Jamena, where we met French
troops and were joined by members of the British and
American military. Together, they are supporting the
Multinational Joint Task Force, as well as the Nigerian
military, through capacity-building, training and
intelligence-sharing. We heard how further support
was needed to enable better mobility and logistics in
the fight.

We also deeply thank the Governments and the
peoples of the four countries that we visited: Cameroon,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria.

Women’s participation and protection were a
constant theme throughout the visit, and it was clear
that women must be more involved in efforts to
tackle Boko Haram, counter violent extremism and
build peace. We also heard of the hundreds of Boko
Haram defectors, including women and children. We
made clear the need for compliance with international
human rights and humanitarian law by all actors in
tackling the scourge of Boko Haram. That is essential
to preventing mistreatment, including of detainees, as
well as to building confidence among communities and
counter radicalization.
Let me close with this final reflection. Only
yesterday, here in New York, I met three inspirational
young women from Chibok who were attending an
International Women’s Day event at the United Nations.
Far from being victims and far from being survivors,
those women are now campaigners for education for
women and girls in poverty. Despite everything they
had endured and despite being caught up in the hell
unleashed by Boko Haram, they are determined to
look to the future. They showed what lies ahead. They
showed a future that may be possible when the fighting
ends. To achieve that reality, it is clear that there can
be no military solution; only a comprehensive approach
will bring stability and peace. And so let me reiterate
that the United Kingdom will stand side by side with
the region, with the four Governments that we visited
and with the affected people in this effort.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.

Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the delegation of Senegal, I should like at the
outset to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on the United
Kingdom’s assumption to the presidency of the Council
for this month. You may rest assured of our support and
full cooperation.

I congratulate Ms. Amina Mohammed and wish her
every success in her new functions as Deputy SecretaryGeneral, which she assumed in March, including
at yesterday’s commemoration of International
Women’s Day.
I welcome this meeting to discuss the Security
Council’s historic visit from 2 to 7 March to the Lake
Chad region, with successive stops in Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria. As you rightly said, Mr. President,
the visit was not only timely but also essential, given the
extent to which the multidimensional crisis affecting
that strategic part of the African continent has been
neglected and even forgotten, as we attempt to redress
today. As you, Sir, addressed the security dimension
and Ambassador Delattre will address the human
dimension, I shall focus on the part of our visit that was
my purview — the deep-rooted causes of the crisis and
long-term solutions.
All with whom we met from the Governments and the
populace — including technical and financial partners,
humanitarian actors and civil society representatives,
pointed to the lack of education, training, sustainable
development and resilience to the combined effects of
climate change and global warming, which lie at the
heart of the crisis we all wish to see resolved. There
has also been a population explosion in the context of
deteriorating environmental conditions and endemic
poverty and unemployment. These factors complicate
efforts to exploit the demographic transition that
would make optimal use of the demographic dividend.
Moreover, the countries of the region are suffering
cruelly from the economic and financial effects of
the fall in commodity prices, including that of oil, on
which those countries’ budgets rely heavily. When we
add to that the pernicious effects of cross-border crime;
the traffic in drugs, arms, human beings and cultural
goods; the growing number of clandestine migratory

17-062283/13

S/PV.7894

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

flows and cybercrime, we can assess the full scope
of the challenges to that key region of the SaheloSaharan region.
What, then, are the region’s long-term prospects?
Throughout our visit, we affirmed the need to focus on
everything from humanitarian issues to development.
We need significant coordination at various levels
between United Nations organs, specialized agencies,
financial and technical partners, as well as subregional
coordination within the States members of the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and intergovernmental
coordination at the national level, with contributions
from the private sector and civil society. We look
forward with interest to the contributions to be made
by the Secretary-General and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral with respect to coordination in that area.
The Security Council should strengthen its
exchnages with the other organs, in particular the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. Our work with the Secretary-General is
proceeding apace, although the available funding is
drying up at the regional and international levels and
remains dramatically insufficient to meet needs in all
sectors. The small amount that has been announced
and included in the budget is being spent effectively,
but Governments, the humanitarian agencies and civil
society organizations often appeal to the same donors.
It is therefore important to identify and mobilize
other sources of international financing, and above all
domestic funding, by increasing contributions from the
private sector, foundations and charitable organizations.
A platform to manage it all must be established,
taking the priorities of Governments into account,
particularly when they have prepared their own
development programmes pursuant to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Sustainable
Development Goals, the African Union Agenda
2063, and the economic agendas of the regional
economic communities to which the countries
belong — the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) for the Niger and Nigeria, and
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) for Cameroon and Chad.
In the security sector, the Security Council must
strongly encourage and support the countries of
the Lake Chad basin and their neighbours in their
outstanding, high-profile efforts to combat terrorism
in West and Central Africa. The Governments and
4/13

09/03/2017

the peoples of those countries have moved quickly
to pool their resources to more effectively fight
terrorists and organized crime. The establishment
and operationalization of the Multinational Joint Task
Force are a striking example of such cooperation
and is extremely important to the world mobilization
against that international scourge. These countries
have a right to and fully deserve the decisive support
of the international community, beginning with the
Security Council.
A question was put to us during our visit as to
why the Security Council takes so long to adopt
resolutions that would help those countries. I have
no easy answer to that question, but one banker even
suggested that security, in its broadest understanding,
should henceforth be considered to be a world public
good. Countries, such as those of the Lake Chad basin,
that contribute to the critical stability and security of
the region therefore have the right to enjoy the benefits
in terms of financial, logistical, and technical support,
as well as in equipment and training adapted to highly
asymmetric threats. We must also recall that two
members of the Multinational Joint Task Force, Chad
and the Niger, also belong to the Group of Five Sahel,
which is another important subregional initiative to
fight terrorist organizations operating in North and
East Africa, particularly in Libya and northern Mali.
The Security Council should also fully utilize
the conclusions of the joint visit in February by the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa to
the four countries of the Lake Chad basin, including
the recommendations on strengthening judicial and
police cooperation capacities, especially mutual legal
instruments on assistance in the areas of prisoner
extradition and transfer. It is also an issue of adopting
a common strategy to properly address the matter of
persons who have repented and turned themselves
into the authorities, one that duly includes norms
of international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and international refugee law. That
would also contribute to efforts to rehabilitate and
reintegrate women, children and youth, as the President
just mentioned.
At our meeting at the Abuja headquartes of
ECOWAS, which included officials of that organization
and the Secretary-General of ECCAS, we received a
briefing on the draft comprehensive strategy developed
17-06228

09/03/2017

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

jointly by those two organizations, which is aligned
with the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel. An interregional ECOWAS/ECCAS summit is
being prepared for the adoption of the draft strategy,
which will include neighbouring countries from the
Lake Chad basin, namely, Nigeria and Cameroon.
As part of the analysis, it is important to include the
maritime aspect of the counter-terrorism fight, as well
as efforts to combat crime.
In conclusion, I should like to underscore that all
of those efforts will be for naught unless Lake Chad
is saved by raising the water level, either through
plentiful rainfall in the long term or, as was explained
to us, by diverting water from elsewhere. That can be
done, as we say in Senegal, by way of hydro-diplomacy,
namely, inter-State cooperation in order to fairly and
jointly manage trans-border water resources, just
as has been done for more than 40 years by Guinea,
Mali, Mauritania and Senegal in the framework of
the Organization for the Development of the Senegal
River, and as done by the Gambia, Guinea, GuineaBissau and Senegal through the Gambia River Basin
Development Organization.
Lastly, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations has carried out a study on joint
efforts with regard to Lake Chad, which I found very
useful, entitled The Future Is An Ancient Lake. The
report points out that many traditional practices in the
Lake Chad basin could be useful in overcoming the
challenges faced by the region owing to natural effects as
well as human activity, including intensive agriculture.
The reports refers to the importance of such practices
as a good foundation upon which to develop a new ways
of undertaking agriculture, grazing and sustainable
fishing, all in the framework of a new ecosystem
approach aimed at the integrated conservation of land,
water and living resources, thereby ensuring equitable
use and preservation. That is precisely what is called for
in the Convention on Biological Diversity. Researchers
have shown us how stakeholders in the Lake Chad
basin — using traditional knowledge, biodiversity and
the genetic resources of their land — could use new
technologies in order to feed themselves, transform
production and create added value; in a word, how to
develop while safeguarding their ecosystem. The great
hope aroused by our visit, both among the populations
and the Governments, can therefore become a reality.

S/PV.7894

The President: I thank the representative of
Senegal for his briefing and for his co-leadership of
the visit.
I now give the floor to the representative of France,
who will inform us about the humanitarian situation.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to welcome the presence here
today of the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, whose return to New York to take up her
important duties is both a great opportunity for the
United Nations and excellent news for us all. I should
also like warmly to congratulate the United Kingdom
on its accession to the presidency of the Security
Council, as well as to assure it of our full support.
It was an honour and an unrivalled experience to
lead this important Security Council visit to the Lake
Chad region, along with you, Sir, and our colleague
and friend from Senegal. I join you, Mr. President, in
expressing thanks to all of the officials who welcomed
us so warmly, including the entire United Nations team.
In line with the distribution of issues we agreed, I will
focus on the humanitarian situation.
On behalf of my colleagues, I should like to begin
by paying tribute to the courage and commitment of
the humanitarians we met, who are doing outstanding
work in often very difficult situations. The daily
commitment of those men and women is exemplary,
and it is important that the Council visited them on the
ground in order to express our deep gratitude.
The United Nations has considerably increased
its presence on the ground, particularly in north-east
Nigeria, to face the humanitarian crisis that threatens
hundreds of thousands of people. We were able to visit
the hub at Maiduguri, in north-east Nigeria, which
brings together all humanitarian actors and is now
operational. Those efforts must be pursued, while the
United Nations must further strengthen its presence
in order to meet the immense and growing needs of
the most vulnerable populations. With regard to the
humanitarian situation, we have identified three main
issues: the humanitarian emergency, protection for
affected populations and the challenge of financing
humanitarian aid.
On the first challenge — the humanitarian
emergency and access to populations in need — the
humanitarian consequences of the crisis are catastrophic
for the region: 26 million people affected, of whom

17-062285/13

S/PV.7894

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

10.7 million are in need of emergency aid. More than
two and a half million people have been forced to take
to the road to flee or go into exile. Land is no longer
cultivated, markets are at a standstill and the prices of
basic necessities have soared.
Food security was the first urgent need highlighted
by our interlocutors on the ground. The situation is
tragic and threatens hundreds of thousands of people
in the region. In total, more than 7 million people are
affected. The Secretary-General has spoken of famine
in the north-east of Nigeria. The Security Council was
able to meet with displaced persons and refugees in
Cameroon and Nigeria. All of them expressed the same
concerns: problems of safety and access to water and
quality food. The inhabitants are sometimes deprived
of their means of subsistence and depend entirely upon
humanitarian aid for their survival.
Insecurity and access difficulties sometimes
complicate food distribution. It is therefore crucial that
the countries of the region ensure unhindered access,
without bureaucratic impediments, as well as secure
access for the United Nations and humanitarian actors
wherever populations need emergency assistance. To
be truly effective, the efforts of the United Nations
must be only in support of those of the Governments
concerned. During its visit, the Council welcomed the
excellent cooperation between the United Nations and
the countries of the region. In north-east Nigeria, given
the scale of the needs, we encouraged the Nigerian
Government to continue its efforts to facilitate
humanitarian assistance for the most vulnerable people.
Health is the second emergency. With, for instance,
60 per cent of health-care facilities destroyed in northeast Nigeria, people are threatened by large-scale
epidemics, such as polio or measles.
The third emergency is education. More than 1,200
schools have been destroyed since the beginning of the
crisis, and 3.2 million children are urgently in need
of education. Education for girls is paramount and
should be encouraged. There is no time to be wasted in
preventing this generation from being sacrificed.
In addition to the humanitarian emergency, the
second challenge is that of ensuring the protection
of civilians and respect for human rights. The goal is
to ensure that people are kept safe from Boko Haram
and to assist with the voluntary and sustainable
return of displaced persons or refugees, where the
security situation allows. The Council also recalled
6/13

09/03/2017

the importance of respecting humanitarian law and,
to that end, welcomes the tripartite agreement signed
by Nigeria, Cameroon and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
on 2 March in Yaoundé. The agreement allows for the
creation of a solid legal framework to encourage the
voluntary and sustainable return of Nigerian refugees
to safe areas, under the auspices of the UNHCR. The
Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria have committed
to implementing that agreement as soon as possible.
The Security Council has also paid special
attention to the plight of women and girls in the region.
In Maroua, Cameroon, the Council heard stories of
the pain inflicted on female refugees and internally
displaced persons by Boko Haram. I think that, for
all of us, it was a particularly powerful and touching
encounter. In Chad and Nigeria, we also met with a
number of civil society women’s organizations for
those displaced in the Maiduguri camp and women
Senate representatives in Abuja. We lauded the courage
shown by women and girls who are often victims of
both Boko Haram violence and of stigmatization within
their own communities. It is therefore crucial for those
women not only to be protected from prostitution and
early marriage, but also to be included in security
management, political decision-making and economic
development matters. It is a key point that struck us all,
which I would like to underscore today.
The third challenge is that of providing financial
support to affected areas. The response to the immense
needs that I mentioned has remained inadequate. We
welcomed Nigeria’s commitment to allot $1 million
to the north-east of the country in response to the
humanitarian emergency. It is important for that
financial commitment to lead to action as soon as
possible. We have also noted that the international
community’s has rallied in support of the Government
of Nigeria by building on the outcome of the Oslo
Conference, which was held just prior to our mission
and was a step in the right direction. Fourteen countries
pledged $672 million in humanitarian aid over the next
three years and $457 million for 2017. We have also
underscored the need for the international community
and Governments in the region to continue their efforts.
By way of example, it is in that spirit that a donors’
conference for Chad will be held this spring in Paris,
under the auspices of the World Bank.
Given the magnitude of the needs, we underscored
that it was important to promote a global and regional
17-06228

09/03/2017

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

approach to creating synergies and enhancing
coordination with other donors and to mobilize
goodwill, including private donors and companies, as
well as other non-traditional donors such as emerging
countries. Beyond that, our interviews revealed how
important it is for humanitarian aid from partners to
be equitably distributed among the four countries
concerned and for it to be properly apportioned within
each country according to emergency needs.
As underscored during the Oslo Conference,
our interlocutors also recalled the importance of
the humanitarian continuum, stabilization and
development. Above and beyond financing for
emergency humanitarian aid, as our friend Ambassador
Seck pointed out, it is essential to secure long-term
financing to prevent the perpetuation of the crisis. To
put things in a broader perspective, I would say that,
based on information on the situation on the ground,
which is always the most important type, the mission
was crucial for validating, and if necessary, rectifying
some of the strategic guidelines that we implement here
in New York.
For my part, I would like to briefly highlight three
main lessons learned. The first is that the mission was
crucial in itself, not only to shed light on the Lake
Chad basin region, but also to make it a long-term
priority for the international community. Frankly, the
Lake Chad basin region has not always received the
attention it deserves from the international community.
This mission will help to correct that mistake and
injustice. Secondly, this mission proved that, given
the multifaceted humanitarian, security and economic
crisis that affects the region, the only response possible
is a global approach that encompasses all three key
priorities: stepping up a coordinated response to Boko
Haram, responding to the humanitarian emergency and
setting in motion the virtuous circle of development.
All of our representatives agree and feedback has
clearly shown that to be successful in overcoming
those three challenges, they must be tackled head-on
and simultaneously.
How can we vanquish terrorism without eradicating
abject poverty and malnutrition? How can we
achieve that without improving education and youth
employment? Conversely, how can we spur development
without putting an end to Boko Haram? We can see that
they are all interlinked and that compartmentalizing
the situation would mean resigning ourselves to
doing nothing. The only way to overcome those three

S/PV.7894

challenges is to address their root causes. Once again, it
is one thing to understand concepts while here in New
York, but quite another to internalize them as we hear
from our interlocutors on the ground.
The third lesson — and allow me to stress this — is
that our efforts in the Lake Chad region can and must
be an example of United Nations reform. This mission
confirmed that the silo mentality, which has long been
the key component of United Nations bureaucracy, does
not produce results and that an integrated approach that
smartly combines the entire range of tools available
can be successful. The Security Council’s mission
strengthens a vision held by António Guterres and
Amina Mohamed for United Nations reform that France
fully supports.
The President: I thank the representative of France
for his briefing.
I give the floor for the very first time to the Deputy
Secretary-General.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
thank the members of the Security Council for the warm
welcome that I have had today; it is truly humbling.
I would also like to congratulate the United Kingdom
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
in March.
As Deputy Secretary-General, as an African and
as a Nigerian, I truly welcome the Council’s visit to the
Lake Chad basin to witness first-hand the impact of the
Boko Haram insurgency — even more so because, as a
child, I grew up in Maiduguri and know that terrorists
are not born, but created by a set of circumstances.
Security Council field visits around the world have
been instrumental in highlighting the links between
peace, development and human rights, and that has
been recognized in the remarks made this morning.
I thank the Council for the much-needed attention
now brought to that troubled region. The Lake Chad
crisis provides a powerful illustration of the complex
multidimensional challenges facing our modern
world. A successful response requires mobilizing our
assets holistically to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The United Nations is focused on six main pillars
of engagement: political; humanitarian assistance;
human rights; recovery and development; justice,
law enforcement and the financing of terrorism; and

17-062287/13

S/PV.7894

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

technical support to the regional Multinational Joint
Task Force. Three other dimensions are being added:
gender; defections and arrests of Boko Haram militants,
with its own challenges given the number of youth and
girls; and support to Member States in developing a
regional plan of action to prevent violent extremism.
It is essential that we address the Boko Haram
crisis in a holistic manner. That means looking beyond
the security lens and addressing root causes, including
inequality, exclusion and the full array of economic,
social, political, cultural and religious grievances. To
that end, the United Nations continues — through the
efforts of Mr. Fall and Mr Chambas, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representatives for Central Africa
and West Africa and the Sahel, respectively — to
encourage Member States and the leadership of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Economic Community of Central African States to
convene a joint summit on Boko Haram.
We and the Council are keenly aware of the
deteriorating humanitarian and human rights situation,
which has displaced millions of people in the region.
Approximately 10.7 million people in the Lake Chad
basin need humanitarian assistance now. More than
7 million require food support, including 515,000
children with severe acute malnutrition. Drought is
inevitable and there is a real risk of famine, which can
be averted with the urgent action that we need now.
The World Food Programme is reaching more
than 1 million people in north-east Nigeria and is
expanding its efforts. UNICEF has assisted 4 million
people with basic health care and safe water. But,
despite the considerable contribution of the recent Oslo
donor conference, demand outstrips the resources.
I urge Member States to ensure that the $1.5 billion
humanitarian appeal for the Lake Chad region is fully
funded, and I implore affected Governments to ensure
full, safe and unimpeded access to all affected areas
and populations.
At the same time, we must pay attention to the
need to better coordinate our responses and ensure that
resources are used in the most efficient manner possible.
We must also close the gap between humanitarian
assistance and development interventions. Lasting
recovery will entail supporting the reconstruction
of schools and health centres and reviving essential
infrastructure, such as agriculture and water supplies,
that supports the necessary livelihoods.
8/13

09/03/2017

Effective prevention of future radicalization and
violence will also entail comprehensive responses that
benefit all members of society, especially marginalized
communities and youth. I was in Bama just three weeks
ago, where we have one of the largest camps, and to
see how children were thriving with the opportunity
of education, albeit not in the right circumstances.
But certainly the transition that UNICEF was able to
provide was really a sign of hope, and one that we need
to invest in reinforcing the recovery and the investments
that are needed.
The situation in the four countries affected by Boko
Haram continues to be defined by grave human rights
abuses committed by Boko Haram and in the context
of counter-terrorism actions. In response, the United
Nations is deploying additional human rights officers
to collect information on violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. The United Nations is
also assisting affected States to ensure their counterterrorism efforts comply fully with international human
rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law. There is a
need to strengthen justice mechanisms and ensure due
process for defectors and suspected terrorists.
In the Niger and Chad, the United Nations
has been able to facilitate the release of dozens of
children suspected of being Boko Haram fighters and
to deliver them to child protection actors. In Nigeria,
the United Nations has been given access to detention
facilities in Maiduguri to monitor the conditions under
which women and children captured during military
operations are being held. Cameroon has also indicated
an interest in cooperating with the United Nations on
this issue.
The plight of women and girls associated with
and affected by Boko Haram is of particular concern.
The United Nations and partners have provided
care and support to approximately 6,000 women and
children formerly associated with or captured by
Boko Haram, but many more are still displaced in
camps, detained by the authorities or are struggling
to reintegrate into their communities, where many
face stigma and discrimination. Many are survivors
of sexual violation, exploitation and abuse. They need
comprehensive assistance. We also need to scale up
efforts to provide access to sexual and reproductive
health and psychosocial support and livelihood support
for female-headed households. We must ensure that
women have key roles in the response — from food
distribution and camp management to all efforts to
17-06228

09/03/2017

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

S/PV.7894

counter violent extremism and to restore State authority
and build peace.

the most fragile contexts where people most need our
solidarity and support for their right to a life of dignity.

This month is about women — it is our women’s
month. It is fitting that the United Kingdom, which has
championed the issue of women and peace and security
in the Council for many years, holds the Council
presidency. But I also want to commend the Council as
a whole. In the past two months, members have heard
from the female civil society leader from Nigeria,
Fatima Askira of the Borno Women Development
Initiative. Council experts have met with senior United
Nations leaders from the region in a dedicated meeting
on women and peace and security in the Lake Chad
basin, and during the Council’s mission this past week,
members met with female legislators, civil society
leaders and the internally displaced.

To that end, I welcome the work being done by
the World Bank in the Lake Chad basin, as well as in
Somalia, Yemen and South Sudan. I would also like to
commend the commitment of the African Union and
Africa’s regional organizations to peace, security and
the integrated implementation of the 2030 Agenda and
Africa’s own Agenda 2063.

Addressing the root causes of this crisis is necessary
for durable peace in the region. Let us note that it
will also to help alleviate the phenomenon of mass
migration to Europe by people who feel they have no
choice but to look for better opportunities far from their
homeland. The United Nations development system
is working on national and cross-border initiatives
to support poverty reduction, capacity development,
effective governance, natural resource management,
early recovery, disaster risk reduction, social cohesion,
peacebuilding and resilience.
One priority must be the regeneration of Lake
Chad itself. The lake and its wetlands have now lost
90 per cent of their water due to unsustainable water
management practices and climate change. I commend
the Lake Chad basin countries’ commitment to the
lake’s regeneration, but the support of the international
community will be essential. I would also like to
acknowledge at this point the support of the Chinese
Government for its work on some of the feasibility
studies that have been needed to look at the possibilities
and the financing of that recharge.
The Council’s recent visit to Lake Chad has
highlighted the urgency and complexity of the crisis
faced by the region’s people and the threat it poses to
international peace and security. My clear message today
is that the solution lies in holistic thinking. The 2030
Agenda provides a blueprint and a tool for providing a
better future for the people of the Lake Chad basin. A
fundamental requirement for success there and around
the world is solidarity and partnership — a global
partnership for sustainable development, especially in

I sincerely believe that the Council’s visit has
boosted the potential for partnership and provided
much-needed hope for the people of that region, but
also the impetus for us, in the United Nations system,
to gather all the assets that we have and to put them to
a much more effective and efficient use for the sake of
those who deserve so much more attention than we have
been able to give in the recent past.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her briefing.
Traditionally in these briefings on Security Council
missions it is just the co-leads who speak, but of course
all Security Council members are entitled to request
the floor. Several members have done so. Allow me to
encourage those who have done so to be brief, given the
agenda that we have ahead of us this morning.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
thank Ambassadors Rycroft, Seck and Delattre, as well
as Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, for
their briefings. I would also like to take this opportunity
to welcome the Deputy Secretary-General and wish her
every success in her new functions.
The situation in the Lake Chad basin is alarming.
We are talking about approximately 10 million people
who urgently need humanitarian aid. Unfortunately,
this crisis does not get much traction in the media,
and the international community does not know much
about it.
The multidimensional nature of the humanitarian
crisis in the Lake Chad basin has a number of causes
and serious consequences. As we said in the briefing
on 12 January (see S/PV.7861), the situation has become
what it is because of many aggravating factors, such as
the grievous security situation, undermined primarily
by Boko Haram’s terrorist acts, and the lack of food and
other basic necessities for those populations.

17-062289/13

S/PV.7894

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

In order to verify the seriousness of the
crisis and get a first-hand account from the most
relevant actors — leaders, United Nations agencies,
non-governmental organizations, displaced persons,
refugees and the military — a Security Council mission
was organized to visit Cameroon, Chad, the Niger
and Nigeria. The information we obtained was valuable,
as were many of the testimonies collected, despite
the fact that they described sad, even heartbreaking
personal experiences.
For many years now the Lake Chad basin has been
witnessing a multifaceted, structural crisis, which
demands the development of activities that promote
stability, mitigate the threat of terrorism and feed the
population. We are well aware that this is an insecure
region with very high population growth rates, and one
that has suffered from the effects of climate change,
poverty and low levels of social investment. It is therefore
essential and urgent to ensure that the Governments of
the four countries concerned implement public policies
that prioritize the allocation of resources to education,
health services and job creation. Only then will they
be able to tackle the terrible living conditions. To
make matters worse, Boko Haram has been terrorizing
civilians in many communities, resulting in a flood of
tens of thousands of internally displaced persons and
refugees. The international community should spare no
effort to provide the region with the right tools.
Uruguay considers it important to recognize the
work of the specialized United Nations agencies and the
donor countries that have made good on their pledges,
most recently at the Oslo Conference, a topic that we went
into in detail during the mission with representatives
of the donor countries. We also commend the work of
the Multinational Joint Task Force and the progress it
has made in combating Boko Haram, in a clear example
of how crucial such coordinated regional efforts are
in these kinds of crises, when those who undermine
stability do not recognize borders or countries and,
worse still, violate the fundamental human rights of
entire communities, where women and children suffer
the most.
Based on this mission, in which we participated — and
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
leadership of the Security Council — the Council has
now committed to continuing to address the root causes
that have produced this long-ignored crisis.
10/13

09/03/2017

Mr. Skau (Sweden): I too would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you on your presidency,
Mr. President.
During the past week, the Security Council opened
its eyes and ears to focus on the people of the Lake
Chad basin. What we have seen and heard will not be
easily forgotten, nor should it be. Millions of people
across four countries have been displaced as a result of
the brutal insurgency of Boko Haram. We heard of lives
disrupted and livelihoods destroyed. Displacement
has led to vulnerability, particularly for women and
girls. We heard chilling stories of husbands murdered,
children abducted and killed and women subjected
to sexual violence. Millions more are suffering from
hunger and malnutrition, and we heard that the threat
of famine looms.
Yet alongside the desperation there is hope. We
have seen how host communities have welcomed the
displaced into their homes and villages, sharing already
scarce resources. and I would like to pay special tribute
to them. We commend the efforts being made by the
relevant authorities to mitigate the consequences of the
crisis, as well as the work of humanitarian workers and
the staff of local non-governmental organizations, who
are on the front lines of the response.
However, more is needed if we are to avoid a
humanitarian disaster of historic proportions. To begin
with, the pledges made in Oslo must be disbursed as
quickly as possible. I am happy to report that Sweden
has already done so, and I call on others to follow.
Secondly, every effort must be made to ensure that
the assistance reaches even the most remote and
inaccessible areas.
It is clear that the regional nature of the Boko Haram
threat requires a regional response. The countries of
the region are working together, including through the
Multinational Joint Task Force, which is making progress
and deserves further international support. We also
call for rapid deployment of the African Union civilian
component of the Task Force. We must ensure that the
response does not increase the suffering of an already
brutalized population, and in that regard, we welcome
the commitment expressed by all the Governments of
the region to protecting civilians and human rights, in
line with the 2016 Abuja Action Statement. Counterterrorism measures must comply with international
law, including international humanitarian and human
rights law. We urge the United Nations to enhance its
17-06228

09/03/2017

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

human rights presence on the ground in order to support
monitoring and capacity-building in that regard. We
encourage Governments to enhance their prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration approaches for dealing
with persons associated with Boko Haram and to
improve countries’ coordination in that effort. Children
must always be treated as children, and handover
protocols that prioritize children should be adopted.
The roots of the conflict run deeper than the Boko
Haram insurgency. They include abject poverty, climate
change and underdevelopment. Indeed, the situation in
the Lake Chad basin is a vivid illustration of the links
between security, development and human rights,
as well as climate-change-related risks. In Niamey,
President Issoufou of the Niger cited the shrinking of
Lake Chad as a direct and major reason for the rise
of Boko Haram. This is exactly the type of situation
that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the sustaining peace agenda were created to
respond to. Working within the framework of the 2030
Agenda, we must ensure a coordinated and better
linked humanitarian, reconstruction and development
response. This multidimensional crisis is an example
of one to which the United Nations system can take an
integrated approach, and we look forward to supporting
the Deputy Secretary-General as she leads the reform
of the Organization’s development system so that it can
better respond to such crises.
Yesterday we celebrated International Women’s
Day. The women we met in Maroua and Maiduguri,
despite the challenges they face on a daily basis, are
survivors and leaders, not victims. Meeting the visiting
Security Council, they clearly told us their stories so
that we would know their realities, and set out their
needs so that we would know how to respond. We must
not let them down. It is clear that women play a vital
role in prevention, peacebuilding and de-radicalization
efforts. Improving education, particularly for girls, and
ending early marriage are issues that will be central
to development in the region. We were encouraged by
the development of national action plans on women
and peace and security, and those words must now be
translated into actions with adequate resources and
meaningful implementation.
Now that we have seen the crisis that has been
unfolding in the Lake Chad basin, we must ensure
that we actively follow up on our engagement and on
the trip’s findings. That is why we would like to see
the Council agree a presidential statement setting out

S/PV.7894

a road map for the way forward that encourages the
following actions, among others.
The first is for the Secretary-General to show
leadership, including by visiting the region and
reporting back to the Council. Secondly, the semi-annual
briefings of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWAS) and the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA), as well as the recurring
Security Council meetings under the agenda item on
peace and security in Africa, should be used as forums
for following up on the findings of our visit. Thirdly, we
should work on developing a comprehensive regional
strategy for addressing the drivers of the conflict, in
line with existing plans and supported by development
partners and international financial institutions.
Fourthly, we should support efforts to strengthen the
links between humanitarian assistance and long-term
development measures, focusing on early recovery and
the provision of alternative livelihoods. Fifthly, we
should encourage the organization in 2018 of a third
Regional Security Summit, focusing on post-conflict
stabilization and on early recovery and reconstruction.
Lastly, we should enhance the capacity of UNOWAS
and UNOCA to jointly coordinate United Nations
engagement in the region and report on progress in
that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Governments
of Nigeria, the Niger, Chad and Cameroon, as well
as the co-leaders, the United Nations Secretariat and
their colleagues on the ground, for making our visit a
true success.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to begin by
warmly welcoming the Deputy Secretary-General,
with whom Italy has already worked very intensively,
both as a mission and through me personally during the
organization of Expo Milano 2015, and to say that we
are ready to continue that collaboration. I got the feeling
during our meeting in Nigeria that Ms. Mohammed’s
country was already missing her, while we are doing
our best to keep her here.
I congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency. This is
our first open meeting under your presidency, which
has begun with the successful organization of this visit.
I would like to express my appreciation to you, to the
French and the Senegalese Ambassadors for having set
up the visit, and to the whole United Nations family
and the Governments of each country for their crucial
assistance at every stage of the mission. We were in

17-0622811/13

S/PV.7894

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

favour of the idea of the mission from the start, since we
knew it would offer an opportunity to deliver a strong
message of support and commitment to the countries of
the region and to the international community — and we
have not been disappointed. The goals were achieved.
What have we learned from the visit? First of all,
we directly observed the magnitude of the crisis in the
field, and all of its dimensions — humanitarian, social
and security — show it to be even more alarming than
expected. I think the best illustration is when we were
in Maroua last week, once a tourist destination on the
border of Cameroon’s main national park. Today, we
were not even allowed to leave the airport; we were
surrounded by military and they explained the situation.
We saw the deep impact of the humanitarian crisis on
the region. The Oslo Conference demonstrated growing
international attention to Lake Chad. Many States,
including Italy, committed to supporting the region. We
must continue to stress the importance of timely and
coordinated assistance to the region.
Turning to the issue of security, during our visit we
observed the firm commitment of local Governments
to the fight against Boko Haram and against terrorist
activity in the regio — efforts that are shared by civil
society. It is crucial for us to support those efforts and to
promote the participation of civil society, in particular
women’s organizations, in mediation and the fight
against radicalization. We continue to be concerned
about the many trafficking networks operating in the
region. There is no underestimating the ties between
Boko Haram and transnational organized crime. In
particular, we must resolutely tackle any instance of
smuggling, especially human trafficking connected to
that phenomenon. In that regard, I note the lucid analysis
made by the President of the Niger and its Minister of
the Interior of the effects of that criminal network on
the crisis in the region. We are convinced that those
issues ought to be addressed with a broader regional
perspective that encompasses the Sahel, in line with the
United Nations initiative already in place, particularly
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
But that alone is not enough to improve the
security situation. The region is suffering from the
socioeconomic effects of desertification. It is essential
to accompany security mission with a long-term
development plan in order to foster sustainability
for the people of the area — in particular, internally
displaced persons — and, once the security situation
12/13

09/03/2017

is stabilized, to prevent them from being exploited by
traffickers and smugglers.
In closing, we need to analyse the root causes
of instability in the region and how they impact
the crisis. I would mention, in particular, the effect
of climate change. Addressing the root causes of
instability, we are convinced, is a key priority if we
are to overcome the related security and humanitarian
crises and ensure the long-lasting development of the
region. In that regard, we feel that the region would
benefit from the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development by fostering sustainable
peace and development. During our meeting last week,
Mr. President, you used the very apt expression “the
neglected crisis” several times. At least the crisis is no
longer neglected by the Security Council.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): We welcome
the new Deputy Secretary-General. We look forward to
working with her.
The stories and courage of the women, men and
youths we met during our trip are indelibly etched in
our minds and will continue to inspire all of us as we
work to address the urgent challenges of the people of
the Lake Chad basin. We were particularly interested
in our Lake Chad basin trip and the United Nations
approach to demobilization, reintegration and support
for the ex-Boko Haram, especially with regard to the
women and girls coming out of association with Boko
Haram, as well as the need to ensure that any identified
accountability initiatives are responsive to women
and girls and include following up on any allegations
of sexual and gender-based abuse. We also witnessed
the extent of the United Nations regular engagement
with women’s civil society organizations and women’s
community leaders on peace and security matters.
We note that youth and women’s voices and
efforts are absolutely critical to re-establishing peace
and security in the Lake Chad basin subregion and
in creating the conditions for meaningful change,
sustainable economic development and sustainable
livelihoods — as noted by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral — especially for households headed by females.
Those voices and efforts are also crucial to preventing
extremism and creating more inclusive societies.
We also looked at the ongoing training of security
forces to prevent and respond to sexual and genderbased violence. Still, the protection challenges remain
significant, especially for women and children. The
17-06228

09/03/2017

Security Council mission to the Lake Chad basin region

leaders of the Governments of Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria recognized that fact in their
interactions and conversations with us. Thousands of
women have been victims of abduction, sexual slavery,
forced recruitment and other terrible abuses, and we
were humbled in our meetings with the mention of just
a few of those acts and first-hand stories.
Furthermore, some of those victims, once out
of Boko Haram’s clutches, face stigmatization in
their communities or suffer secondary or tertiary
displacement as a result of such stigma. Still, we were
encouraged during our trip by reports of defections
from Boko Haram and other extremist groups. That
trend underscores the importance of establishing
regionally coordinated disarmament, demobilization,
deradicalization and reintegration programmes.
Respect for human rights on the part of the military,
security services and Governments of the Lake Chad
basin is also key to establishing and building trust
with local communities that have been impacted by the
conflict. That was also a subject of conversation with the
Governments and leaders, who agreed wholeheartedly
with this approach on the respect for human rights.
Finally and more broadly, the magnitude of the
humanitarian crisis, particularly the food insufficiency
challenges and the spectre of famine, is really difficult to
overstate. Enabling access for the humanitarian actors,
both from the United Nations and the implementing
partners, the non-governmental organizations in each of
the four countries we visited will be absolutely essential
to turning back famine and to improving food security,
especially for vulnerable populations such as mothers

S/PV.7894

and their young children. For all of us colleagues, I
think the resolve and energy we have voiced here in our
interventions today must be sustained if we are to make
a real difference in the lives of those we met during this
very important Security Council trip.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I am very encouraged,
Mr. President, by your suggestion that we should be
more active and action oriented. I would just like to add
one very brief comment.
I participated in the mission and was very
encouraged by the sense of ownership from the
regional countries of Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Nigeria. They are very determined to deal with the
Boko Haram issue, and the Presidents have very clear
views on the situation, on the causes and priority tasks
to address that issue. The African countries themselves
are seeking solutions to their own problems. Regional
groups such as the Multinational Joint Task Force, the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Group of Five Sahel,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Economic Community of Central African States are
making joint efforts to tackle the crisis.
Japan believes that assistance from the international
community has greater force and is more needed when
the country or the people on the ground themselves
make genuine efforts to solve their own problems. I
have the strong sense that the Boko Haram problem
and the humanitarian crisis should not be neglected.
Furthermore, the countries of the region have a keen
interest in this issue.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

17-0622813/13
