United Nations

S/PV.4561

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4561

st meeting
Thursday, 27 June 2002, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wehbe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Syrian Arab Republic)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Mr. Corr
Mr. Koonjul
Ms. Lajous
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Harrison
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-44542 (E)

*0244542*

S/PV.4561

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Brunei Darussalam, Costa Rica and
Spain in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Serbini
(Brunei Darussalam), Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica)
and Mr. Arias (Spain) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
It is so decided.
I invite Sir Jeremy Greenstock to take a seat at
the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. At this
meeting, the Security Council will hear a briefing by
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock: The Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) has been in operation for nine
months now. Over that period, it has focused on
reviewing the reports submitted by States on their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). So far, the

2

CTC has received 160 reports from United Nations
Members and from four others. It has completed its
review of 127 of these and is working hard to finish
reviewing the remainder of the reports received.
The Committee is also following up with the 29
States that have not yet submitted a report. My letter to
the Council on this, which was circulated as document
S/2002/673, explained the way in which the CTC
planned to do this. Let me reiterate: the CTC and its
experts are ready to discuss the submission of a report
at any time with States that are having difficulty. I
encourage them to make contact with the CTC.
This achievement has been made by a team which
has become increasingly experienced by the day. I
should like to thank warmly the Vice-Chairmen —
Ambassadors Koonjul, Lavrov and Valdivieso — for
their professional leadership of the subcommittees; and
the whole membership of the CTC for their consistent
hard work and cooperation. I should like to thank our
team of experts, including those who have already
completed their tours, for getting to grips with the
substance so effectively. I should also like to thank the
CTC’s secretariat for the support they have given the
CTC and its subcommittees.
The CTC’s work programme for the fourth 90day period was issued as a recent document of the
Security Council. The CTC will focus in the coming
period on reviewing for a second time the
implementation of 1373 (2001) in the States that have
submitted a further report to the Committee. The States
concerned can expect a slightly different letter from the
CTC the second time around. We intend to set out more
clearly the gaps identified by our experts together with
recommendations about the action needed to improve
implementation of 1373 (2001). We will be looking to
many States to submit a third report to the Committee
setting out their response to these recommendations
and including a timetable for action.
We expect our experts to indicate, where
appropriate, how a State might benefit from technical
or other assistance. If so, the letter from the CTC will
indicate what assistance is a priority — and what might
be required in slower time — taking account of any
request for assistance presented by the State concerned.
The letters may make recommendations on which
providers could be contacted by the State concerned for
help.

S/PV.4561

The CTC also intends to be in close contact with
potential providers of assistance. Our team of experts
will act as a source of encouragement for the provision
of assistance in the areas covered by 1373 (2001). We
have asked them to inform providers about any trends
in the implementation gaps as this information emerges
through the review process, with a view to encouraging
providers to develop new programmes to meet these
needs. They will approach potential providers, with the
agreement of the State concerned, to encourage them to
react to the particular needs identified by the CTC.
Let me reiterate the Committee’s agreed
approach: the CTC does not intend to declare any
Member State 100 per cent compliant with 1373
(2001). We believe that there may always be further
work to do to meet the objectives of the resolution
against a constantly evolving background. We intend to
move ahead more intensively with some than with
others, but we will want all States to remain in close
contact with the Committee and to inform it of any new
developments that are relevant to the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001).
In all of that, the CTC will proceed with the
transparency and openness that are by now, I hope, a
hallmark of our work. I will continue to brief the wider
membership of the United Nations on a regular basis
on the activities of the Committee. I, the ViceChairmen and the experts are available to address the
concerns and questions of individual Member States or
of regional groups.
The CTC’s outreach to international and regional
organizations has intensified since my last briefing to
the Council. I myself have visited the United Nations
Office in Vienna, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization to discuss matters
covered by resolution 1373 (2001). The Bureau met
representatives of the Group of Eight in New York
earlier this month. The Committee’s experts have
begun an intensive travel programme — visiting, for
instance, Abu Dhabi, for a conference on hawala;
Prague, for an OSCE seminar on terrorist financing;
Washington, for contacts with the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank; Paris, for a
meeting with the Financial Action Task Force on
Money Laundering; and other venues. Today one of our
experts is in Sofia for a regional meeting of the
countries of South-Eastern Europe.

Our message to those regional players is fourfold. They must be determined in dealing with
terrorism, and must develop permanent mechanisms for
doing so in accordance with their respective mandates.
They should use those forums to get together to talk
about counter-terrorism on a regional level, because no
State is secure from this threat if its neighbour is a
backmarker. Many regional organizations are well
placed to facilitate the sharing of expertise and best
practices within a region, where a common culture and
history often makes the transfer of expertise easiest. I
would also hope that these organizations will develop
their own assistance programmes.
Let me try to set out what the CTC has achieved
in its first nine months. Our most important success to
date is to have directed very widespread attention to
the fact that resolution 1373 (2001) both exists and is a
powerful resolution. A broad range of international
institutions and regional and subregional organizations
are now aware that there is a global structure for
countering terrorism, into which they would be well
advised to fit their activities. We have also contributed
by bringing out the connections between terrorism and
other forms of international organized crime. The CTC
is not a law-enforcement agency, nor is it working on
cases. So, in that sense, we do not have any operational
achievements in that sense to report. But we have a
strong interest in capacity-building. The fact that the
vast majority of Member States are now engaged with
us in that exercise and that all States recognize their
responsibility to follow up resolution 1373 (2001) is a
massive change from the situation that existed when
the Committee was formed.
There is a further indicator that demonstrates the
activity of the international community in this area, and
that is the ratifications of the 12 international
conventions and protocols relating to terrorism.
Ratifications have gone up by more than 15 per cent
since last July. There are now 14 countries which have
ratified all 12 conventions, when on 11 September
there were only two, Botswana and my own. The CTC
urges all States to continue to bring forward ratification
of these instruments. It is a requirement of resolution
1373 (2001), but it also is an indication that States are
beginning to build up the network of legislation they
need to be able to take effective action.
Let me end with an update of where we are with
practical support from the Secretariat. I am most
grateful to the Fifth Committee for allowing the

3

S/PV.4561

Secretariat flexibility in meeting the demands placed
by the Committee. I hope this will soon translate into
an immediate improvement in the speed of the
translation of documents and the servicing of meetings.
The United Nations membership as a whole has
confirmed time and again the priority it places on
action against terrorism and the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). I urge the Secretariat to reflect
that priority in the allocation of resources.
My next report to the Council will mark the yearpoint since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and
the establishment of the CTC. The Vice-Chairmen,
other Committee members and I are determined to
ensure that the Committee’s story at its first birthday is
one of the United Nations translating international
determination to deal with a global threat into effective
action encompassing all our Governments. The
Security Council should at that point have a wellprepared debate about our objectives in this field in the
Committee’s second year.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Sir
Jeremy Greenstock for his comprehensive briefing.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): This morning my
staff had a meeting to discuss what I should say at this
morning’s session. The instructions they gave to me
were that I should give a very short speech based on
three Cs. The three Cs are commend, commitment and
criteria. But after having a discussion with Ambassador
Greenstock on the way in, I thought I would add a
question or two after the three Cs.
First, with regard to commending, I think there is
no doubt that we have a lot for which to commend the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and, of course,
its Chairman, Sir Jeremy Greenstock. My only concern
is that Sir Jeremy might receive so much praise today
that he will not know how to handle it in the course of
day-to-day events. But, most important, he has shown
that United Nations committees ─ which are often
perceived, as we know, to be toothless entities ─ can
actually make a difference. There is no doubt that the
CTC has made a significant difference since it was set
up. But we also want to commend the rest of the team,
including the three Vice-Chairmen ─ Ambassadors
Koonjul, Lavrov and Valdivieso. I know that the three
of them have also had to chair very long meetings and
go through piles of reports. At the same time, I wish to
commend all the experts and the other staff who have

4

been involved in this exercise. So there is a lot of
commendation to be provided.
The second C is commitment. In that regard, we
want to declare once again that Singapore is fully
committed to the fight against terrorism. As members
are aware, we came close to experiencing a terrorist
attack ourselves some time ago; so we are committed
to doing whatever we can. Also in this regard, I would
like to add that we are also committed to sharing our
expertise with others, including our colleagues in the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
For example, to enhance the capabilities of ASEAN
member States in the fight against terrorism, Singapore
has offered logistical support for training in various
aspects of anti-terrorism skills that will strengthen the
national mechanisms of ASEAN member States to
combat terrorism.
I believe that my colleague from ASEAN will be
speaking later today ─ and of course Singapore
associates itself fully with the statement to be made on
behalf of ASEAN members. By the way, I should also
mention here that we are looking at other ways and
means of sharing our expertise, not just with the
ASEAN region but also with the rest of the AsiaPacific region as well.
Finally, with regard to the third C, which is
criteria, I want to refer to a sentence in Sir Jeremy
Greenstock’s presentation to us. He said that the CTC
did not intend to declare any Member State 100 per
cent compliant with resolution 1373 (2001). We
completely agree that that is the right approach to take.
But I think that Member States will be asking
themselves the question of how to assess themselves
with regard to whether or not they have fulfilled the
requirements of resolution 1373 (2001) and all the
demands made of them by the CTC. I therefore wonder
whether, in the course of the next three months, the
CTC can try to work out some kind of criteria. It may
be difficult to create formal criteria, but some kind of
informal criteria might be desirable, so that Member
States can measure themselves against some sort of
benchmarks provided to them by the CTC in trying to
do some kind of self-assessment of their performance. I
am not sure whether that is doable, but I hope Sir
Jeremy Greenstock will reflect on it with his
colleagues.
Finally, I have a question or two. I turn to a
sentence in Sir Jeremy’s presentation, where he said:

S/PV.4561

“The CTC is not a law-enforcement agency, nor is it
working on cases.” (Supra)
Sometimes, we compare the Security Council to a
fire department that is sent to put out fires whenever
conflicts break out. What is the best layman’s analogy
we could find to describe the nature of the work of the
CTC so everyone understands the nature of the beast
we are dealing with when we deal with the CTC? I
wonder whether Sir Jeremy has any suggestions in that
direction.
Finally, I am glad Sir Jeremy mentioned there
will be a full debate and discussion in three months’
time. It will be very important for the one-year review
of the accomplishments of the CTC to have a more
extensive debate, with wider participation of all
Member States. Clearly, if this fight against terrorism
is going to succeed it needs the commitment of 189 —
or by then 191 — Member States. It is important that
they participate in that review. But what would the
CTC like them to bring to the table when they come for
the discussion? If Sir Jeremy has any thoughts on how
Member States can prepare themselves for that very
important review, it would be helpful if he wants to
plant the seeds now. Certainly it would help my
delegation and I hope other delegations as well.
Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): Nine
months have passed since the establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). During that
period the CTC has made much praiseworthy effort
towards the implementation of the recommendations of
resolution 1373 (2001). The Council meetings of
18 January 2002 and 15 April 2002 enabled us to see
the determination of Member States to act decisively to
combat terrorism. The submission of 164 reports to
date — the majority of which have already been
considered by the Committee, as Ambassador
Greenstock mentioned — eloquently illustrates that
determination. The experience acquired by the
Committee through consideration of these reports is
promising for the coordination of future activities.
There is no doubt that the Committee, through its
work, has in many respects highlighted the connection
between terrorism and other forms of organized crime
and the existence of a world structure to combat it. We
are grateful to the Committee, its Chairman and its
support staff for the important milestones they have
reached.

The tragic events of 11 September 2001 shed new
light on the dangers posed by terrorism because of its
many ramifications. We welcome the appointment of
two experts on the provision of assistance to States,
and we encourage them in the accomplishment of their
mission. My delegation views coordination of
assistance as a priority, beginning with identifying the
type of assistance available with a view to better
coordinating it with the needs expressed. In that regard,
the contacts already established with potential
providers of assistance are encouraging. Strengthening
cooperation between the Committee and other
international community actors including regional
organizations is necessary and greatly benefits Member
States. We encourage the ongoing work on the
composition of the panel of experts, and we reiterate
the need for representation of all regions within the
panel. My delegation would also like to emphasize the
importance the Committee should attach to
consideration of the second reports. We are convinced
the outcome will enable Member States to adopt, as
appropriate, additional measures to strengthen our
common fight against terrorism.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its support for the new work programme of the
Committee, submitted for our consideration.
Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
Nine months after the establishment of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), the United States would
again like to thank Sir Jeremy Greenstock for his
continued vigorous and committed leadership of the
CTC. We would also like to thank the Vice-Chairmen
for their contribution as well as the Mission of the
United Kingdom, which has a dedicated team of
professionals who are supporting the Committee’s
work.
From the beginning, Sir Jeremy has insisted on
serious and energetic implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and on monitoring by the CounterTerrorism Committee. We believe he has been
imaginative and effective both in building and
maintaining consensus within the Committee and in
informing Member States of the work and the progress
of the CTC. As a result of the efforts of CTC members,
experts and the Secretariat, the CTC has largely
completed its successful review of the initial reports
and is now embarked on the second round of reviews.

5

S/PV.4561

With the second stage of the CTC’s work now
under way, we reiterate the importance of all States
abiding by their obligations under resolution 1373
(2001), including submission of timely, responsive and
complete reports. Only in that way can we have a
benchmark of the world’s counter-terrorism capacity.
The review of the second round of reports will, to a
large extent, determine the level of impact the CTC
will have in the fight against terrorism and whether it
will be anything more than an ongoing world audit of
the capacity of Member States to combat terrorism.
The Committee must be prepared to be professionally
critical and tough-minded but also constructive. Above
all, it needs to focus attention on those States which
lack the capacity and/or the will to implement
resolution 1373 (2001). To that end, in its second set of
responses to Member States the Committee should
identify the gaps in implementation, what each State
needs to do to bring itself into compliance with
resolution 1373 (2001) and what should be each State’s
priorities. Where a particular State needs technical or
other assistance with the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) we believe the CTC should undertake
efforts to ensure that such State receives the assistance
it needs. We are pleased to see that the CTC informally
agreed to such procedures earlier this month.
Regardless of how successful the CTC is in identifying
the States that lack capacity to implement resolution
1373 (2001), its ultimate success will in large part be
determined by whether those States and organizations
that have the resources to help are willing to do so.
To that end, we urge Member States with the
capacity to do so to provide assistance to countries that
seek help in full implementation of 1373 (2001). A
substantial number of countries capable of providing
assistance such as training have yet to list themselves
in the CTC directory of assistance providers. Perhaps
some of the countries with expertise do not usually
think of themselves as potential assistance providers. I
have in mind sophisticated financial centres in
particular. It would be desirable for such States to
consider carefully their capacity to provide assistance
such as technical training.
We are pleased to see that the CTC now has two
experts to coordinate its efforts to mobilize States and
organizations, to provide assistance and to match those
willing to help with those in need. We also agree with
the importance that Ambassador Greenstock continues
to place on the role regional, subregional and

6

functional organizations can play in the fight against
terrorism. Those organizations are well placed to
undertake collective efforts to implement resolution
1373 (2001). They can also assist — and some have
already begun assisting — the CTC in monitoring the
efforts taken by countries in their respective regions to
implement the resolution. Thus, we welcome the
Committee’s intention to encourage these organizations
to develop action plans to implement resolution 1373
(2001) and to facilitate the sharing of principles, best
practices and expertise within their regions and their
areas of competence.
It is important to remember that resolution 1373
(2001) and the Committee established to monitor it
have no time limits. They will continue until the
Security Council is satisfied with the implementation
of the resolution. The high level of energy and
determination that those involved with the Committee
have shown to date will need to be maintained.
Before closing, I am pleased to report that
yesterday the United States deposited with the United
Nations the instruments of ratification of the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings and the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. In
so doing, the United States expressed its consent to be
bound by those two treaties, the last remaining United
Nations anti-terrorism conventions to which it had not
yet become a party.
One of the tangible results of the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the work of the Committee
has been an increase in momentum among Member
States towards ratification of all 12 United Nations
anti-terrorism conventions. We hope that this
momentum will continue, and we urge all States that
have yet to do so to take the steps necessary to ratify
those instruments.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): I too would like to thank
Sir Jeremy Greenstock for his excellent work as
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
Norway commends him and the three Vice-Chairmen
for their dedicated efforts to implement the tasks
assigned to the Committee. We fully share the aims and
objectives outlined by him for the Committee’s next
90-day working period.
Many States are in the process of finalizing their
second reports to the CTC. Norway has recently
adopted a legislative package designed to combat

S/PV.4561

terrorist acts and the financing of terrorism. Those
measures provide the basis for our second report to the
CTC. At the same time, the work of the CTC and its
experts, as well as that of other international bodies,
has to a large extent inspired the legislative process in
our country.
We remain focused on the need to assist States in
their efforts to implement resolution 1373 (2001). This
is a priority for the Committee. Norway and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) recently agreed
on a cooperation programme to support the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by OAU
member States. This year Norway will make available
approximately $210,000 for the project. Norway is also
funding a project to support and strengthen cooperation
between the countries in the Southern African
Development Community in the fight against terrorism
in the southern African region.
Norwegian efforts to combat terrorism will
continue to be broad based, including political, legal,
diplomatic and economic measures. We also consider a
strong commitment to development cooperation to be a
relevant contribution to combating terrorism by
improving socially unjustifiable conditions.
Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to align itself with the statement that
will be made by the representative of Costa Rica on
behalf of the Rio Group. I wish also to refer to some
matters of particular interest to my country related to
the fight against terrorism, and particularly regarding
the role of the Committee established by Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001).
The creation of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) has given vigorous and unprecedented impetus
to the efforts of the international community and the
United Nations in combating terrorism. Although it is
too early to reach conclusions based on preliminary
results, we can say today that the Committee has
breathed life and dynamism into its mandate, in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001). As has been
stated on other occasions, there is no doubt that one of
its specific contributions is that it has encouraged
States to conduct an in-depth analysis of their legal and
institutional pillars in order to effectively combat
terrorism.
Another positive element stemming from the
submission of national reports has been the broad
dissemination of resolution 1373 (2001) within States

through inter-institutional cooperation in the drafting
of every report.
Recognition for these achievements must be
directed also to the creativity of the Committee
Chairman, Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, and to the
staff members who assist him in the United Kingdom
Mission. Mexico also expresses its gratitude to the
Vice-Chairmen of the Committee for efficient presiding
over the subcommittees. We also congratulate the
experts on their effective work in their respective areas.
The Secretariat too has contributed to the functioning
of the Committee.
During the debate last April, my delegation stated
that five premises should guide the Committee and the
United Nations in its work in combating terrorism.
Now that we are on the eve of the second phase, we
reaffirm that these premises remain valid.
My country believes it is essential for the
Committee to work through transparency and
cooperation. We insist that one central element in
combating terrorism is respect for human rights, as
well as observance of international law, the Charter of
the United Nations in particular.
Perhaps the greatest challenge now facing the
Committee is technical and financial assistance for full
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). It is
becoming increasingly clear that greater cooperation
between countries is required in order to combat
terrorism effectively. The dimension of this challenge
has a number of aspects that need to be considered.
One of them is the close relationship of assistance with
compliance with paragraph 6 of resolution 1373
(2001). The Committee has succeeded in getting the
great majority of Member States to comply by
submitting reports. As for the States that have not yet
done so, the Committee could cooperate with them
through a dialogue aimed at support, which the
Committee experts themselves could provide, in order
to find the most viable means for each country that has
not yet done so to comply with resolution 1373 (2001).
We would like to thank the Government of Norway for
the support and cooperation it is providing to various
regional organizations in Africa to ensure full
compliance with the resolution.
Another aspect of particular importance to
Mexico is the dialogue established between the
Committee and the various regional and subregional
organizations. We believe it is necessary and

7

S/PV.4561

appropriate to strengthen cooperation between the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
and
regional
organizations on the basis of dialogue, exchange of
information and respect for their respective spheres of
competence in order to broaden the possibilities for
support required by States to implement resolution
1373 (2001).
To the extent allowed by their mandates, regional
organizations have been developing an array of
activities in order to strengthen the fight against
international terrorism. The activities carried out by the
Organization of American States (OAS) have been
particularly fruitful.
One of the major achievements in our hemisphere
has been the conclusion, under the presidency of
Mexico, of the Inter-American Convention against
Terrorism. This instrument, which complements the
international legal framework in combating this
scourge, was adopted and opened for signature in
Barbados at the thirty-second General Assembly of the
OAS on 3 June. I am pleased to report that 30 of the 34
member States of the organization, Mexico included,
have signed this new instrument. Not only does the
Inter-American
Convention
against
Terrorism
strengthen hemisphere-wide cooperation; it also
supports international efforts in this sphere.
In this new phase of its work, the Committee
must continue to comply with its mandate to promote
international cooperation to combat international
terrorism. Furthermore, we feel that the Committee
should assist in identifying additional measures that
should be adopted by the international community to
combat terrorism, without losing sight of the fact that
any measure adopted to combat terrorism should, in
addition to criminal focus, have a preventive
dimension. The new instruments to be adopted should
put greater emphasis on prevention and also be aimed
at strengthening the capacity of States to implement the
necessary measures.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself with the statement that will later be
made by the Ambassador of Spain on behalf of the 15
member States of the European Union. But I would like
to say a few words in my national capacity.
Last 11 September, we experienced one of the
moments that define the development of the world for
many years and perhaps decades to come. The question
that arose was whether the Security Council would

8

meet the challenge posed to the entire international
community. Our meeting today shows once again, I
believe, that, yes, the Security Council has been able to
cope with its new responsibilities, and it has been able
to do so in an exemplary manner.
This is first and foremost the result of the work of
one person, Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, to whom
I would like to pay a special and well-deserved tribute.
I would also like to include in that tribute a woman,
Anna Clunes, who is part of the delegation of the
United Kingdom and who has carried out tremendous
work. Beyond that, it is in fact the entire Council, first
of all through the Vice-Chairmen, that should show the
result achieved in a few months time. This result is first
a method, I believe, a determination to have total
transparency with regard not just to the Member States
but also, above and beyond that, all those who have
come as partners, especially regional organizations,
and therefore an ability to act as a team, not just within
the Council and the permanent missions in New York
but also with the networks of international
organizations.
Sir Jeremy has reminded us of the results. One
hundred sixty reports have been received and
considered. This shows not just the success but also the
importance that all States members of the community
of nations attach to the work done by the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC).
Regional and technical organizations are
henceforth not just informed but also mobilized, along
with the CTC, which seems to be a veritable umbrella
that covers all these organizations and thereby ensures
a necessary consistency in the work of the entire
community of nations.
We shall soon be going on to the second, more
targeted phase of the work, which, on the basis of a
dialogue with each country, will enable us first of all to
identify the areas in which each country should
improve its legislation and the administrations
involved. Secondly — and above all, I would say —
this phase will enable us to identify the work of
technical cooperation that not the Security Council but
the organizations identified by the Council and
Member States will make available to States that need
such technical assistance.
This second phase is crucial. It will be more
targeted and concrete. Indeed, it will enable the world,
following an unprecedented auditing of the state of the

S/PV.4561

world in combating terrorism, to work to improve the
situation, State by State, and the steps to be taken by
all.
France has already indicated the areas in which it
was prepared to provide such technical assistance.
Beyond that, the French-speaking world, which will
hold a summit meeting in October in Beirut, is
mobilizing the means at its disposal for States that are
part of a culture that goes beyond a single language and
a common legal culture.
Once again, I would like to pay tribute to Sir
Jeremy and his entire team. Let us continue to work in
the good spirit that he himself has inspired in us.
Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): The
representative of Singapore has warned us: Sir Jeremy
Greenstock will bend today under the weight of the
congratulations extended to him. Allow me at the
outset to express our admiration to Sir Jeremy for the
tactful and effective way in which he has conducted the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
created by resolution 1373 (2001) over the past nine
months. His very detailed, updated and enriching
information on the Committee’s activity over the past
90 days show, without a doubt, the commitment and
determination of the Committee to strengthen the
capacity of States to combat terrorism.
In fact, the global nature of terrorism and its clear
ties with trans-border crime necessarily require a
concerted response on the part of the international
community. We believe this is essential. In order to
effectively combat this phenomenon, all States without
exception must adopt specific measures and must
cooperate frankly and constructively to meet this
challenge, which is the very denial of the right to life.
Today, beyond condemning terrorism, action is
needed — individual and collective action by States
against terrorism.
Beyond the indignation and reprobation
expressed at the highest Government level in the wake
of the sad events of 11 September 2001, Cameroon,
whose legal framework already had a counter-terrorism
strategy and provisions to prevent and punish terrorist
acts, immediately, at all levels of Government, set
about drafting specific legislation integrating the
effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). On
this point, I welcome the cooperation we received
within the Committee, as well as the prospects of
assistance, the form of which has become ever clearer.

Here, we welcome Norway’s commitment to the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) in this regard.
We urge all States, as well as international,
regional and subregional organizations whose activities
could be related to counter-terrorism to cooperate fully
with the resolution 1373 (2001) Committee to enable
the Committee better to carry out its immense task, the
scope and importance of which are growing every day.
In fact, in its nine months of existence, the Committee
has already considered 127 of the 160 national reports
that States have submitted to it, an average of 14
reports per month. That is considerable work, and an
unprecedented event in the history of our Organization.
In our view, particular attention should be given
to the content of the letters addressed to States
following consideration of their national reports
because of the importance of the supplementary
questions in those letters, which should enable the
States concerned more precisely and effectively to
target areas where additional legislative, regulatory or
administrative efforts need to be made to prevent and
suppress terrorism.
It is from this vantage point that we would call
upon the 29 States that have not yet submitted their
reports in accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution
1373 (2001), to take measures to rapidly overcome the
difficulties they are facing and cooperate with the
Committee. Only then will we be able perhaps to
celebrate the first anniversary of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee with the adoption of a common platform of
recommendations on the prevention and suppression of
this scourge that continues to haunt us.
We are convinced that the dialogue envisaged by
the Committee with the 29 States is correct, because it
will preserve the transparency and cooperation that
have always guided its work. This should be
acknowledged and encouraged, and we invite Member
States to respond favourably to the appeal made to
them.
We also appreciate the dialogue that has been set
up between the Committee and regional and
subregional organizations, as well as international
organizations such as the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the International Maritime Organization,
the International Criminal Police Organization and
many others. This initiative too must be pursued,

9

S/PV.4561

because it will enable us further to define and reduce
the scope of activities related to terrorism.
Cameroon fully endorses the Committee’s new
work programme for the fourth quarter, from 26 June
to 23 September 2002, as well as the present structure
of the Committee and its working methods, as outlined
by Sir Jeremy Greenstock. The Committee should take
advantage of the next three-month period to begin an
active phase of progressive assessment, involving the
formulation of specific recommendations based on the
information provided by each State. It is clear that, at
this stage of its work, the Committee may still need
additional information from some States. This defining
stage requires more transparency and specificity on the
part of the Committee.
We feel that the regular briefings provided by the
Chairman of the Committee are an ideal way to
reassure the Member States about working methods,
but I am already convinced that there will be broad and
useful participation of Member States in the next three
months, reflecting the considerable impact made by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Moreover, we are pleased to note that the
question of assistance continues to be of primary
concern to the Committee. Undeniably, States are
eagerly awaiting a complete and more understandable
format for the provision of assistance. We feel that the
Committee could speed up the gradual implementation
of the directory of assistance in order to provide many
States with sufficient information on the nature of the
assistance proposed by bilateral and multilateral
donors, and in particular on how to gain access to that
assistance.
We feel it is important for each subcommittee,
when meeting with delegations to consider their
national reports, to systematically provide detailed and
updated information about assistance.
Finally, my delegation would like to congratulate
the Secretariat, the experts and the subcommittees, as
well as the colleagues of Sir Jeremy Greenstock, for
the quality of their assistance to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.
All these efforts would be in vain if together we
did not clearly express our unshakable determination to
cooperate in implementing resolution 1373 (2001).
Only
international,
regional
and
subregional
cooperation will enable us effectively to combat this

10

scourge. Regional and subregional organizations must
become the true agents in the fight against terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee must be able to
count on them anytime, anywhere.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Ambassador
Greenstock for his briefing on the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC). Since its establishment,
the CTC has accomplished a great deal of effective
work. Its fair, open and transparent working methods
have won acclaim by the vast majority of Member
States. Coordination and cooperation among the
subcommittees are proceeding smoothly. We believe
that the Committee’s review of the first phase of its
work has been fruitful. My delegation agrees with
Ambassador Greenstock’s summary and assessment of
the Committee’s work to date. We also appreciate the
efforts and the great amount of work done by the
experts and the Secretariat. Like other members, China
endorses the Committee’s work programme for the
fourth 90-day period and the procedure for the secondphase review.
Ambassador Greenstock pointed out in his report
that the Committee has a strong interest in capacitybuilding. My delegation has also noted that, in the
second-phase review, the Committee will focus on the
question of providing the assistance needed by Member
States to implement resolution 1373 (2001). We appeal
to potential providers of assistance to respond actively
to the Committee’s call and to provide timely and
effective assistance to countries in need.
We endorse the Committee’s pragmatic working
methods, intended to step up the pace of work in the
interest of soon completing the review of national
reports.
The fight against terrorism is a new task for the
Security Council as it discharges its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
order to enable the United Nations to play its core role
in the international fight against terrorism, the Security
Council must focus on the real problems involved and
take measures to facilitate their resolution, stepping up
international counter-terrorism cooperation so as to
make such efforts more effective.
The work of the CTC to date has laid a good
foundation for the counter-terrorism efforts of Member
States and for international cooperation to that end. We
should note, however, that capacity-building for

S/PV.4561

combating terrorism is a long-term process — one that
is inseparable from the international fight against
terrorism. The Security Council should focus on how
the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations can
be integrated into the international fight against
terrorism.
Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like, first of all, to
thank you, Mr. President, for arranging today’s open
meeting of the Council on the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC). Ireland fully associates
itself with the statement to be delivered later in the
debate by Spain on behalf of the European Union.
Resolution 1373 (2001) set in motion the
construction of global scaffolding against international
terrorism. Clear and defined tasks are required of all
States through resolution 1373 (2001) — tasks relating
to legislative and executive actions against
international terrorism. The provisions of resolution
1373 (2001) involve the establishment and
maintenance of a global consensus of action. Those
who perpetrate acts of international terrorism are the
enemies of all States, and they must be the friends of
none.
It is now realistic to assess what has been
achieved. At one important level, there has been a
dramatic and welcome increase in the number of States
that have ratified some or all of the 12 international
conventions and protocols against terrorism. At another
level, throughout the world legislative measures are
being put in place in response to resolution 1373
(2001), and executive decisions are being taken. In
summary, a strong architectural framework in the fight
by the international community against international
terrorism is now clearly visible.
I want to pay special tribute to the Chairman of
the CTC, Ambassador Greenstock, and his colleagues
in New York and London, for the leadership and
support given to the Committee since its establishment.
We appreciate this work, which has been well done.
My delegation also appreciates the work of the three
Vice-Chairmen — Ambassador Koonjul, Ambassador
Lavrov and Ambassador Valdivieso — and thanks the
experts and the Secretariat for their commitment and
dedication in the complex and difficult work of the
CTC.
At this stage in our debate, I would like to make a
few general points of importance to my delegation.
First, the CTC must continue to avoid at all costs — as

it has done to date — any simplistic formula, such as
“You have succeeded; you have not succeeded”, in its
approach to States. Many of the detailed
requirements — on banking or finance, for example —
are extremely complex. Many States — often because
their economies are not fully or even partially
integrated into the global economy — never had any
need until now to put in place technical legislation in
respect of financial flows or regulatory frameworks.
All of this will take time and effort. What is
noteworthy today is how much has already been
achieved. That said, it is important that all States reply
to the CTC as required under resolution 1373 (2001).
Secondly, the CTC must continue to be vigilant in
the extreme in not going beyond the letter or the spirit
of what is required by resolution 1373 (2001). The
CTC, and the wider United Nations, must complement
the work of other institutions, which have their own
specific mandates or roles in the struggle against
terrorism. They must not duplicate this work or replace
it. The role of the United Nations is to provide global
legitimacy, to build a global consensus, to act as the
defender and promoter of multilateralism and
internationalism against those who are enemies of the
international good.
In so doing, we must continue to be guided by the
need to avoid any actions that could undermine this
sense of international legitimacy in the struggle against
international terrorism, just as we must also progress in
our work of protecting that sense of international
legitimacy. As we advance in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), it may well be necessary at
some stage for the Security Council to strengthen and
protect this sense of legitimacy by a renewed mandate
in the light of our experiences to date.
Thirdly, Ireland attaches great importance to
generous assistance by the international community in
supporting the efforts of developing countries to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). That is what we
agreed to do in resolution 1377 (2001). Ireland
welcomes the work of the CTC to date in this area. We
hope the concept of a trust fund will also be kept under
review. We understand the problems but hope that they
can be solved.
Ireland, for its part, is in the process of compiling
a list of experts who could be included in the CTC’s
directory of advice and expertise in the areas of
legislative and administrative practices, as set out in

11

S/PV.4561

the relevant provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). We
are also ready to support capacity-building in relation
to the specified areas through existing bilateral aid
programmes at country level and the provision of
fellowships for participation in relevant courses or
seminars in Ireland.
Ireland will continue to work with our developing
country partners to come up with a list of areas in
which relevant assistance can be provided, either
within the framework of existing programmes or by
means of additional mechanisms.
Fourthly, and most important, the fight against
international terrorism can never be at the expense of
human rights. This is not a point of narrow emphasis: if
we in the international community go down that
road — and it is a slippery road — then we are lost, as
are the core values that the United Nations stands for.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Mary Robinson, in a speech to the
Commonwealth Institute in London on 6 June, spoke of
“a subtle change in emphasis in many parts of the
world; order and security have become the
overriding priorities. In the past, the world has
learned that emphasis on national order and
security often involved curtailment of democracy
and human rights. As a result, a shadow has been
cast”.
We need to heed those words of wisdom and warning.
Finally, Ireland fully shares the view that regional
organizations have a critical role to play in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), and we
warmly welcome progress in that area to date.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like first of all to associate myself
with the words of appreciation that have been
expressed to the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador Greenstock, and to
thank him both for the comprehensive account of what
has been done by the Committee that he has headed for
the past nine months, and for the efforts that he
personally has been making in order to guarantee such
results.
Thanks to the energetic work being carried out
openly by the CTC under the auspices of the United
Nations, an unprecedented global system to combat
terrorism is being created. We very much appreciate
the fact that in carrying out its work, the Committee

12

has knitted together all areas of its activity into one
organic whole. First of all, it has undertaken a
comprehensive analysis of the reports submitted to it
on the counter-terrorism measures of various countries,
and secondly, it is seeking concrete ways and means to
provide advice and technical assistance to those States
that need such assistance in order to comply with their
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001).
We welcome the Committee’s intention to focus
in particular on cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in the fight against terrorism.
We believe that cooperation between the CTC and the
Commonwealth of Independent States anti-terrorism
centre and the regional anti-terrorist structure of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization would prove very
fruitful.
We support the programme of work of the CTC
for the fourth 90-day period. The Committee, in
essence, is entering into a new phase of its work, in
which its major task will be to study the additional
reports submitted by States in response to requests by
the Committee.
Of course, it is important at this stage to define
and clarify the ways and means and methods that will
guide the Committee in making recommendations, in
order to eliminate any gaps or flaws. We are convinced
that the success of this work is guaranteed, given the
dedication of the Council and the Committee as well as
the overall clear understanding that the CTC will not
function as a punitive body or overstep the bounds of
its mandate. This is especially important with respect
to the involvement in the work of the CTC of those
States that, for one reason or another, have not yet
submitted reports to it pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001).
In his letter of 13 June addressed to you, Mr.
President, the Chairman of the CTC concretely and
clearly described the situation and the prospects for the
work of the Committee on this question. The work of
the Committee promotes the establishment of a solid
basis for the comprehensive implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). We believe that
we in the CTC are providing a clear confirmation of
the effective discharge by the Security Council of its
major functions as the body that is responsible, under
the Charter of the United Nations, for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Russia in future
will take an active part in the work of the Committee.

S/PV.4561

In conclusion, I should like to thank the
delegations that have warmly commended the work of
the Bureau of the CTC.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me also begin by expressing my gratitude for the
considerable efforts and great dedication of
Ambassador Greenstock as Chairman of the
Committee. We would like also to thank him for his
briefing. I wish also to say that we endorse the
statement that will be made by Ambassador Niehaus of
Costa Rica on behalf of the Rio Group.
Colombia recognizes the progress that has been
achieved during this first phase of the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and supports the
programme of work established for the second phase.
My country reiterates the CTC’s appeal to all States
Members of the Organization to review together and to
implement effective and appropriate mechanisms in
order to stop those who today are instilling fear in
humankind through terrorist acts and threats from
achieving their goals.
In this respect, I wish to highlight, as Mexico has
done, the very recent adoption in the American
continent of the Inter-American Convention against
Terrorism, which is an effective instrument in the
combat against this scourge. This is a welcome sign of
the importance and the effectiveness of efforts carried
out in a spirit of solidarity by a regional group acting
jointly.
It is essential for the CTC to continue to
strengthen its relations of cooperation and assistance
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations, as they represent a fundamental
instrument in combating terrorism.

In the second phase of processing and analyzing
State reports, the Committee must focus its activities
and programme of work on priority areas such as the
identification by its experts and subcommittee
members of the shortcomings of some States in the
area
of
counter-terrorism
instruments.
Thus
recommendations should be proposed as to the
measures that should be adopted within a particular
State, in particular in the legislative and administrative
areas, as well as in the field of law enforcement, in
order to suppress the financing of terrorism. We deem
very useful the suggestion made by the representative
of Singapore regarding the criteria for assessing and
evaluating such gaps or shortcomings.
My delegation recognizes the importance and the
effectiveness of the measures and actions that have
been adopted by the majority of Member States in
compliance with resolution 1373 (2001), as well as the
activities that have been carried out by some regional
organizations to combat terrorism.
However, given present-day events, in particular
the serious threats that have been publicly made by
terrorist individuals and organizations, such as those
relating to actions planned by Al-Qaeda, for example,
as well as the numerous terrorist acts being carried out
throughout the world, we should reflect on what else
can be done in the CTC to prevent terrorism from
continuing to sow fear, dread and uncertainty
throughout the world, causing countless deaths and the
destruction of State infrastructures. For that reason, we
must continue to seek out innovative and effective
solutions to strengthen national capacities in order to
strengthen international cooperation in the area of
terrorism.

In the area of technical and financial assistance, I
should like to highlight the importance of the
establishment by the CTC of an on-line directory for
Member States on the resources and expertise available
in the areas covered by the resolution.

The answers to these questions should therefore
constitute the premises that the Committee should
consider during the second phase of its work. It should
determine whether or not the measures it is taking are
sufficient and if it needs to rethink its actions or
reformulate the modalities of its work.

This directory has been designed to help, during
the second phase — in which the Committee will
analyse the reports — those Governments that request
information and technical assistance as well as other
forms of assistance offered by other States and by
Committee experts, in the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001).

A number of agencies in various countries have
warned of the possibility of new and worse operations
and attacks by terrorist groups. We must promote
actions and create mechanisms in order to address
these threats in order to prevent them, or, at least,
reduce their severity, and, above all, to avert the
serious consequences of such attacks.

13

S/PV.4561

For that reason, one objective in the international
community’s efforts to combat terrorism must be to
continue to learn sufficiently about the capacities of,
and the methods used by, terrorist organizations, so that
we can move from our primarily reactive response —
pursuing and capturing terrorists after they have
achieved their objectives — to a preventive approach,
using key indicators to predict terrorist attacks before
they happen.
We know that this is not an easy task. The CTC
must continue to move forward and cooperate with
regional organizations, Member States and other
international or private organizations in the quest for
adequate and effective solutions.
The next public debate in this Chamber will give
us an opportunity to analyse in greater depth the major
challenges posed by terrorism, which require greater
efforts on the part of the United Nations.
Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Let me join other
colleagues in heartily congratulating the Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, for the very good work accomplished by
the CTC under his able leadership. His dedication to
the work of the Committee, his drive to push forward
and to realize to the fullest extent possible the agenda
set forth by resolution 1373 (2001), as well as his
personal commitment and effort in bringing home to
Member States as well as to various regional and
subregional organizations the cardinal responsibility of
eradicating terrorism — root and branch — have been
exemplary. It can be said that the outreach programme
that he has undertaken has been one of the most
successful United Nations in-house programmes.
The overwhelming response from Member States
and their cooperation with the CTC at all levels reflect
the serious commitment of each Member State to
address the problem of terrorism. Indeed, we have been
able to develop a broad, comprehensive and, above all,
sustained strategy to combat terrorism.
As a member of the Bureau, I wish to convey my
gratitude to all the other members of the CTC, the
experts, the staff of the Secretariat and the dedicated
staff of the Mission of the United Kingdom responsible
for CTC matters. I also wish to thank the
representatives of all those countries that responded to
the invitation of subcommittee B to discuss the draft
letters in the most transparent and even-handed
manner. The spirit in which our discussions have taken

14

place has been most cordial and cooperative, and it is
our hope that that spirit will continue to guide relations
between the CTC and Member States.
The dangers of terrorism and of possible attacks
by terrorists are realities that cannot be escaped.
Terrorism has no geographical boundaries. It attacks
indiscriminately and ruthlessly. A terrorist attack, be it
in Kashmir or in the Middle East, does not only have
negative effects in the locality in which it takes taken
place, it has ripple effects that may result in a
conflagration of unprecedented violence throughout the
globe. That is why we cannot stand idly by or be
passive onlookers.
The standards set under various international
conventions and instruments give us hope that
terrorism can be stopped. The far-reaching mandate of
resolution 1373 (2001), if fully implemented and
respected by each State Member of the international
community, will, to a large extent, guarantee
international peace and security and rid the world of
the scourge of terrorism. In order to ensure that we
attain that goal, it is important to address the following
issues in a comprehensive manner.
We will need to look into ways to prevent the
proliferation of future terrorists and terrorist
organizations. We will also need to address the root
causes of terrorism, as well as to explore ways to
enforce rigorous rules and laws, at the domestic,
regional and international level, on issues such as drug
trafficking, money laundering, terrorist financing and
traffic in small arms and light weapons. Lastly, perhaps
the most important issue — which is a matter that the
CTC is clearly focusing on fully — is to give the
necessary assistance in fully implementing resolution
1373 (2001) to those countries that need it.
My delegation supports the appeal made by the
Chairman to those States that have not yet submitted a
report to open a line of communication with the CTC
and to keep the Committee informed of any difficulty
they are facing in the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). Their response is all the more important if
we are to keep up the momentum in the international
alliance against terrorism.
Finally, I would like to reiterate my personal
commitment to the work of the CTC, as well as the
commitment of my Government to fully implement
resolution 1373 (2001).

S/PV.4561

Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I shall
try to be brief, as I am the next to last member of the
Council to take the floor, because I agree fully with the
analysis made by previous speakers and also because
Bulgaria fully endorses the statement to be made
shortly by the representative of Spain on behalf of the
European Union.
The fact that I am the penultimate speaker among
members places me in a somewhat difficult position,
because the praise given to the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), and to its Chairman in
particular, has been extremely eloquent and it is very
difficult to add much more. However, I would like to
underscore the fact that, in our opinion, the success
achieved by the Committee and by its Chairman, Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, is not due solely to its working
methods, evoked by Jean-David Levitte a few moments
ago, but also to a certain style, a style that is on a par
with the task at hand and that is characterized by
extraordinary intellectual and moral rigour, equality,
benevolent discipline and full transparency leading to
consensus. I must say that we have rarely seen an
individual contribute so much to such a noble cause.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock and his colleagues in the United
Kingdom Mission are showing that diplomacy serves
some purpose.
I must very briefly highlight the aspects of the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee that are of
the greatest interest to us. First and foremost, I wish to
mention the unprecedented audit of the legislative,
administrative and other capacities of States Members
of the United Nations. That audit is indeed
unprecedented, and it has also been very effective and
thorough. Political will is generally present, but further
efforts must nevertheless be made. There are still
countries that have not yet submitted reports. They
must do so.
In particular, I wish to emphasize the importance
that Bulgaria attaches to the ratification of the 12
United Nations counter-terrorism instruments. I will
not hide the fact that my country is proud to be among
the 14 States to have ratified all 12 conventions.
It is a strong temptation for me not to conclude on
such a specific point, but, as Sir Jeremy mentioned a
while ago, a regional political forum of the countries of
South-Eastern Europe is being held today in Sofia on
the subject of the fight against terrorism. Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece,

Macedonia, Romania, Slovenia, Turkey and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia are all taking part in that
meeting. Principal among the major objectives of the
forum is to establish permanent regional counterterrorism structures. Another important objective is to
develop a coordinated plan of action among the States
of the region and to encourage the creation through
parliaments of national structures devoted to combating
terrorism and to help accelerate the adoption of
counter-terrorism legislation.
I wish to point out, among the more specific
objectives, a unified format for travel documents and
identity cards for citizens of the States of the region.
And also on the agenda are items for training police
officers and customs inspectors to combat human
trafficking, illegal immigration, and drug trafficking,
which very often are the very source of terrorism. My
delegation will inform Members of the United Nations
of the results of its activities because we firmly believe
in the need for a regional approach to the fight against
terrorism. From this standpoint the work of the CTC is
headed in the right direction.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I will make a
statement in my capacity as representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
The Syrian delegation expresses it gratitude to the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, to the Vice-Chairmen, the
Committee’s members, the experts, the Committee
secretariat and the Translation Services for their
successful efforts during the previous phases of the
Committee’s work. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for facilitating the work of the
Committee.
The Committee, in previous phases of its work
has been able to meet the requirements of its
commitments and mandate primarily through the
response of most Member States to the requirements of
resolution 1373 (2001). Specifically, 159 requisite
reports have been submitted to the Committee to date,
with four more reports to come. We note that a few
States have been unable to submit their reports. This in
no way is due to unwillingness to abide by the
requirements of the resolution but rather is due to
difficulties previously raised by the Committee
Chairman at previous meetings. Syria welcomes the
provision by the CTC of all forms of assistance —

15

S/PV.4561

technical, financial and administrative — to these
countries in the preparation of the requisite reports.

that have not yet presented their national reports to do
so.

The Chairman of the CTC presented to the
Council a clear and precise work plan for the CTC’s
next phase. While Syria is determined to make every
possible effort to ensure the realization of that work
plan through its cooperation in meeting the
expectations of Member States, we stress that
guaranteed success depends primarily on the response
from Member States. Success depends also on
concerted international efforts to combat all forms and
manifestations of terrorism, as well as an analysis of its
roots and causes.

However, resolution 1373 (2001) is not complied
with through mere presentation of reports. The
essential point is to implement the resolution fully, and
reports should reflect the reality of legal and practical
measures adopted at the national or regional level. The
European Union will provide a timely response to the
Committee’s request for clarifications. Similarly, its
member States will do likewise in their national
capacity.

Combating terrorism requires all of us to make
genuine and sincere efforts in different fields. It
requires of the Security Council members in particular
further coordination and concentration of efforts,
particularly at the regional level. The Syrian Arab
Republic, whose genuine contributions to combating
terrorism are known to many States, will continue to do
its utmost to achieve our common objectives.
I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as Iceland,
align themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomes this new
opportunity to review the work of the Security Council
Counter-Terrorism Committee. We commend and
support the transparency with which it works, and we
thank Ambassador Greenstock for his commitment and
involvement in this essential task.
The fight against terrorism remains an absolute
priority for the European Union. In this context we
acknowledge the central role of the United Nations
through the Security Council and the CTC, and we
affirm our full commitment. The Committee is now
entering the second phase in its consideration of the
reports. A great effort has been made by members of
the Committee, its experts and the Secretariat to
analyse the wealth of information provided by more
than one hundred and fifty reports. Member States
should provide the CTC with their pending reports,
whether initial or subsequent. We urge those countries

16

International solidarity and cooperation constitute
essential instruments to fight the scourge of terrorism.
The European Union stands ready to assist third
countries to reinforce their capacity to respond
effectively to this international threat. The European
Commission has further scope to offer assistance in the
areas covered by resolution 1373 (2001) through
existing programmes.
The European Union expects that the CTC and
countries or regions in serious need of assistance will
provide specific requests. This would enable the
Commission and the European Union member States,
together with the international financial institutions and
other donors, to enhance coordination to identify and
implement concrete actions. An overview of the
European Union assistance programmes appears on the
CTC’s website. The European Union will remain in
close consultation with the CTC, since it is an
important forum for coordinating requests with offers
of assistance in counter-terrorism actions.
The Chairmanship of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe organized an
important conference in Lisbon in June, at which
representatives of various international organizations
discussed the need for coordination among regional
organizations. The European Union stated there that we
must try to avoid overlapping and proliferation of
bodies with similar or identical tasks. Time and
resources should be used more effectively through
identifying the added value each organization can
provide. To that end, the CTC is optimally qualified to
serve as a clearing house for contacts and information
exchange on the activities of the various international
bodies.
The effectiveness of national counter-terrorism
efforts can be greatly enhanced through regional
organizations. The Union is well prepared for that, as it

S/PV.4561

is not just a cooperation organization; it is geared
towards developing common norms and policies.
During these past three months, the Union has
continued to implement the Common Position and the
Action Plan adopted after the events of 11 September.
We have revised and substantively enlarged the list of
terrorist individuals, entities and groups, which is
annexed to the European Common Position of 27
December 2001.
We recently adopted European Council regulation
881/2002, which incorporates the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1390 (2002). The most
recent development occurred on 13 June 2002, when
the
competent
European
ministers
approved
harmonization of the criminal offence of terrorism
through an agreement that entails a common definition
of terrorism that carries the most severe penalties of
each national legal system.
The establishment of joint investigation teams
and the framework decision on the common European
arrest warrant and surrender procedures were also
approved. This will result in a procedure that is much
simpler than the traditional extradition procedures,
which judges will use to detain terrorist suspects and to
turn them over to the requesting State member of the
Union.
The European Union is convinced that the fight
against terrorism must respect human rights and the
rule of law, and that individual human rights must be
taken into account in the design and implementation of
sanctions in the fight against terrorism. The Union
believes that States, in fighting terrorism, must not
condone acts of indiscriminate violence against
civilians or use counter-terrorism as a pretext for
political repression. We commend the Committee’s
contacts with the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and its acceptance of parallel
monitoring of the observance of human rights
obligations.
The European Union is trying to assist in the fight
of the international community, urging the speedy
signature or ratification of the 12 United Nations
instruments against terrorism. We remain committed to
finalizing negotiation of the draft comprehensive
convention against terrorism. The United Nations
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention at
Vienna should provide Member States upon request
technical assistance for the signature, accession,

ratification and effective implementation of those
international instruments. The Union awaits the report
of the Secretary-General, requested by the General
Assembly in its resolution 56/253, which will make
proposals to strengthen the United Nations Terrorism
Prevention Branch to enable it to carry out its mandate,
as approved by the General Assembly.
In conclusion, the international fight against
terrorism is going to require a long and costly effort on
the part of us all. It can succeed only through strong
and sustained international cooperation. The United
Nations,
particularly
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee, will be crucial to its success. We urge all
States and international organizations to offer full
assistance.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The next
speaker is the representative of Costa Rica. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
am pleased to address the Security Council, on behalf
of the 19 States members of the Rio Group, during its
consideration of the third quarterly report of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) established by
resolution 1373 (2001). I wish to begin by thanking Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the Committee, for
his briefing and for his excellent work at the head of
that body. I wish also to congratulate the ViceChairmen of the CTC.
The States members of the Rio Group condemn
and reject terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
At the same time, we firmly support all cooperation
and coordination measures adopted internationally and
regionally and within a framework of strict observance
of human rights, the rule of law, international
humanitarian law and other norms and principles of
international law, with a view to combating terrorism.
In that context, as the representatives of Mexico and
Colombia have stated, the 3 June 2002 adoption of the
Inter-American Convention against Terrorism by the
Organization of American States significantly bolsters
regional mechanisms to combat this scourge.
The Rio Group is particularly pleased to note the
submission of more than 160 national reports, in
compliance with the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001). We appreciate the vast work of the Committee,
which has enabled it, with professionalism and
transparency, to consider the vast majority of those

17

S/PV.4561

reports. We hope that the Committee will soon be able
to consider the reports it has not yet been able to
examine. However, we note that a small number of
States have still not submitted their first reports, in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001), and we call on them to submit them as soon as
possible. In that regard, we believe that the Committee
experts on the provision of assistance could help them
resolve any practical difficulties they may face.

order to coordinate its counter-terrorism efforts. We
note that those organizations can act only within their
respective mandates and in accordance with their
statutes. In this framework, cooperation between those
organizations and the Committee must be in strict
compliance with those mandates. At the same time, we
believe it is necessary for States members of those
bodies to consider the role that each of them can play
within their respective spheres of competence.

The Rio Group welcomes the opportunity for
constructive dialogue between the Security Council and
United Nations Member States provided through the
submission and consideration of national reports. We
believe that the Committee’s success depends on its
capacity to generate and maintain ongoing
communication among the Organization, its Member
States and regional organizations, with a view to
strengthening intergovernmental and inter-institutional
assistance and cooperation to combat terrorism.

During the upcoming period the Committee will
also have to meet the challenge of its growing practical
and financial requirements. The work of that body is
consuming significant quantities of the limited
resources of the Organization. To date, its needs have
been met with resources earmarked for other
programmes and mandates. This is not a sustainable
solution, given that other programmes are equally
necessary for the international community. We
therefore consider it essential to allocate resources to
the Committee within the Organization’s budget.

In that context, we believe that the Committee
must facilitate the provision of technical assistance and
financial cooperation to those States requiring it to
strengthen their justice systems and their legislative
frameworks. Therefore, we welcome the Committee’s
intention to serve as a contact point between countries
and bodies providing assistance and the States
requesting assistance. The States members of the Rio
Group hope that, in the coming months, in accordance
with its programme of work, the Committee will
consider the second round of reports and the
clarifications requested of States. Similarly, we trust
that in the coming months the Committee will pursue
dialogue with all countries in order to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to
strengthen the capacity of States to combat terrorism.
That is the Committee’s mandate.
We endorse the understanding within the
Committee that it need not assume quasi-judicial
functions or declare that some States have complied
with resolution 1373 (2001) while others have not. We
agree with Ambassador Greenstock’s assessment that
continuous efforts are required to achieve the
objectives enshrined in the resolution and that therefore
no State can consider its work complete. We trust that
during the next phase the Committee will continue to
work transparently and to be impartial in its results.
In the next three months the Committee should
also increase contacts with regional organizations in

18

We the members of the Rio Group are aware that
combating terrorism should lead us to build more open
and tolerant societies. As clearly stated by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, combating terrorism
requires that the root of the problems that cause
insecurity be attacked. In this context, we know that
the best protection against terrorism is respect for
human rights and democracy in all spheres. Therefore,
combating this scourge should lead to the
establishment of a true culture of peace, tolerance and
solidarity. These are the values that the CounterTerrorism Committee must promote.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Brunei
Darussalam. I invite him to take the seat reserved for
him at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Serbini (Brunei Darussalam): I have the
honour of speaking on behalf of the members of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and
Viet Nam.
At this juncture, ASEAN wishes to thank the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
His Excellency Sir Jeremy Greenstock, the ViceChairmen, the other Committee members and all the
experts involved for their dedication and hard work.

S/PV.4561

We very much welcome these open meetings to
hear updates by the Chairman of the CTC on its work.
We appreciate the progress made by the Committee and
note that it has already issued 127 responses to the
reports submitted by Member States in response to
paragraph 6 of Council resolution 1373 (2001), and is
ready to review the second round of reports. In that
regard, we wish to emphasize that all ASEAN member
countries have already submitted their first reports and,
at this stage, are progressing towards fulfilling the next
requirements of the CTC. We look forward to further
efforts by the Committee and others to provide
assistance to ASEAN member countries in need of help
in implementing resolution 1373 (2001).
Allow me to give a further update on ASEAN’s
ongoing efforts to combat international terrorism. An
important ASEAN achievement was the special
ministerial meeting on terrorism held in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, on 20 and 21 May 2002. While noting with
concern the close links between transnational crime
and terrorism, which lend greater urgency to efforts to
combat transnational crime, our ministers agreed to
endorse a comprehensive work programme on
terrorism to implement the ASEAN Plan of Action to
Combat Transnational Crime, which included, among
other things: exchange of information; the compilation
and dissemination of relevant laws and regulations of
ASEAN member countries; the compilation and
dissemination of bilateral and multilateral agreements
and information on relevant international treaties where
feasible; the development of multilateral or bilateral
legal arrangements to facilitate apprehension,
investigation, prosecution, extradition, inquiry and
seizure in order to enhance mutual legal and
administrative assistance among ASEAN member
countries where feasible; the enhancement of
cooperation and coordination in law enforcement and
intelligence sharing; and the development of regional
training programmes.
Offers were also made at the meeting by
Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia with respect to
training and capacity-building for all ASEAN member
countries. The ministers also agreed to designate
principal contact points in all ASEAN member
countries on counter-terrorism matters. The progress
made in the implementation of these programmes will
be reviewed at subsequent meetings of ASEAN
ministers responsible for transnational crime issues.

An ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) workshop on
the prevention of terrorism was held in Bangkok on 17
to 19 April, organized by the Governments of Thailand
and Australia. It was opened by the Foreign Minister of
Thailand. The workshop concluded that greater
exchange of information and intelligence and further
cooperation among law enforcement and other relevant
security agencies were essential tools in the fight
against terrorism. Participants agreed that training and
exercises among ARF countries could contribute
usefully towards the development of national and
regional capabilities to prevent terrorism. They further
agreed that ARF participating countries be invited to
submit to the ARF Chair summaries of measures taken
nationally in response to the terrorist threat.
Earlier, another ARF workshop on financial
measures against terrorism was jointly organized in
Honolulu by the United States and Malaysia from 24 to
26 March 2002. Japan, the Republic of Korea and
Singapore will also jointly organize the third ARF
workshop on counter-terrorism in Tokyo in September
or October 2002, which will focus on security
arrangements for large-scale events. These workshops
are examples of ASEAN-led efforts to promote
cooperation between countries within South-East Asia
and those outside the region to combat international
terrorism.
In addition, various projects and initiatives
related to combating international terrorism were
planned by individual ASEAN members such as the
agreement on information exchange and establishment
of communication procedures signed by Indonesia,
Malaysia and the Philippines in Kuala Lumpur on
7 May 2002, under which the parties to the agreement
will cooperate to combat transnational crime, including
terrorism.
These steps reflect our commitment to tackle this
enormously challenging task. Countering terrorism
remains very high on our agenda, and I would like to
take this opportunity to reassure the Council of
ASEAN’s continued cooperation in preventing,
countering and suppressing all terrorist acts in
accordance with the Charter, all relevant United
Nations resolutions, in particular Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), and the principles of
international law.

19

S/PV.4561

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Sir Jeremy Greenstock to respond to questions
and comments made.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
very warmly appreciate the words of support and
commendation that the Committee has received. I am
particularly pleased that Council members and others
have warmly recognized the work of the ViceChairmen, because the work of the subcommittees has
been absolutely crucial to the progress that we have
made on the reports. I really pay tribute to the amount
of personal effort and intelligent determination that
they have brought to the work of the subcommittees.
I am also glad that members of the Council have
recognized the excellent work of our experts, who have
formed a truly united team now, which has given us
tremendous help — and of the Secretariat. Council
members have also drawn attention to the contribution
of my own delegation, which comes better from you,
members of the Council, than from me. I want to
underline the debt of gratitude that I owe to Anna
Clunes and the rest of my team for maintaining an upfront, initiative approach that has provided a real grip
on this subject for the whole Committee.
Let me go through a number of points that arose
in the interventions. Ambassador Mahbubani raised
three questions with his typical imagination. I think
that the criteria for self-assessment are going to emerge
from the work that our experts are doing, from their
experience of what they are finding in the reports. And
the Chair intends to offer to the Committee, with the
help of the experts, a synthesis of ongoing experience,
which will begin to amount to benchmarks for what we
are looking at and what we are looking for. We
discussed this with the experts, and in due course over
this next period, we will provide some advice to
members of the Committee that will be available to the
wider membership about what is coming of the reports
and what the emerging criteria are on which we are
working. I think it is better that this should come out
from experience and from an empirical approach rather
than from our trying to lay it down as a matter of
principles. We will discuss this within the Committee,
but I assure Singapore and others that the Committee
will work to produce what Ambassador Mahbubani is
working for.
As to preparing for the major annual review that
we will have in October, the United Kingdom

20

delegation will commit itself to putting around a paper
before that debate that will set out some issues worth
deeper discussion. They will be issues that will not be
unfamiliar to Committee members, because we discuss
most things, but we will try to set the framework for
that debate in late September or early October in
coordination with the presidency of the month. We will
try to make some suggestions to our colleagues on the
Council as to what we should be looking at.
Ambassador Mahbubani asked a third question.
He really set a little trap that is tempting to fall into. So
I shall. He asked for a layman’s analogy, and what
occurred to me in response was that the Committee has
in a sense become a fitness trainer. A fitness trainer is,
in many respects, your friend, because he is aiming to
do you good; and in some respects he is your enemy
because he is hurting you. It hurts, but it prolongs your
life. The important thing about the Counter-Terrorism
Committee is that it is acting on doctor’s orders. There
is the threat of a life-affecting disease that we are
having to attack. We have to raise our capability to deal
with this. Nearly all of us need help in doing so.
The CTC is the catalyst for the provision of the
instruments for raising that capacity. The fitter the
global system is, without exception, to meet the threat
of the disease of terrorism, the longer our global
society will remain healthy and will prolong its life. I
think this is a fair analogy, but do not forget that it is
under doctor’s orders. It is your choice, Member States,
whether you respond to the programme, but your
doctor has laid out the prescription.
Many of you have referred to non-reporting
States, and we are working in cooperation with those
States to make sure that they report soon. I would like
to underline, please, the role of the regional groups in
making sure that their members do respond to the
requirement of resolution 1373 (2001). We were not
going to have a comprehensive debate today, and not
all regional groups have decided to contribute, but I
note that those regional groups from whom the great
majority of non-reporters come have not decided to
contribute today. There is a responsibility within the
region to make sure that members who have not
reported do not let down those members who have
reported.
A number of speakers — including Mexico,
Ireland, the European Union (EU) and the Rio
Group — have commented on the relationship between

S/PV.4561

our work and the requirements of human rights, and on
the balance that is needed in this area. I think the
Committee has got this balance right in showing a
considerable awareness of human rights requirements,
but not taking on any responsibility as a function —
because it is not our function — and in having a good
relationship with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, with civil society and nongovernmental organizations who, at some point, I
would like the Committee to agree, should come in
some guise or other to have a discussion within the
Committee.
Let me just make one small comment on the
quotation from High Commissioner Mary Robinson
that came out of the Irish intervention. She says that
her shadow is cast by — and I paraphrase — by
excessive security. Yes, a shadow is cast on human
rights by excessive security. But a shadow is cast on
human rights and freedom by inadequate security. We
have to realize that there is a balance between the two.
The action of terrorists is an attack on human rights
and individual rights, and the fight against terrorism is
itself an extension of human rights. So let us get the
balance right.
I think many speakers have rightly focused on the
assistance programme. We are taking time to get it
going to a point at which it is of real practical help to
individual Member States. The appointment of two
experts in that area has accelerated the programme, and
the Committee is committed to producing a website
that is of real use within the 90-day period coming up. I
think that the United States is right to draw attention to
the fact that donors must offer more, because there are
donors out there — or potential donors — who have
not come forward. We will be enhancing our contacts
with them to accelerate the programme. I warmly
welcome the words of the European Union in
establishing itself as a major source of donor activity,
and we will be in contact with the European Union to
chase it up.

I will continue to have open meetings with United
Nations Members, and I have to say that I am
extremely grateful to the members of delegations who
come along to these meetings — in quite considerable
numbers — for the spirit with which they enter the
conversations and for the care they take to realize the
opportunity we give them to ask questions and to look
at areas where they are uncertain about the
Committee’s approach. I think this is a very important
aspect of the Committee’s work, and I appreciate the
response.
Finally, I think that the intervention of the Rio
Group made a good point about resources. We do not
have, in this area, the resources that the importance of
the subject dictates. That is something that we will
have to look at — not just the provision of assistance,
but the resources that come from the United Nations
family and the Secretariat in making sure that the work
of the Committee continues to be of real practical value
to all United Nations Members and that the momentum
behind the Committee is maintained. That is an area
that we will have to look at on the agenda of the
Committee.
I thank you, Mr. President, for your care in
having organized and presided over this meeting,
which I think has been very useful. We look forward to
reporting from the Committee on our next 90-day
period.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Sir
Jeremy Greenstock for his useful responses and the
comprehensive clarifications that he provided. I would
like once again to thank him for his efforts.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

21
