A/RES/77/289

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 May 2023

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 18 (c)
Sustainable development: disaster risk reduction

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 18 May 2023
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/77/L.70)]

77/289.

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm
review of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030
The General Assembly
Adopts the political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm review
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, as contained in the
annex to the present resolution.
71st plenary meeting
18 May 2023
Annex
Political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm review of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030
1.
We, Heads of State and Government, Ministers and High Representatives,
gathered at the United Nations on 18 and 19 May 2023 for the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the midterm review of the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015–20301 to assess progress on integrating disaster risk reduction
into policies, programmes and investments at all levels, identify good practices, gaps
and challenges and accelerate the path to achieving the outcome and goal of the
Sendai Framework and its seven global targets by 2030. We reaffirm our commitment
to the full implementation of the Sendai Framework, including its guiding principles
and four priorities for action.

__________________
1

23-09996 (E)

Resolution 69/283, annex II.

010623

*2309996*

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm review
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030

A/RES/77/289

2.
We recall that the Sendai Framework applies to risks of small- and large-scale,
frequent and infrequent, sudden- and slow-onset disasters caused by natural and manmade hazards, as well as related environmental, technological and biological hazards
and risks.
3.
We reiterate the call in the Sendai Framework for the substantial reduction of
disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and health and in the economic, physical,
social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses, communities and
countries.
4.
We recognize the need for a broader and a more people-centred preventive
approach to disaster risk reduction, reflecting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, 2 and that disaster risk reduction policies and practices need to be
multi-hazard and multisectoral, inclusive and accessible in order to be efficient and
effective.
5.
While we recognize that the implementation of the Sendai Framework is
delivering positive results, we are deeply concerned that the pace of implementation
is not sufficient nor equal. Insufficient access to disaster data, risk knowledge,
technology and financing, as well as insufficient prioritization and action on disaster
risk reduction, including through climate action, continue to hinder progress in
implementing the Sendai Framework.
6.
We express deep concern at the increasing frequency and intensity, as well as
the number and scale of disasters and their devastating impacts, which have resulted
in massive loss of life, food insecurity and famine, biodiversity loss, water-related
challenges, increased displacement, humanitarian and development needs and longterm negative economic, social and environmental consequences, especially for those
in vulnerable situations throughout the world, and which are undermining progress
towards sustainable development, the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the achievement of its Sustainable Development Goals,
in particular for the least developed countries, small island developing States,
landlocked developing countries and African countries, as well as middle -income
countries facing specific challenges.
7.
We express deep concern also that economic losses are rising as a result of the
increasing number and value of assets exposed and vulnerable to hazards.
8.
We recognize that disaster risk is increasingly complex and systemic and that
hazards can trigger each other with cascading and compounding impacts within and
across sectors and geographies, as well as at the local, national, regional and global
levels. We continue to recognize, in this regard, that conventional approaches to
disaster management are no longer adequate and recognize also the need to shift from
managing disasters and their impacts to reducing and preventing disaster risk. We
therefore reaffirm our commitment to addressing disaster risk reduction and the
building of resilience to disasters with a renewed sense of urgency within the context
of sustainable development and poverty eradication.
9.
We highlight the synergies between the implementation of the Sendai
Framework, the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement. 3
10. We reaffirm the urgency of implementing the Sendai Framework as an integral
part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to adopt a risk-informed
approach to sustainable development and recall the synergies between the
implementation of the Sendai Framework and other relevant major intergovernmental
outcomes of United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and
__________________
2
3

2/10

Resolution 70/1.
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
23-09996

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm review
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030

A/RES/77/289

environmental fields. In this regard, we recommit to fostering collaboration across
global and regional mechanisms and institutions for the implementation and
coherence of instruments and tools relevant to disaster risk reduction, such as for
climate change, biodiversity, sustainable development, poverty eradication,
environment, agriculture, health, food and nutrition and others, as appropriate.
11. We welcome the outcomes of the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
fourth Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris
Agreement, held in Sharm El-Sheikh, including the decision 4 on funding
arrangements for responding to loss and damage associated with the adverse effects
of climate change, including a focus on addressing loss and damage.
12. We welcome the holding of the United Nations Conference on the Midterm
Comprehensive Review of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International
Decade for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028, from 22 to
24 March 2023, and reiterate that sustainable, integrated, disaster risk-informed water
resource management is necessary for successful disaster preparedness, disaster risk
reduction and climate change adaptation and that the achievement of the water-related
goals and targets contributes to the successful implementation of the Sendai
Framework.
13. We express appreciation to the countries, United Nations system entities and
stakeholders that engaged in the midterm review process, including by submitting
voluntary national reports 5 and reporting against the seven global targets through the
Sendai Framework monitor, and we take note of the report on the main findings and
recommendations of the midterm review of the implementation of the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–20306 and the report of the midterm
review of the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030.7 We recognize the importance of the discussions that were held at the
global and regional platforms for disaster risk reduction as valuable inputs to the
midterm review.
Priority 1: Understanding disaster risk
14. We welcome the progress made in understanding risk at all levels since 2015,
including the establishment and upgrading of disaster loss databases and
improvements in the collection, analysis and utilization of disaster risk data in
decision-making in many countries.
15. We express concern that gaps in the collection of disaster loss and risk data,
including data disaggregated by income, sex, age and disability, are barriers to the
development of inclusive multisectoral disaster risk reduction policies and strategies.
16. We emphasize that strengthened efforts are needed to enhance the quality of and
access to multi-hazard risk data in all sectors, including their use in multi-hazard early
warning systems in all countries, particularly developing countries, to allow policy
and investment decisions to be made with sufficient understanding and consideration
of disaster risk.
17. We acknowledge that more is needed in assessing and addressing core elements
of risk, particularly in respect of the drivers of risk creation and vulnerability, and to
__________________

Decision 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4.
Available at sendaiframework-mtr.undrr.org/2023/mtr-sf-submissions-and-reports.
6
A/77/640.
7
Available at sendaiframework-mtr.undrr.org/publication/report-midterm-review-implementationsendai-framework-disaster-risk-reduction-2015-2030.
4
5

23-09996

3/10

A/RES/77/289

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm review
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030

better integrate vulnerability, exposure and resilience of people and communities into
existing disaster data platforms and decision-support mechanisms.
18. We stress the need to foster better understanding and knowledge of disaster risk,
in particular in developing countries through, inter alia, the exchange of best practices
and expertise, technology transfer on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually
agreed, educational and training programmes for disaster risk reduction and
management and access to relevant data and information.
19. We recognize that greater attention is needed in all countries to strengthen
awareness and understanding of new, emerging and future disaster risks, including
the impacts of climate change, biodiversity loss, environmental degradation and
unplanned and rapid urbanization, as well as technological hazards and risks.
20. We call upon States to strengthen understanding of disaster risk, taking into
account their national circumstances, needs and priorities, including by:
(a) Strengthening the collection and analysis of data on hazards, disaster
events and their impacts, including losses and damages, and the monitoring of
systemic risk, cascading effects, compounding hazards and multiple risk drivers
through enhancing investment in human and institutional capacity development,
research, digital technological development and innovation, emerging technologies,
Earth and climate observations as well as geographic information systems, and
sharing of lessons learned from past disasters and good practices for multidimensional
and multi-hazard risk assessment, risk analytics, risk mapping and strategic foresight,
especially in developing countries;
(b) Ensuring the provision of adequate, sustainable and timely means of
implementation through capacity-building, financial and technical assistance and
transfer of technology, on mutually agreed terms, to the least developed countries,
small island developing States, landlocked developing countries and African
countries, as well as middle-income countries facing specific challenges, to enhance
the collection, analysis and dissemination of disaster-related data;
(c) Improving national mechanisms to share disaster risk data and analysis
among sectors, institutions and ministries, as well as among countries at the regional
and international levels, and ensuring that disaster risk data and information are
accessible, interoperable and available in easily understandable formats for public
and private sector use in decision-making in all sectors;
(d) Enhancing the collection and interpretation of data disaggregated by
income, sex, age and disability;
(e) Ensuring the use of traditional, Indigenous and local knowledge and
practices to complement scientific knowledge in disaster risk assessment, policies,
programmes and communication, including through dialogue between the scientific
community and Indigenous Peoples;
(f) Enhancing efforts to promote a culture of disaster prevention, resilience
and responsible citizenship and to promote education on disaster risk, including
through the use of traditional, Indigenous and local knowledge and practices and,
inter alia, raising public awareness and investing in academic and professional
training, advocacy campaigns, social media and community mobilization.
Priority 2: Strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk
21. We reaffirm that each State has the primary responsibility to prevent and reduce
disaster risk and commend the progress made in strengthening national disaster risk
governance, including the significant increase in countries with national disaster risk

4/10

23-09996

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm review
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030

A/RES/77/289

reduction strategies since 2015 and the considerable progress made in regional and
subregional cooperation mechanisms for disaster risk reduction.
22. We reiterate the importance of the engagement and inclusion of all of society in
disaster risk reduction and express appreciation for the critical role played by
non-State stakeholders in implementing the Sendai Framework at the local, national,
regional and global levels.
23. We reiterate that, while there has been progress on disaster risk governance at
the local level, more needs to be done. We recognize the need for enhanced support
to local authorities as well as for greater engagement with local communities and civil
society organizations in developing countries, in particular the least developed
countries, small island developing States, landlocked developing countries and
African countries, as well as middle-income countries facing specific challenges.
24. We express concern that silos within and between national and local institutions
limit coordination between disaster risk reduction, biodiversity conservation,
sustainable development and economic policies and plans, as well as climate change
policies and plans, including mitigation and adaptation, and that a lack of national
legal frameworks for disaster risk reduction hampers progress in implementing the
Sendai Framework.
25. We stress the need to enhance coordination, coherence and integration between
disaster and health risk management systems, including at the local level.
26. We call upon States to strengthen comprehensive disaster risk governance,
taking into account their national circumstances, needs and priorities, including by:
(a) Strengthening national multi-hazard risk governance with the full
engagement of all State institutions, including by establishing or strengthening
national platforms for disaster risk reduction, or similar mechanisms, to strengthen
coordination across ministries, institutions and sectors at all levels; mapping existing
policy architecture and capacities for disaster risk reduction and addressing gaps and
assigning roles and responsibilities across ministries and institutions, as needed; and
ensuring that all sectors at all levels have disaster risk reduction policies and strategies
in place;
(b) Supporting and enabling all local authorities to have disaster risk reduction
strategies and local platforms for disaster risk reduction, or similar mechanisms, in
place, including by strengthening the role of local authorities for multi -hazard risk
governance with the provision of financial assistance, technical support and capacity
development; promoting local ownership through community-based disaster risk
management approaches; and participating in the Making Cities Resilient 2030
initiative to promote exchanges between cities;
(c) Ensuring that disaster risk governance is supported by legal and regulatory
frameworks, policies and plans at all levels that reflect responsibility to reduce
disaster risk, including through risk-informed decision-making and investments as
well as regulations for land-use and urban planning and building codes, as needed;
(d) Promoting the full, equal, meaningful and inclusive participation and
contribution of women, older persons, persons with disabilities, migrants, Indigenous
Peoples and local communities, as well as the role of youth, volunteers, academia,
scientific and research entities and networks, business, professional associations,
private sector financing institutions and the media, in all forums and processes related
to disaster risk reduction and in the design and implementation of disaster risk
reduction policies, plans and programmes, including for gender-responsive and
disability-inclusive disaster risk reduction, in accordance with the Sendai Framework,

23-09996

5/10

A/RES/77/289

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm review
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030

and promoting also the engagement of children in disaster risk reduction, as
appropriate;
(e) Mainstreaming disaster risk reduction in the implementation of other
relevant policy areas, such as for sustainable development, poverty eradication,
climate change mitigation and adaptation, water, biodiversity conservation,
restoration and sustainable management, desertification, land degradation, drought,
wildfires, forestry, agriculture, food security and nutrition, health, including
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response, disaster-induced human mobility,
urban and rural development, infrastructure and others, as appropriate, at the national
and subnational levels, in collaboration with relevant entities of the United Nations
system and stakeholders;
(f) Promoting disaster risk reduction policies, strategies and actions that
reduce the risk of displacement in the context of disasters, including by addressing
the underlying disaster risk factors and causes of such displacement, preparing for its
adverse consequences and supporting durable solutions to disaster-related displacement
through international, regional, subregional, transboundary and bilateral cooperation;
(g) Promoting nature-based solutions, ecosystem-based approaches, among
other approaches, for disaster risk reduction at all levels and across all phases of
disaster risk reduction and management to restore, maintain and enhance ecosystem
functions and services for protection from natural hazards, and to contribute towards
increasing the resilience of biodiversity, supporting sustainable livelihoods and
building community resilience;
(h) Engaging with global, regional and subregional organizations to intensify
their work in advancing cooperation and transferring knowledge and technologies, on
mutually agreed terms, for disaster risk reduction, and to foster and encourage greater
engagement and partnership between the entities of the United Nations system and
regional and subregional organizations.
Priority 3: Investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience
27. We recognize that, while investments have increased globally in some areas of
disaster-related financing, such as social protection, forecast-based financing and risk
transfer mechanisms including insurance, we are concerned that investments in
disaster risk reduction and efforts to de-risk investments remain inadequate and
recognize further that disaster risk reduction-related official development assistance
has barely increased. We acknowledge that addressing this financing gap would help
to reduce disaster risk.
28. We stress the significant need to improve means of implementation and strengthen
capacity-building, financial resources, data and technology and partnerships to assist
developing countries in implementing the Sendai Framework and recognize, in this
regard, the need for sustainable and predictable investment in disaster risk reduction
in all sectors.
29. We recognize that the detrimental impact of disasters on the debt sustainability
of many least developed countries, small island developing States, landlo cked
developing countries and African countries, as well as middle-income countries
facing specific challenges, warrants further attention and that preserving external debt
sustainability requires ex-ante financing to enable the systematic reduction of disaster
risk and resilience-building as well as the disclosure of disaster risk to avoid
exacerbating debt distress, when feasible.
30. We are deeply concerned that public and private investments to anticipate, plan
for, reduce and prevent disaster risk remain insufficient and do not match the scale of
existing and future risk. We reaffirm the importance of investments that contribute to
6/10

23-09996

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm review
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030

A/RES/77/289

the reduction of disaster risk, the protection of lives, livelihoods and assets,
resilience-building and the realization of sustainable development and poverty
eradication, particularly in the least developed countries, small island developing
States, landlocked developing countries and African countries, as well as middle income countries facing specific challenges.
31. We recognize the need to implement integrated and inclusive economic,
structural, legal, social, health, cultural, educational, environmental, technological,
political, financial and institutional measures that prevent and reduce hazard exposure
and vulnerability to disasters, increase preparedness for response and recovery and
thus strengthen resilience.
32. We recognize also the need for the global community, including international
financial institutions, development banks and the private sector, to enhance efforts to
scale up disaster risk reduction financing instruments to meet the scale of financing
needed by developing countries to prevent and reduce risks and build resilience
against current and future shocks and hazards.
33.

We call upon States to invest in disaster risk reduction, including by:

(a) Identifying gaps in public spending on disaster risk reduction and
allocating increased domestic resources to disaster risk reduction to ensure that
disaster risk reduction is mainstreamed into public budgeting, financial planning,
expenditure, investment and procurement processes in all relevant sectors and at all
levels of government, and that integrated national financing frameworks are risk informed, according to national plans and policies;
(b) Developing comprehensive national and local disaster risk reduction
financing strategies that leverage the full spectrum of pre- and post-disaster financial
resources from public, private, domestic and international sources;
(c) Encouraging financial authorities to integrate disaster risk reduction into
their work to encourage and promote investments in disaster risk reduction and
resilience;
(d) Ensuring that infrastructure plans are aligned to disaster risk reduction
strategies, promoting multi-hazard disaster risk assessments as a prerequisite for
infrastructure, housing and real estate investments in all sectors and stress -testing of
critical infrastructure systems;
(e) Engaging with the private sector to scale up investment in disaster risk
reduction and collaborating with financial institutions, credit rating agencies and
capital market actors to better integrate disaster risk reduction, including multi -hazard
and long-term risk analysis, into their decisions;
(f) Prioritizing and enhancing the allocation of and access to sustainable and
predictable financing for disaster risk reduction at all levels and technology transfer
on concessional and preferential terms, as mutually agreed, to build resilient health,
water, agriculture and food systems, cultural heritage, transport, energy and digital
connectivity systems;
(g) Enhancing financing for early and anticipatory approaches to reduce the
impact of disasters, including through the United Nations system and other relevant
organizations;
(h) Incorporating disaster risk reduction measures, as appropriate, into
multilateral and bilateral development assistance programmes and infrastructure
financing, including through quality reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure
investment, scaling up effective and meaningful global and regional partnerships and
further strengthening international cooperation, including the fulfilment of respective
23-09996

7/10

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm review
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030

A/RES/77/289

commitments of official development assistance by developed countries, in order to
ensure effective disaster risk management;
(i) Promoting the development of innovative instruments and tools to finance
disaster risk reduction, such as resilience bonds, particularly in developing countries,
to build resilience against current and future shocks and hazards;
(j) Pursuing the reform of international financial institutions to further
consider integrating disaster risk reduction into their work, including through lending,
debt support and sustainable development and adaptation financing streams and
grants;
(k) Strengthening prevention, preparedness, response and recovery for health
emergencies, drawing lessons learned from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, and applying the Bangkok Principles for the implementation of the health
aspects of the Sendai Framework.
Priority 4: Enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response and to
“Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction
34. While we welcome the progress made in enhancing the effectiveness of disaster
prevention, anticipation, preparedness and response in the design and implementation
of multi-hazard early warning systems since 2015, particularly through enhanced
regional cooperation mechanisms and by the United Nations and its partners, we are
deeply concerned that build back better principles have not been applied
systematically.
35. We are deeply concerned that coverage of and accessibility to multi-hazard early
warning systems remains inadequate in all countries and emphasize the need to
urgently extend the reach of multi-hazard early warning systems everywhere,
especially in developing countries and in particular in least developed countries, small
island developing States, landlocked developing countries and African countries, as
well as middle-income countries facing specific challenges.
36. We recognize that more is needed to invest in, develop, maintain and strengthen
people-centred multi-hazard, multisectoral forecasting and early warning systems and
to ensure that early warning information is broadly disseminated and tailored to the
needs of users, including social and cultural requirements, to enable timely and
effective early action with emphasis on reaching affected communities and, in this
regard, we welcome the progress of the United Nations Secretary-General’s call to
protect everyone on Earth through universal coverage of early warning systems,
including through the Early Warning for All initiative. 8
37. We are concerned that the number of people and countries affected by disasters
will increase owing to the impact of climate change and increasing exposure and
vulnerability to hazards and that most countries still lack effective pre -disaster
preparedness to effectively respond and build back better in recovery, rehabilitation
and reconstruction, which has led to missed opportunities to build resilience, reduce
disaster risk and make progress towards sustainable development through risk informed recovery and reconstruction.
38. We urge continued efforts to strengthen inclusivity and participation to ensure
that no one is left behind in the design and implementation of disaster preparedness,
response and recovery mechanisms.

__________________
8

8/10

Decision 2/CP.27 and 2/CMA.4.
23-09996

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm review
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030

A/RES/77/289

39. We call upon States to enhance inclusive disaster preparedness for effective
response and to build back better in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction,
including by:
(a) Preparing, reviewing and exercising national and local disaster response,
recovery and rehabilitation plans to ensure that they are cross-sectoral, inclusive,
contain provisions to build back better, address underlying drivers of disaster risk and
are supported by legal frameworks as well as resources and capacities for their
effective implementation;
(b) Ensuring the incorporation of disaster risk management into post-disaster
recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction processes, enhancing the development and
dissemination of science-based and targeted methodologies and tools and facilitating
cooperation among States for the sharing of experiences;
(c) Promoting the further development of and investment in effective local,
national and regional multi-hazard early warning mechanisms that lead to early action
and inviting development partners and international financial institutions, and other
relevant stakeholders, to provide support for the implementation of early warning
systems, including through the Early Warning for All initiative;
(d) Strengthening good governance and accountability in disaster risk reduction
strategies at the local, national, regional and global levels and improving preparedness
and national coordination for disaster response, rehabilitation and reconstruction;
(e) Strengthening risk monitoring, impact-based forecasting and early warning
communication at all levels that is relevant, timely and in an easy-to-understand and
accessible manner, in close collaboration with national authorities, to better address
disaster preparedness for response, take action in anticipation of events and integrate
disaster risk reduction into response preparedness supported by governance
frameworks and pre-arranged financing and disbursal mechanisms;
(f) Strengthening subregional, regional and global cooperation on
transboundary risk and disasters in terms of risk monitoring, information and data sharing, risk-informed response, recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction planning,
among others;
(g) Recognizing concerns that countries affected by protracted humanitarian
crises and emergencies are among those most vulnerable to the impacts of disasters
and are furthest behind in implementing the Sendai Framework, recognizing also that
implementation of the Sendai Framework can address drivers of vulnerability and
exposure to build resilience and reduce humanitarian impacts and needs, and in this
regard recognizing further the need for multidimensional and comprehensive risk
assessment and the promotion of coherence between humanitarian and development
assistance, which can contribute to strengthening resilience and climate change
adaptation, for a more targeted and effective approach to prevention and resilience building;
(h) Enhancing recovery schemes to provide psychosocial support and mental
health services for all people in need.
Follow-up and review
40. We commit to implementing the calls to action in the present political
declaration to promote a disaster risk-informed approach to sustainable development
at the local, national, regional and global levels and to accelerating progress on
integrating disaster risk reduction into policies, programmes and investments at all
levels, while acknowledging that some of the calls to action will require cap acity-

23-09996

9/10

A/RES/77/289

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on the midterm review
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030

building and technical and financial assistance in order to be effectively implemented
by developing countries.
41. We reiterate the instrumental and cross-cutting role of science, technology and
innovation in strengthening the effectiveness and efficiency of disaster resiliencebuilding and encourage their greater application to support and accelerate the
implementation of the Sendai Framework and its four priorities.
42. We recognize that the findings of the midterm review of the Sendai Framework
and the present political declaration can provide input to other relevant major
intergovernmental outcomes of United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and environmental fields.
43. We look forward to the global and regional platforms for disaster risk reduction
to be held before 2030 to assess and discuss progress on and give practical guidance
to the implementation of the Sendai Framework, including on the implementation of
the present political declaration.
44. We note the establishment of the Group of 20 Working Group on Disaster Risk
Reduction.
45. We welcome the progress and take note with appreciation of the interim report
published by the High-level Panel on the Development of a Multidimensional
Vulnerability Index for Small Island Developing States and look forward to the
finalization of the work of the Panel, and we encourage the international community to
consider multidimensional vulnerability, including the potential of a multidimensional
vulnerability index, as criteria to access concessional finance.
46. We will invest in enhancing the capacity and capability of developing countries,
in particular the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States, for disaster risk reduction by strengthening capacitybuilding investment and programmes at the national, regional and global levels, such
as the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction Global Education and
Training Institute.
47. We recognize that North-South cooperation, complemented by South-South and
triangular cooperation, has proven to be key to reducing disaster risk and that there is
a need to further strengthen cooperation in both areas.
48. We note the ongoing work of the United Nations system to develop a gender
action plan for the implementation of the Sendai Framework.
49. We call upon relevant entities of the United Nations system, within their
respective mandates, to enhance support for the implementation of the Sendai
Framework and the calls to action contained in the present political declaration. We
further call for the integration of disaster risk reduction in the common country
analysis and in United Nations planning and programming documents, including the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, in consultation
with host Governments and in line with national policies, priorities and needs.
50. We call upon relevant entities of the United Nations system to enhance technical
support, when requested, for the development of disaster risk reduction standards,
legislation and regulations; comprehensive risk governance; data collection,
disaggregation and monitoring; risk analytics; de-risking investments; and accessible
multi-hazard early warning systems. We encourage all existing and new donors to
consider enhancing and providing voluntary contributions to the United Nations trust
fund for disaster reduction.

10/10

23-09996
