A/RES/74/182

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 December 2019

Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 77
Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-second session

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 18 December 2019
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/423)]

74/182.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-second session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of international
trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting developing countries, would contribute
significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a basis of
equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the elimination of
discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability and the well being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim of
promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and harmonization
of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal

__________________
1

19-22341 (E)

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17).

090120

*1922341*

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-second session

A/RES/74/182

activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations, active
in the field of international trade law,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law; 1
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of the Model
Legislative Provisions on Public-Private Partnerships with an accompanying
legislative guide, 2 the Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency and its guide to
enactment, 3 the Practice Guide to the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law Model Law on Secured Transactions 4 and a text on the obligations of
directors of enterprise group companies in the period approaching insolvency, 5 to be
added to part four of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law; 6
3.
Also commends the Commission for the finalization of the Notes on the
Main Issues of Cloud Computing Contracts prepared by the secretariat and for
approving them for publication, including in the form of a mobile device-friendly
online tool; 7
4.
Welcomes the signing ceremony, held in Singapore on 7 August 2019, for
the United Nations Convention on International Settlement Agreements Resulting
from Mediation (Singapore Convention on Mediation), adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 73/198 of 20 December 2018, and invites Governments
and regional economic integration organizations that have not yet done so to conside r
becoming a party to the Convention;
5.
Notes with satisfaction the contributions from the Fund for International
Development of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and from the
European Commission, which allow the operation of the repository of published
information under the Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State
Arbitration, 8 and that the Commission reiterated its strong and unanimous opinion
that the secretariat of the Commission should continue to operate the transparency
repository, which constitutes a central feature both of the R ules on Transparency and
of the United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State
Arbitration (Mauritius Convention on Transparency); 9
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to operate, through the
secretariat of the Commission, the repository of published information in accordance
with article 8 of the Rules on Transparency, as a pilot project until the end of 2020,
to be funded entirely by voluntary contributions, and to keep the General Assembly
informed of developments regarding the funding and budgetary situation of the
transparency repository based on its pilot operation;

__________________

Ibid., chap. III, sect. C, and annex I.
Ibid., chap. VI, sect. A, and annex II.
4
Ibid., chap. IV, sect. C.
5
Ibid., chap. VI, sect. B.
6
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.13.V.10.
7
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17),
chap. VIII, sect. C.
8
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), annex I.
9
Resolution 69/116, annex.
2
3

2/7

19-22341

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-second session

A/RES/74/182

7.
Takes note with interest of the progress made by the Commission in its
work in the areas of micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, dispute settlement,
investor-State dispute settlement reform, electronic commerce, insolvency law and
the judicial sale of ships, 10 and encourages the Commission to continue to move
forward efficiently to achieve tangible work outcomes in those areas;
8.
Notes with interest the authorization for the Secretariat to hold a
colloquium on civil asset tracing and recovery and a colloquium on applicable law in
insolvency proceedings, with the goal of advancing the exploratory work on those
topics, as well as other decisions taken by the Commission on future work, notes that
the Commission agreed to request the Secretariat to proceed with its preparatory work
on warehouse receipts and to convene a colloquium with other organizations having
relevant expertise, with a view to considering the questions of scope and nature of
work discussed at the fifty-second session and possibly advancing the preparation of
initial draft materials, to conduct exploratory and preparatory work on legal issues
which relate to the digital economy and digital trade, including on dispute resolution
in relation to high-technology disputes, and to start exploratory work on railway
consignment notes, as well as to start preparing draft materials on access to credit for
micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, 11 and further notes that the Commission
will further consider the draft United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
mediation rules 12 and the draft United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law notes on mediation 13 at its next session, in 2020, following further comments
and consideration from States and other interested relevant organizations, and any
appropriate revisions to the draft texts;
9.
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law, including on legal
issues relating to the digital economy, and at promoting the rule of law at the national
and international levels in this field, and in this regard appeals to relevant
international and regional organizations to coordinate their activities with those of the
Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts and to promote efficiency, consistency
and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international trade law;
10. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
work of the Commission concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical cooperation and assistance programme, in that respect
encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and non-State actors
to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and facilitate the effective
implementation of legal standards resulting from its work, and notes in that regard
the round table on technical assistance held during the fifty-second session of the
Commission, which brought together governmental and intergovernmental
organizations active in international development assistanc e to explore synergies and
discuss ways to further cooperate with the secretariat of the Commission in
implementing sound reforms of international trade law;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
cooperation and assistance activities and for providing assistance with legislative
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17
(A/74/17), chap. XV, sect. A.
11
Ibid., sect. C.
12
A/CN.9/986.
13
A/CN.9/987.
10

19-22341

3/7

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-second session

A/RES/74/182

drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the attention of the
Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical cooperation and assistance activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law trust fund for symposiums and, where
appropriate, for the financing of special projects and otherwise to assist the secretariat
of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperatio n and assistance activities, in
particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the
Commission and to cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities
with those of the Commission in the light of the relevance and importance of the work
and programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at the
national and international levels and for the implementation of the international
development agenda, including the achievement of the 2030 Agen da for Sustainable
Development; 14
(e) Recalls its resolutions stressing the need to strengthen support to Member
States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their respective
international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and capacitybuilding, and welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure greater
coordination and coherence among United Nations entities and with donors and
recipients;
11. Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and methods
of work of the Commission, including transparent and inclusive deliberations, taking
into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in annex III to the report on
the work of its forty-third session, 15 requests the Secretariat to issue, prior to meetings
of the Commission and of its working groups, a reminder of those rules of procedure
and methods of work with a view to ensuring the high quality of the work of the
Commission and encouraging the assessment of its instruments, and recalls in this
regard its previous resolutions related to this matter;
12. Notes that the Commission, during its fifty-second session, welcomed
improvements in the organization of that session made by the Secretariat pursuant to
a joint comprehensive proposal concerning the methods of work of the Commission
submitted by several Member States at the fifty-first session of the Commission 16 and
confirmed its understanding that two-week sessions would generally be sufficient and
that the duration of each annual session was to be determined on a case-by-case basis
depending on the expected workload; 17
13. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law Regional Centre for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of
Korea, towards providing capacity-building and technical assistance services to
States in the Asia-Pacific region, including to international and regional
organizations, expresses its appreciation to the Republic of Korea and China, whose
contributions enabled continuing operation of the Regional Centre, notes that the
__________________

Resolution 70/1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
16
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/73/17), chap. XVIII, sect. A.
17
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17), paras. 316 and 331.
14
15

4/7

19-22341

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-second session

A/RES/74/182

continuation of the regional presence relies entirely on extrabudgetary resources,
including but not limited to voluntary contributions from States, welcomes
expressions of interest from other States in hosting regional c entres of the
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly
informed of developments regarding the establishment of regional centres, in
particular their funding and budgetary situation;
14. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system,
organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the trust
fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries that are members
of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary-General,
in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and to increase expert
representation from developing countries at sessions of the Commission and its
working groups, necessary to build local expertise and capacities in those countries
to put in place a regulatory and enabling environment for business, trade and
investment;
15. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries, at their
request and in consultation with the Secretary-General, and notes the contributions
from the European Union and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation to
the trust fund, which would facilitate the participation of representatives of
developing States in the deliberations of Working Group III;
16. Takes note of a proposal for the enlargement of the membership of the
Commission submitted by Israel and Japan at the fifty-second session of the
Commission, 18 and that the Commission encouraged its member States to consult with
each other and other interested States on the proposal during the intersessional period
and requested the Secretariat to facilitate those intersessional consultations; 19
17. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and
effective use of modern private law standards in international trade are essential for
advancing good governance, sustained economic development and the eradication of
poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial relations
should be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to promote the
rule of law at the national and international levels, including through the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law Unit in the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
18. Notes the role of the Commission in promoting the rule of law, respective
discussions in the Commission at its fifty-second session, 20 and the comments
transmitted by the Commission, pursuant to paragraph 20 of General Assembly
resolution 73/207 of 20 December 2018, highlighting the relevance of its current work
and of the texts finalized and adopted at the fifty-second session of the Commission
to the promotion of the rule of law and the implementation of the Sust ainable
Development Goals; 21
19. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012,
Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable legal
__________________

Ibid., para. 311.
Ibid., para. 315.
20
Ibid., chap. XX.
21
Ibid., sect. B.
18
19

19-22341

5/7

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-second session

A/RES/74/182

frameworks for generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable development,
economic growth and employment, generating investment and facilitating
entrepreneurship and, in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in
modernizing and harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the
declaration, Member States expressed their conviction that the rule of law and
development were strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
20. Also notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 89 of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,
adopted by the General Assembly by consensus as resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015,
States endorsed the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal body
within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed at
increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field;
21. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
resolutions of the General Assembly on documentation-related matters, 22 which, in
particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate, the length of
documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the
mandate and functions of the Commission in the progressive development and
codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect to
the documentation of the Commission; 23
22. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of Commission
standards and the provision of summary records of the meetings of the Commission,
including committees of the whole established by the Commission for the duration of
its annual session, relating to the formulation of normative texts;
23. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011
regarding the rotation scheme of meetings between Vienna and New York;
24. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the
work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of international
trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to consider signing,
ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and encouraging the use of
other relevant texts;
25. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the
collection and dissemination of case law on Commission texts in the six official
languages of the United Nations (the CLOUT system), notes the resource -intensive
nature of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sustain and
expand it, in this regard welcomes the renewed efforts by the Commission and its
secretariat towards building partnerships with interested institutions, and appeals to
Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising
awareness as to the availability and usefulness of the CLOUT system in professional,
academic and judiciary circles and in securing the funding required for the
coordination and expansion of the system and the establishment, within the secretariat
of the Commission, of a pillar focused on the promotion of ways and means of
interpreting Commission texts in a uniform manner;

__________________
22
23

6/7

Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
See resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
19-22341

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-second session

A/RES/74/182

26. Welcomes the continuing work of the Secretariat on digests of case law
related to Commission texts, including their wide dissemination, as well as the
continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through the CLOUT system,
in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system as important tools for the
promotion of the uniform interpretation of international trade law, in particular by
building local capacity of judges, arbitrators and other legal practitioners to interpret
those standards in the light of their international character and the need to promote
uniformity in their application and the observance of good faith in international trade,
and notes the satisfaction of the Commission with the performance of the New York
Convention website 24 and the successful coordination between that website and the
CLOUT system;
27. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, userfriendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their multilingual
development, maintenance and enrichment, 25 commends the fact that the website of
the Commission has been migrated to a mobile device-friendly platform and that it
continues to be published simultaneously in the six official languages of the United
Nations, and welcomes the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain and
improve its website, and to enhance the visibility of its work by utilizing social media
features in accordance with the applicable guidelines. 26
51st plenary meeting
18 December 2019

__________________

www.newyorkconvention1958.org.
Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B, sect. X;
58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76; 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV, paras. 66–80;
and 61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
26
See resolution 63/120, para. 20.
24
25

19-22341

7/7
