General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

120

2. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa for the
work they have accomplished in strengthening and expanding the Programme;
3. Appeals once again to all States, organizations
and individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme in order to ensure its continuation and expansion, particularly during this most important period.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/32.

Offers by Member States of study and
training facilities for inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3423 (XXX) of 8 December 1975,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 11
prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the continued need to provide educational and training facilities at all levels for the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;.-~--3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly those in southern Africa, and, whenever possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Requests the administering Powers to ensure the
widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities made by
States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
<;olonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/45.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Western Sahara,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
11 A/31/287.

Considering the decision of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirteenth ordinary session, held at Port
Louis from 2 to 6 July 1976, to hold an extraordinary
session devoted to the question of Western Sahara,12
Taking note of that part of the Political Declaration
adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, relating to Western
Sahara, 13
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the
Territory,
Recalling also its resolution 3412 (XXX) of 28 November 1975 regarding co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
1. Reaffirms its commitment to the principle of selfdetermination of peoples in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples;
2. Takes note of the decision taken by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity to convene an extraordinary
session with a view to finding a just and lasting solution
to the problem of Western Sahara;
3. Decides to postpone consideration of the question
of Western Sahara until its thirty-second session;
4. Requests the Administrative Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to inform the Secretary-General of the United Nations of the progress
achieved in the implementation of the decisions of the
Organization of African Unity concerning Western
Sahara, and invites the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to report on that information to the General
Assembly at its thirty-second session.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/46.

Question of the Solomon Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Solomon
Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 14
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 15
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Decemb~r 1960, containing the. Declaration on the Granting
of Independenc~ to Colomal_ <;:ountries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and dec1S1ons of the United Nations
relating to the Territory,
Recalling also its resolution 3431 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the question of the Solomon Islands ,
12
See A/31/136-S/12141, annex II, resolution AHG/Res 81
(XIII). Fo~ the I?rinted text, see Official Records of the Se~urlly Counczl, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for July, August
and September 1976.
i:lA/31/197, annex I, para. 35.
14
_
Of]icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Sessw11, Sf!pplem~nt J>!o. 23 (_A/31/23/Rev.1), chap. XXI.
15
.
Ibid., TJurty-fzrst Sesswn, Fourth Committee I Ith meet1~g, paras._ 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee, S~ssional Fasc,c/e, corngendum.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Noting with satisfaction that the Solomon Islands
achieved full internal self-government on 2 January
1976 and that the Governments of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Solomon
Islands agree that the Territory should proceed to early
independence,
Noting also with satisfaction the development assistance provided by the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, Australia and New Zealand, as well as the
assistance of the United Nations Development Programme in the economic development of the Territory
during 1976,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Solomon Islands;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Solomon Islands to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, to continue to assist the people of
the Solomon Islands towards the achievement of independence;
4. Further requests the administering Power, in
consultation with the people of the Solomon Islands,
to continue its efforts towards diversification of the
economy of the Territory;
5. Stresses the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all possible assistance to the people of the
Solomon Islands in their efforts to consolidate their
national independence and, to that end, invites the
specialized agencies and the institutions associated with
the United Nations to work out concrete programmes
of assistance to the Solomon Islands;
6. Requests the Special Committee to keep the situation in the Territory under review.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/47.

Question of the Gilbert Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Gilbert Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,16
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the Territory,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power relating to developments in the Territory, 17
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
16 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.1), chaps. III and XIX.
17 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 11th meeting, paras. 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.

121

Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Gilbert Islands;18
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Gilbert Islands to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration;
3. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, to continue to take measures to
expedite the process of decolonization in the Territory
in accordance with the relevant recommendations of
the Special Committee, including in particular the observations of the United Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in 1974;19
4. Requests that steps be taken towards diversification of the economy of the Territory and that the administering Power continue to enlist the assistance of
the specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system in the development and
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the Gilbert Islands,
including the possible dispatch of a further visiting
mission in consultation with the administering Power,
and to report to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/48.

Question of Tokelau

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Tokelau Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,20 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in
June 197621 at the invitation of the Government of
New Zealand, as the administering Power, and the
people of the Tokelau Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 3428 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the question of the Tokelau Islands,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 22
Having also heard the statement of one of the members of the Visiting Mission, 28
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to help the people of the Tokelau Islands to realize
18 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev. l), chap. XIX.
rn Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/
Rev.I). chap. XXI, annex I.
2 0 /hid., Thirty-first Session, Sup/Jlernent No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.1), chaps. III and XVII.
21 Ibid., chap. XVII, annex.
22 fbid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 12th meeting, paras. 1-11.
2:1 Ibid., 24th meeting, paras. 3-7.
