S/PV.8137

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8137th meeting

Friday, 15 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kono. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Ms. Wallström
Mr. Klimkin
Mr. Field
Mr. Tillerson
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Letter dated 1 December 2017 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/1038)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-44413 (E)
*1744413*

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
Letter dated 1 December 2017 from the
Permanent Representative of Japan to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/1038)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, the Ministers and the other
distinguished representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence underscores the
importance of the subject matter we will discuss today.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and of the Republic of Korea to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Cho Hyun, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Korea.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/1038, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 December 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: Allow me to first thank
the Japanese presidency, and to thank you personally,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I would also
like to acknowledge and welcome the many Ministers
and other representatives around the table, as well
as the participation of the Republic of Korea and of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in this
important meeting.
The situation on the Korean peninsula is the
most tense and dangerous peace and security issue
in the world today. I am deeply concerned by the
2/24

15/12/2017

risk of military confrontation, including as a result
of unintended escalation or miscalculation. I know
that the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
briefed the Security Council earlier this week on his
recent visit to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. I will not repeat what he had to say, but I want
to note that his visit involved the first in-depth political
exchange of views between the Secretariat and officials
in Pyongyang in almost eight years. Indeed, his visit
came at the end of a difficult year.
This year, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea conducted activities related to its nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes at an alarming and
accelerated pace. On 3 September, it conducted its sixth
nuclear-explosive test, involving what it claimed was
a “two-stage thermo-nuclear weapon”. The test caused
a seismic event of magnitude 6.1. Over the year, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has conducted
20 ballistic missile launches. Those have included its
first tests of two intercontinental-range ballistic missiles
and tests of new medium- and intermediate-range
ballistic missiles. In September, two Hwasong-12
intermediate-range ballistic missiles overflew Japan.
No aviation or maritime safety notifications were given
for any of those launches.
The International Atomic Energy Agency remains
unable to access the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to verify the status of its nuclear programme.
The Agency monitors developments through satellite
imagery; at the Yongbyon Nuclear Scientific Research
Centre, it has observed signatures consistent with
the operation of a plutonium production reactor and
reported centrifuge enrichment facility. The Agency
also continues to observe indications of ongoing
mining, milling and concentration activities at the
Pyongsan uranium mine and Pyongsan uranium
concentration plant.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
remains the only country to continue to break the
norm against nuclear testing. Its actions show blatant
disregard for the will and resolutions of the Security
Council, and undermine the international norm against
nuclear testing and the nuclear non-proliferation
regime. Resolution 2375 (2017), adopted in September,
includes the strongest sanctions ever imposed on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I reiterate my
call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
leadership to comply with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and allow space for the resumption
17-44413

15/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

of dialogue on denuclearization and sustainable peace
on the Korean peninsula.
While all concerned seek to avoid an accidental
escalation leading to conflict, the risk is being
multiplied by misplaced overconfidence, dangerous
narratives and rhetoric and the lack of communication
channels. It is time to re-establish and strengthen
communication channels, including inter-Korean and
military-to-military channels. That is critical to lower
the risk of miscalculation or misunderstanding and
reduce tensions in the region. Any military action could
have devastating and unpredictable consequences.
The unity of the Security Council is an essential
instrument to achieving the goal of denuclearization,
and creates the space for diplomatic initiatives aimed
at achieving it in a peaceful manner. The Security
Council’s call in paragraph 30 of resolution 2375 (2017)
is united to “further work to reduce tensions so as to
advance the prospects for a comprehensive settlement”.
It also expresses
“its desire for a peaceful and diplomatic solution
to the situation ... and [welcomes] efforts by
Council members as well as other Member States
to facilitate a peaceful and comprehensive solution
through dialogue” (resolution 2375 (2017), eighth
preambular paragraph).
The Secretariat and I are the Council’s partner in
that effort, and my good offices will always remain
available. I believe that the Secretariat adds strategic
value in three key areas: first, impartiality; secondly,
the voice and norms, values and principles for peaceful
and diplomatic solutions, in line with international
law; and, thirdly, offering channels of communication
with all parties. The Organization is a key venue
where all six parties are represented and can interact
to narrow differences in understanding and promote
confidence-building measures. As Secretary-General,
I commit to protecting and strengthening those three
areas. Security Council unity behind that effort
is essential.
I welcome the Council’s humanitarian and human
rights concerns. The Secretariat has consistently
conveyed the importance of disassociating the
peace and security situation from the humanitarian
imperative. Seventy per cent of the population of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is categorized
as food insecure, and 40 per cent are malnourished.
The 2017 Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8137

Humanitarian Needs and Priorities document calls
for $114 million to meet urgent requirements, which
is only 30 per cent funded. I ask all Member States,
particularly those around this table, to carefully
consider the humanitarian principles that underpin our
work. The people of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea need our generosity and help.
Not long from now, athletes will gather in
Pyeongchang for the Winter Olympics. I express my
sincerest hope that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea will take part. As the General Assembly
has recognized, the Olympic Games can foster an
atmosphere of peace, development, tolerance and
understanding on the Korean peninsula and beyond.
We need to spread and deepen that spirit of hope and
possibility. Diplomatic engagement is the only pathway
to sustainable peace and denuclearization. We must do
everything we can to reach that objective and avoid
a level of danger that would be unpredictable in its
trajectory and catastrophic in its consequences.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan.
As we have all witnessed, North Korea has been
escalating its outrageous acts of provocation, in flagrant
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Over the past two years, North Korea has launched 40
ballistic missiles, and two of those missiles flew over
Japan. They have also conducted three nuclear tests.
North Korea purported the one in September to be a
hydrogen bomb test; the test’s scale was far larger than
those previous. Their defiance of the authority of the
Council is totally unacceptable.
Most recently, on 29 November, North Korea
launched a ballistic missile with the range of an
intercontinental ballistic missile, which appears
to be a new type of missile. It demonstrated, once
again, that North Korea poses a clear global threat to
all Member States. The advancement of its nuclear
programme represents a fundamental threat to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The most
recent launch was conducted 75 days after North Korea’s
provocations in September. Some optimistically viewed
those 75 days of silence as a positive signal. However,
the missile launch in November made it clear that North
Korea had been continuing its relentless development
of its nuclear and missile programmes while seeming

17-444133/24

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to be silent. It is increasingly evident that it is nowhere
near ready to abandon them, nor is it interested in
returning to meaningful dialogue.
The visit of Under-Secretary-General Feltman has
simply reconfirmed the dire reality of the situation. The
international community should be increasingly alarmed
by the fact that North Korea is continuing its nuclear
and missile development even as we are holding today’s
meeting. North Korea claims that its programmes are
for its own security, including the maintenance of its
regime. On the contrary, however, they are extremely
dangerous. They run counter to the international order
and could affect the safety of any other State Member
of the United Nations. In that connection, I would
like to point out that Japan has never attempted to
achieve regime change in other countries or regions by
force. We believe that a peaceful solution is desirable.
However, North Korea has consistently rejected the
possibility of such a solution and instead has continued
to escalate its acts of provocation. It ignores the socalled Agreed Framework, of 1994, and the 2005 Joint
Statement of the Six-Party Talks, betraying the good
faith of all the countries concerned. North Korea has
used those talks as a pretext for continuing its nuclear
and missile development.
How has North Korea rewarded our efforts to
achieve dialogue and provide assistance over the past
two decades? It has employed brinkmanship and tried
to win concessions. It is our responsibility not to repeat
past mistakes such as engaging in dialogue for the sake
of dialogue. That has done nothing but enable North
Korea to continue to stall for time for its nuclear and
missile development. The relevant Security Council
resolutions have already clearly stipulated that North
Korea must abandon its programmes in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner, and we should not
retreat from that goal. Commitment and concrete action
towards denuclearization on the part of North Korea are
prerequisites for meaningful dialogue.
The international community must seek greater
unity and cooperate closely in order to put maximum
pressure on North Korea through every available means.
That is the only way we can make North Korea change
its policy. The United Nations sanctions are an effective
way to achieve that goal. In that regard, the Council
should also recall the determination it has expressed in
its resolutions to take further significant measures in
the event of further nuclear tests or launches by North
Korea. Sanctions are the tools that can make North
4/24

15/12/2017

Korea understand that the only path is to change its
policies. The measures that the Security Council has
adopted are unprecedentedly strong and very close to
a full-fledged sanctions regime. Sanctions are most
effective when they are fully implemented and put
robust pressure on North Korea to curb its nuclear and
missile programmes by drastically reducing its foreign
currency earnings. We therefore strongly urge all States
Members of the United Nations to fully implement
such sanctions and close all potential loopholes. In that
regard, Japan is ready to assist countries experiencing
difficulties in implementing sanctions measures.
In addition, we welcome the more autonomous
measures targeting North Korea that are being
introduced or reinforced in many countries and call on
all Member States to take further additional measures
to stop the movement of persons, goods and funds to
North Korea, including by severing diplomatic ties.
Japan has been implementing its own strict measures.
I would like to inform the Council today that we have
just introduced additional autonomous measures,
designating 19 North Korean entities for an assets
freeze. I call on other States to adopt similar measures.
Regrettably, the threat posed by North Korea
also includes its capacity to produce other weapons
of mass destruction, such as biological and chemical
weapons, as well as its activities in cyberspace.
North Korea may reportedly be acquiring funds to
further develop its nuclear and missile programmes
by selling weapons or through cybertheft. We should
strengthen our international information-sharing and
cooperation network so that we can better cope with all
possible threats.
Even as we speak, nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles are being steadily developed at the expense
of the welfare of the North Korean people. We cannot
overlook the reports of grave violations of their human
rights. Some years ago, North Korean agents infiltrated
Japan and abducted a number of Japanese citizens,
including a girl as young as 13 years old. Only five of
the abductees have returned, while many of the Japanese
who were abducted have remained in custody in North
Korea. This week the mother of one of the abductees
passed away, having not seen her beloved daughter for
nearly 40 years. Another family member also passed
away recently. The families cannot wait forever. It is
deeply regrettable that only a few of the abductees
have been able to return home to their waiting families
and friends. We must underscore our serious concerns
17-44413

15/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

about the human rights violations and abuses that
North Korea has committed, including those against
citizens of other countries both within and outside the
territory of North Korea, as happened in the case of
the United States citizen Otto Warmbier. The only way
to achieve the core United Nations goal of maintaining
international peace and security — including in North
Korea itself — is through a comprehensive settlement
of these abduction, nuclear and missile issues.
North Korea may be able to dramatically boost
its economy and improve the welfare of its people if
it chooses the right path. But it will be able to enjoy a
bright future only by resolving its nuclear and missile
issues and cases of abduction. Since it has yet to fulfil
its commitment to denuclearization and take concrete
actions to that end, let us send a clear and unified
message that the international community will never
accept a nuclear-armed North Korea.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now invite the Secretary of State of the United
States of America to take the floor.
Mr. Tillerson (United States of America): I am
grateful for the opportunity to speak to the Security
Council today. On behalf of the United States, I thank
Japan and Foreign Minister Kono for convening
today’s ministerial meeting on the growing threat from
North Korea.
Upon taking office, President Trump identified
North Korea as the greatest national security threat
to the United States. That judgment remains the same
today. After its intercontinental ballistic-missile launch
on 29 November, the North Korean Government
claimed that it now possesses the capability to strike
any location in the continental United States. North
Korea’s growing capabilities reflect a direct threat to
our security and the security of the entire world. We
do not regard this claim as an empty threat. The North
Korean regime’s continuing unlawful missile launches
and testing activities signal its contempt for the United
States, its neighbours in Asia and all Members of the
United Nations. In the face of such a threat, inaction is
unacceptable for any nation.
Through a series of robust Security Council
resolutions, this organ has taken a leading role in
condemning North Korea’s unlawful nuclear and
missile programmes and imposing consequences.

S/PV. 8137

The international community remains firm in its
determination that it will not accept a nuclear North
Korea. Each United Nations State Member must fully
implement all existing Security Council resolutions.
For those nations that have not yet done so, or that have
been slow to enforce Security Council resolutions, their
hesitation calls into question whether their vote is a
commitment to words only but not actions. For countries
that have not taken action, I urge them to consider their
interests, their allegiances and their values in the face
of this grave and global threat.
We believe that more can and must be done beyond
enforcing the minimum requirements of the Security
Council resolutions directed at the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Last spring, the United States
initiated a peaceful pressure campaign of economic
and diplomatic sanctions against North Korea, with the
intent of setting conditions for North Korea to engage
in serious negotiations for the complete, verifiable
and irreversible abandonment of its nuclear-weapon
programmes. Our resolve to continue that campaign
is even greater today. Over the past, year many allies
and partners of the United States have joined our
campaign, going beyond mere compliance with the
Security Council resolutions. We ask those nations to
continue to increase pressure through unilateral action.
Doing so will further isolate North Korea politically
and economically, cutting off support and funds for its
unlawful nuclear and missile programmes.
We particularly call on Russia and China to
increase pressure, including going beyond the full
implementation of the Security Council resolutions.
Continuing to allow North Korean labourers to toil
in slave-like conditions inside Russia in exchange
for wages used to fund nuclear-weapon programmes
calls into question Russia’s dedication as a partner
for peace. Similarly, as Chinese crude oil flows to
North Korean refineries, the United States questions
China’s commitment to solving an issue that has
serious implications for the security of its own citizens.
Recently, the North Korean regime has sought to portray
United Nations sanctions as harmful to women and
children. But this is a regime that hypocritically spends
billions on nuclear and ballistic missile programmes
while its own people suffer great poverty. The regime
could feed and care for women, children and ordinary
people in North Korea if it were to choose the welfare
of its people over weapons development.

17-444135/24

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

15/12/2017

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
a choice: it can reverse course, give up its unlawful
nuclear-weapon programme and join the community
of nations, or it can continue to condemn its people
to poverty and isolation. The regime in Pyongyang
bears the ultimate responsibility for the well-being
of its people. North Korea claims to undertake its
nuclear-weapon programme as an essential step for the
survival of its regime. In making that choice, North
Korea has made itself less secure, and its economy has
become further isolated and disconnected from the
global economy.

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and global
non-proliferation norms.

We have been clear that all options remain on the
table in the defence of our nation, but we do not seek,
nor do we want, war with North Korea. The United
States will use all necessary measures to defend itself
against North Korean aggression, but our hope remains
that diplomacy will produce a resolution.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s important meeting. I particularly
welcome the presence of the representatives of the
Republic of Korea and of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea here today. Let this meeting be a step
towards dialogue.

As I said earlier this week, a sustained cessation
of North Korea’s threatening behaviour must occur
before talks can begin. North Korea must earn its way
back to the table. The pressure campaign must and will
continue until denuclearization is achieved. We will,
in the meantime, keep our channels of communication
open. Our message today is one that this body has heard
before and one that we will continue to repeat: the
United States will not allow the regime in Pyongyang to
hold the world hostage. We will continue to hold North
Korea accountable for its reckless and threatening
behaviour today and in future. We ask every nation
here to join us in exerting sovereignty to protect all of
our people. We also ask all to join a unified effort to
achieve a complete and verifiable denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula.

I want to take this opportunity to convey directly
to the representative of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea the following five messages. First,
cease all provocations; secondly, engage in a credible
and meaningful dialogue; thirdly, abide by the
Security Council’s resolutions and fulfil international
obligations; fourthly, abandon the nuclear weapon
and missile programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner; and, fifthly, return to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.

The President: I now invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden to take the floor.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): The situation on the
Korean peninsula is the greatest threat to international
peace and security facing the world today. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear
weapons and ballistic missile programme illustrates,
as we have already heard, a blatant disregard for its
international obligations. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has repeatedly violated international
law, including numerous Security Council resolutions.
Its actions are also contrary to the existing global
norm against nuclear testing, as embodied in the
6/24

The Council has repeatedly — I believe this is
the sixteenth meeting — been called together this
year to address the illegal testing of nuclear weapons
and ballistic missiles by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. At each meeting, Council members
have unanimously condemned those provocations in
the strongest terms. The world does not accept the
nuclear weapon and ballistic missile programmes of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and it is
essential that we continue to stand united.

The adoption of resolution 2375 (2017) toughened
the targeted sanctions against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and it now constitutes the most
rigorous sanctions regime ever enforced under the
United Nations system. For the sanctions to have the
desired effect, it is critical that we urgently ensure their
universal and comprehensive implementation. To that
end, we need additional capacity at all levels, including
improved monitoring and targeted capacity-building.
We are actively engaged, through the European Union,
in support of such efforts.
This week, the Council has held discussions
on both the acute human rights situation and the
precarious humanitarian conditions in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The humanitarian situation
for ordinary North Koreans remains of serious
concern. The responsibility for the well-being of the
North Korean people falls, without a doubt, on the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
17-44413

15/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Korea. At the same time, it is of the utmost importance
that the humanitarian exemptions provided for
under the sanctions regime be upheld. Reports that
international humanitarian organizations’ ability to
provide assistance has been reduced, therefore, need to
be addressed. As the Secretary-General has pointed out,
there is also an urgent need for more funding towards
life-saving humanitarian assistance in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
Over the past year, tensions on the Korean peninsula
have continued to rise. They have now reached a very
dangerous level. I think we all want to instil a sense
of urgency on this matter. Provocations have been
accompanied by an increase in confrontational rhetoric.
In that environment, the potential for mistakes,
misunderstandings and miscalculations is high.
In parallel to effectively implementing the
sanctions regime, we must undertake further work
to reduce tensions in order to advance the prospects
for a comprehensive settlement. Sanctions alone
will not resolve the current situation. Intensified and
creative diplomatic efforts that pave the way for a
peaceful, diplomatic and political solution are urgently
needed. The situation must be approached without
prejudice, and we must be prepared to consider both
new and previous proposals and agreements. In that
regard, there is also need to explore the possibilities
for regional security cooperation and arrangements.
Sweden is contributing to those diplomatic efforts, and
we welcome Under-Secretary-General Feltman’s recent
visit to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The Council has the responsibility to uphold peace
and security. All over the world, people have their
eyes on what happens here, and they fear what could
be the result of a further escalation of the crisis on the
Korean peninsula. We have to exhaust every avenue
for diplomacy and dialogue. Efforts are urgent, and the
consequences of failure would be disastrous.
The President: I now invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to take the floor.
Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): I thank the Japanese
presidency and you personally, Minister Kono, for
convening today’s briefing. Of course, I also thank the
Secretary-General for his very useful update.
The ongoing development of North Korea’s nuclear
and missile programme continues to undermine the
global disarmament and non-proliferation regime.

S/PV. 8137

Recent developments prove that Pyongyang is
arrogantly defiant in ignoring international law and the
repeated calls to halt its illegal activity.
Unprecedented provocative actions by North Korea
in the past two years were met by the most robust
sanctions regime in history. Resolution 2375 (2017),
adopted unanimously in response to the sixth and most
powerful nuclear test conducted by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, sent a very clear signal to
Pyongyang. In particular, it urged Pyongyang not to
conduct any further missile launches or nuclear tests
and to refrain from any other provocations. At the
same time, the Security Council indicated the way out
of the crisis, including by reaffirming its commitment
to a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution to
the situation, while also confirming the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s sovereignty and stressing
the need for further work to reduce tensions in order to
advance the prospects for a comprehensive settlement.
What was the response to that resolution? Another
missile test. Despite all of the political and diplomatic
efforts to curb Pyongyang’s aggressive ambitions,
North Korea moved closer to having a fully functional
nuclear arsenal. The increasing militarization has
already severely affected the livelihoods of its people,
who continue to live under constant duress as they
experience chronic shortages of even basic goods and
services. Besides diverting resources from acute human
needs to finance its missile and nuclear programme, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
effectively evade sanctions.
Recent developments, in particular the intercontinental
ballistic missile launch last month, suggest that
Pyongyang is not interested in the resumption of
negotiations. We are of the view shared by many
around this table that only the full implementation of
the Security Council resolutions can bring us closer to
changing that trend. Before that happens, the Council
must stand ready to introduce additional measures in
case of new provocations. The long-standing crisis
on the Korean peninsula has global implications, and
therefore raises a question as to what should be done by
the international community to prevent the emergence
of a nuclear threat in future in other parts of the globe as
well. In my view, the case of North Korea includes two
important basic lessons for the international community.
First, it demonstrates what can happen when
weapons of mass destruction are obtained by

17-444137/24

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

15/12/2017

irresponsible actors. Today Pyongyang blackmails the
entire region — in fact, the entire world — by threatening
to use its nuclear and missile capabilities, without any
thought of possible consequences and repercussions.
We therefore continue to witness emerging and further
evolving challenges to the non-proliferation regime.
Unfortunately, it is becoming harder for the Council
to respond in unity. More often, we witness a policy
of unwillingness on the part of some countries to
recognize that the North Korean regime represents a
fundamental threat. Those who are looking for excuses
for Pyongyang should realize that for people in Japan,
the Republic of Korea and other countries alerts with
regard to North Korean missiles have become a fact of
life. Just imagine how it feels to be jolted awake by the
wail of sirens piercing the early-morning calm.

Let me remind the Council that the provision of
security guarantees to Ukraine by nuclear States was
a precondition for my country’s accession to the NPT.
Let me also stress that the Memorandum is deposited
with the Secretariat, in accordance with Article 102 of
the Charter of the United Nations, and was certified by
the Secretary-General as an international agreement.
However, the obligations set forth in that document
were insidiously violated by Russia — one of the
signatories and the recipient of the nuclear weapons
based in Ukraine until 1994. As a result, my country had
its borders fundamentally violated in a blatant show of
disregard for the norms and principles of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki
Final Act and a number of other agreements, including
the Budapest Memorandum.

Secondly, the appeasement of aggressive ambitions
never works. Furthermore, perpetrators are only
encouraged by concessions and inaction by the
international community. We saw that previously in
Europe in the 1930s, and see it today too in Europe
and elsewhere. Therefore, the international community
should demonstrate a clear and uncompromising
stance — and I would like to emphasize
“uncompromising” — in defending international law,
wherever or by whomever it is breached. That stance
should not be limited to declarations on the ultimate
necessity to defend human rights, peace and security.
We need actions and prompt and adequate responses.

The illegal occupation of Crimea and the ongoing
Russian aggression in the Donbas region of Ukraine
have left the low-enriched uranium research reactor
in Sevastopol, two nuclear repositories and more
than 1,200 radionuclide sources without due control
of the Ukrainian national regulator. I wish to recall
the legal framework of the International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards application in Ukraine,
including in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol. And when we talk about the
importance of preserving and strengthening the nuclear
non-proliferation regime, we should also keep in mind
that the continuing occupation of the territory of
Ukraine by a nuclear-weapon State has resulted in the
de-facto expansion of the geographical area of nuclearweapon deployment.

In recent decades, we have witnessed the emergence
of a number of volatile hotspots in different parts of
the world. We have also seen a nuclear-weapon State
successfully testing a technology, creating long-lasting
destabilization and carrying out aggression against
its neighbours — sovereign States. Unfortunately, my
country has been affected too.
Earlier this month we marked the twenty-third
anniversary of the signing of the Budapest Memorandum
on security assurances in connection with Ukraine’s
accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). In return to the voluntary
renunciation by Ukraine of its nuclear arsenal, three
nuclear States committed to respect the independence
and sovereignty and the existing borders of Ukraine.
The signatories of the Memorandum furthermore
obligated themselves to refrain from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of Ukraine, and that none of their
weapons would ever be used against Ukraine.
8/24

Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine, along
with its client North Korea’s systematic provocations,
has provoked a dangerously unbalanced situation in
the international security system, undermining the
effectiveness and reliability of the non-proliferation
regime. If we are to prevent the world from sliding into
a state of lawlessness, we must stand united in order to
ensure respect for international law and accountability for
violations of that law, regardless of whether it is violated
by a recognized nuclear-weapon State or by those that,
regrettably, desperately wish to gain such status. That is
not going to happen.
Mr. Field (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Foreign Minister Kono for bringing us together in
today’s important meeting under Japan’s presidency
of the Security Council. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive briefing on the clear
17-44413

15/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

global threats and challenges that the destabilizing
conduct of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
presents to us all.
I would like to start by discussing the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It was
and is a great diplomatic achievement and remains
a cornerstone of our international security. As
signatories, we have all benefited from its protections.
It is our collective responsibility and in our collective
interests to ensure that all nations stand by their
commitments and obligations under the Treaty and its
associated agreements; it is also our duty as members
of the Council, and as responsible international actors.
We must abide by our collective rules, defend our
values and work together in the Council to safeguard a
system of international security that benefits the whole
of humankind. North Korea repeatedly and wilfully
rebuffs that system and our collective values. Earlier
this week, members of the Council heard appalling and
harrowing accounts (see S/PV.8130) of the regime’s
brutal treatment of its own people — of women forced
to drown their newborn babies because the regime did
not consider them to be racially pure. We heard multiple
examples of violations of foreign citizens’ rights,
including those of your own country, Mr. President.
Today we meet once again to condemn North
Korea’s illegal and dangerous nuclear-weapon
programme. Kim Jong Un claims that he wants to be a
responsible actor and to bring security and prosperity
to his people. The regime’s actions, exemplified by its
systematic violation of human rights and its nuclearweapon programme, demonstrate precisely the opposite
intent. North Korea’s pursuit of an intercontinental
nuclear weapon is increasingly destabilizing for us
all. It has fired some 20 ballistic missiles this year.
We have seen three intercontinental ballistic-missile
launches and two missiles launched across the territory
of northern Japan. In response to those actions, the
Council has unanimously and appropriately decided to
impose the strictest sanctions in a generation on North
Korea. Our community of nations has shown its deep
condemnation of the regime by taking the sanctions
seriously. And, of course, that has started to have an
impact. We all have a responsibility to ensure that the
sanctions are fully and properly implemented so that
they have the desired effect.
Now that North Korea’s arms dealers are
discovering that their usual routes to clients are
closed, its diplomats are struggling to process bank

S/PV. 8137

transactions for contraband goods and their exporters
of manual labour are finding that their contracts are not
being renewed. We must therefore not only keep this
pressure up but increase it. We must share information
and expertise to prevent North Korea from using front
companies or illicit channels to evade sanctions. We
must all cooperate fully with the highly competent and
professional United Nations Panel of Experts on North
Korea sanctions, whose work we strongly recommend
and will continue to support actively.
But we should be clear that the reason we enforce
sanctions is to force Kim Jong Un to see that he has a
choice of two paths. The path he is currently on will
lead his country to greater poverty and isolation, and
threatens the security not just of North Korea but of
the entire world. He can and must choose to change
course. He can choose to comply with the Security
Council’s resolutions and join the community of lawabiding nations. He can choose to let his people express
themselves through debate and commerce. That is
the real path to security and prosperity for the North
Korean people; only Kim can now make that choice,
and all of us here must work together to persuade him
to make the right choice. Our message to Kim Jong Un
and his regime must therefore be clear and united. For
the well-being of his countrymen and the safety of his
neighbours in the wider world, he must change course. I
hope that the North Korean representative present here
today conveys that strong message back to Pyongyang.
We must all work together and use all the diplomatic
and economic tools at our disposal to deliver this
uncompromising message. Let us stand firm and stand
fast to our values. The world looks to all of us here
to defend our system of international security. For the
sake of future generations of humankind, we must now
rise to the challenge.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
continues to reiterate its strong condemnation of the
activities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
as it seeks to arm itself with nuclear weapons and to
develop and launch ballistic missiles, in violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions and in a manner
that threatens international and regional peace and
security. We do so based on our unwavering commitment
to the importance of preserving the credibility of both
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and the Security Council. Egypt also reiterates
the importance of ensuring that every United Nations
entity, along with all international organizations and

17-444139/24

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the international community, is decisive in addressing
any threat to the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
without discrimination or double standards. It goes
without saying that the need for all parties to respect
the binding international consensus represented by the
NPT is very important to Egypt, in view of the fact that
it is one of the major pillars of the existing security
regime. We also have to ensure that the Security
Council deals consistently and impartially with any
threat to that regime and with any measures that stand
in the way of its universalization.
Egypt is also aware that the repeated violations
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of the
relevant Security Council resolutions constitute a threat
to peace and security, to the stability of North-East Asia
and to the national security of the friendly countries of
Japan and the Republic of Korea. Egypt will therefore
continue to call on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to immediately cease any actions that contravene
Security Council resolutions and to refrain from any
that may escalate tension and instability and threaten
regional and international peace and security. We urge
it to once more accede to the NPT as a non-nuclearweapon State and to implement the International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards regime without delay.
Egypt reiterates the need for the Security
Council and every United Nations entity to meet their
responsibilities in this regard by seeking a sustainable
peaceful settlement to the alarming situation on the
Korean peninsula. Such a settlement should provide for
the total elimination of the regime’s nuclear weapons
and the achievement of sustainable peace between North
and South Korea, in accordance with the provisions of
the relevant Security Council resolutions. That should
include efforts to revive negotiations and provide a
favourable environment in which that can be done, so
that we can escape from the current vicious circle of
continued violations of Security Council resolutions by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
At the moment, the Security Council has only
imposed additional sanctions without clear political
prospects for a solution to the crisis. That will lead
only to further deterioration of the situation, which
could be a genuine international catastrophe. In that
regard, Egypt followed with interest this month’s recent
visit to Pyongyang by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs — the first of
its kind by a senior United Nations official since 2010.
We believe that continuing engagement and dialogue
10/24

15/12/2017

with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is an
imperative if we want to safeguard the chances for
reviving negotiations and dialogue as a way to reach a
peaceful solution to the current, serious crisis, which
has implications for our collective security. In that
connection, we would like to thank Mr. Feltman for his
briefing of 12 December on the outcome of his visit
to Pyongyang.
We underscore the need to continue with engagement
and dialogue. We must not lose hope in the ability of the
international community to reach a peaceful settlement
that meets the agreed-upon provisions set out in the
relevant Security Council resolutions related to nuclear
disarmament and bring about sustainable peace in the
Korean peninsula.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing.
China firmly opposes the development by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of its nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes, which are in
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
China urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to abide by those resolutions.
Since the beginning of 2017, the situation on the
Korean peninsula has been one of constant tension.
While the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has continued to conduct nuclear tests and missile
launches, in defiance of the universal opposition by
the international community, the parties concerned
have continued to expand military exercises and scale
up their shows of force. The escalation of tension on
the Korean peninsula, which has reached the point of
risking spiralling out of control, is not in the interests
of any parties.
The nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula has
lasted for over two decades. It has deep historical
causes and takes place within a grave and complex
context. Reviewing the evolution of the nuclear issue
of the Korean peninsula, we can see that, when the
parties concerned have tried to converge and respect
one another’s concerns, it has been possible to achieve
results. On the other hand, when the parties have taken
stubborn stances and disregarded the security of the
other side, it has led to the deterioration of the situation.
The current situation on the Korean peninsula is mired
in a vicious cycle of tough posturing and confrontation,
which is hardly a cause for optimism about the future.
17-44413

15/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

However, the hope for peace is not totally lost. There
is still a possibility of negotiations. The option of
resorting to the use of force is an unacceptable one.
China believes that all of the parties concerned should
keep in mind the broader goal of maintaining peace and
stability on the Korean peninsula, judge the situation
calmly, make wise choices and take practical steps.
First, it is necessary to put an immediate end
to rhetoric and actions that are unfavourable to
denuclearization and the peace and security of the
Korean peninsula. It is also necessary to ease the
situation as soon as possible. The tough positions that
have been taken by the parties concerned serve only to
escalate tensions, deepen divisions and decrease mutual
trust. Therefore, such positions are not helpful to the
security of all parties. The parties concerned should
keep calm and exercise restraint in order to prevent the
situation on the Korean peninsula from worsening and
getting out of control. They should create the necessary
conditions for turning the situation around.
Secondly, it is necessary to act in accordance
with the provisions and spirit of the Security Council
resolutions relating to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and push for an appropriate settlement of the
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula. Since 2016, the
Council has unanimously adopted a series of resolutions
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Those resolutions represent the common will of the
international community and constitute international
obligations that must be observed by all parties. All
parties must comprehensively implement the resolutions
relating to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in
their entirety; strengthen non-proliferation measures in
order to curb the nuclear and missile programmes of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea; and actively
push for a peaceful settlement through diplomatic and
political means. At the same time, there is a need to
avoid negatively impacting the livelihoods of the people
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
humanitarian assistance activities that are taking place
in the country. Unilateral sanctions measures without
the authorization of the Security Council undermine
the unity of the Council and hurt the legitimate rights
and interests of other countries. Therefore, such actions
should be abandoned.
Thirdly, it is necessary for all sides to shoulder their
respective responsibilities and fulfil their incumbent
obligations in earnest. The current situation on the
Korean peninsula has not been caused by any individual

S/PV. 8137

party alone. It is not helpful to impose responsibility
for resolving the problem on a single party. The parties
concerned should try to converge instead of engaging
in mutual blaming. They should also not try to abdicate
their own responsibility and shift the blame onto others.
The United States has committed to not seeking regime
change, not pursuing the overthrow of the Government
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, not
accelerating the reunification of the Korean peninsula
and not moving its troops beyond the thirty-eighth
parallel. We hope that the United States will turn those
four commitments into concrete actions.
Fourthly, it is necessary to remain committed to
peacefully settling the situation and resuming dialogue
and negotiations as soon as possible. Security is at
the core of the nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula.
As such, the fundamental solution lies in addressing
the security concerns of all parties, including the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in a balanced
manner. There is no military option with respect to the
settlement of the nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula.
Resorting to force will only bring about disastrous
consequences for the peninsula. Sanctions are a
means, not an end. History shows that dialogue and
negotiations are a fundamental way to ease tensions and
advance the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The parties concerned should endeavour to turn the
pressure of sanctions into the driving force behind the
resumption of dialogue and negotiations. They should
get the nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula back on
the right track of peaceful settlement through dialogue
and negotiations at an early date.
As a close neighbour of the Korean peninsula,
China has persisted in promoting the denuclearization
of the peninsula, preserving peace and stability on the
peninsula and seeking a settlement to the situation
through dialogue and negotiations. China is opposed
to conflicts and chaos on the Korean peninsula. China
has always supported and comprehensively and strictly
implemented Security Council resolutions relating to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. By doing
so, China has made greater efforts and paid a higher
price than anyone else. It is irresponsible to doubt or
challenge what China has done.
In view of the current situation on the peninsula,
China has put forward the dual suspension proposal that
would entail the suspension by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of its nuclear and missile activities
along with the suspension by the United States and the

17-4441311/24

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Republic of Korea of large-scale military exercises. We
have proposed the dual-track approach of promoting
parallel progress in denuclearization efforts and the
establishment of a peace mechanism on the peninsula.
The Russian Federation has also put forward the idea of
a phased approach to the settlement of the issues of the
Korean peninsula.
On the basis of those proposals, China and the
Russian Federation issued a joint statement on 4 July
that proposed a road map for the settlement of the
problems on the Korean peninsula. The joint proposal of
China and Russia is practical and feasible and is aimed
at promoting the peaceful settlement of the nuclear
issue of the Korean peninsula and the maintenance of
peace and stability on the peninsula. As such, we hope
that the proposal will elicit responses and support from
the parties concerned.
Due to historical reasons, the Korean peninsula is
still under the shadow of the Cold War. That is the root
cause of the protracted nature of, and lack of settlement
for, the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula. The
parties concerned must reject Cold War thinking
in all its forms, establish a concept of common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security,
and seek a peaceful settlement to the Korean nuclear
issue through political and diplomatic means, so as
to realize, at an early date, the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula and the long-term security and
tranquillity of North-East Asia for the benefit of the
people of the countries in the region.
China stands ready to work together with the
parties concerned and the international community to
continue to play a positive and constructive role for the
realization of this goal.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Japanese presidency for having convened this
important meeting, and I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his very informative briefing.
France is deeply concerned at the worsening
situation on the Korean peninsula and by the significant
risks therefrom to our collective security. This year the
North Korean regime fired 20 ballistic missiles, three
of them intercontinental, and carried out a nuclear test
on an unprecedented scale. We have met 17 times, 12 on
an emergency basis. North Korea today is an existential
threat for our partners in the region; I would like to
assure them of our full solidarity in the face of this
unacceptable situation.
12/24

15/12/2017

This unprecedented series of illicit and increasingly
destabilizing actions has all the hallmarks of a dangerous
escalation. The threats are real and proven, have already
reached an unacceptable level and increase daily. That
is why inaction and weakness are not options.
France believes that our action should be guided by
three priorities.
The first to be clear-sighted in the face of the
extreme seriousness of the situation. The multifaceted
progress of North Korea in terms of its nuclear and
ballistic capacity and probably in the chemical area as
well represents a deep-seated change. The threat has
gone from regional to global and from potential to
immediate. Let us not be under any illusion: the threat
is unprecedented and has no equivalent.
The North Korean regime, however, has to date
shown no intention of reversing course. Instead, forging
ahead with its illicit nuclear and ballistic programmes,
it continues to flout its international obligations and to
defy the Council, to the detriment of its own people.
I would stress here that the tragic situation of human
rights in North Korea is only getting worse, and we
heard earlier this week. With regard to the humanitarian
situation, it is indeed the North Korean regime that
bears the primarily responsibility.
Secondly, given this very dangerous and volatile
situation, the main focus of our action must be to stand
firm, primarily because the dangerous spiral in which
North Korea is engaged threatens the very foundations
of our collective security system, which together we
have the responsibility to preserve.
It is vital that we react to this testing of the
non-proliferation regime and avoid any possibility of
impunity, which would necessarily lead to other aspects
being called into question. What is at stake here is our
ability to not only ensure our own security but also to
prevent any disruption of the strategic balance in Asia
and, beyond that, the strategic stability that underlies
peace and security.
In that framework, our action should take place
on two tracks. It is indispensable, first, to implement
existing sanctions strictly and comprehensively, in
the face of the formidable inventiveness of North
Korean networks in circumventing our decisions and
escape their effects. Everyone knows that the uneven
implementation of sanctions seriously affects the
effectiveness of our collective action. Their correct
17-44413

15/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

implementation is the responsibility of all Member
States, beginning with the ones seated on the Council.
We must also react methodically and with
determination to all North Korean provocations in
order to prevent further escalation and to preserve the
non-proliferation regime. If North Korea continues
to defy our injunctions and to ignore our appeals to
reason, North Korea will leave us with no other choice
than to strengthen the sanctions, on the understanding
that sanctions are not a goal in themselves and that
target the regime for what it does and not for what it is.
The third and final priority must be the potential
for diplomacy to find a political solution. We do not
close, and have never closed, the door to dialogue. All
our efforts, on the contrary, are aimed at convincing
Pyongyang to return to the negotiating table and to agree
to negotiations on its nuclear and ballistic programme.
But it is clear that given North Korea’s obstinacy, today
only maximum pressure can enable us to return to the
path of negotiation.
France is, of course, in favour of the resumption of
negotiations, but it is up to the North Korean regime to
give us clear indications that it is prepared to talk, and
the sooner the better.
France is convinced that maximum pressure on
the North Korean regime is our best lever to enable
dialogue, which itself is the condition for a political
solution. Failing that, anything that could be seen by
the North Korean regime as a sign of weakness or of
disunity among us would encourage it to continue its
provocations and objectively aggravate the threat of an
extreme scenario.
So, quite simply, the firmness that France is calling
on the Council to show is our best antidote in the light
of the threat of war and our best chance to chart a course
towards dialogue and therefore towards the political
solution that we all seek.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Japanese
presidency for having organized this timely and
important high-level meeting on the issue of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, over which we
are pleased to see you presiding, Mr. Minister. Our own
Minister would have been here today had it not been
for the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
Council of Ministers meeting and the high-level
revitalization forum, both due to take place in the
coming days in Addis Ababa.

S/PV. 8137

We thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
his briefing on the topic of our discussion today, which,
we understand, was one of the issues raised during his
visit to Tokyo. We share his views, and it is no wonder,
therefore, that in this statement we may have to repeat
what the Secretary-General has stressed.
We can imagine the level of anxiety and deep
concern in Japan concerning the repeated ballisticmissile tests by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. We know that most of those missiles fell
into Japan’s exclusive economic zone and that some
of them flew over its territory. It is not difficult to
realize how sensitive this issue is to the people and the
Government of Japan, as the only country to ever suffer
a nuclear attack.
However, the nuclear and ballistic-missile activities
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea pose a
grave danger not only to Japan and the region of NorthEast Asia; as a matter of fact, there is no greater threat
to global peace and security at the moment than the
potential nuclear catastrophe that is hanging over the
Korean peninsula. One does not need to be an expert
in the area to know that no war on the peninsula would
be limited. The possibility that it could spread must not
be discounted. That is why every possible diplomatic
effort must be made to avert this potentially dangerous
situation, which could have devastating consequences
for the region and the world at large.
At this stage, it has become all the more apparent
that there is no option other than a path of peace
and diplomacy to resolving the crisis on the Korean
peninsula. In that regard, priority should be given to
easing the heightened tensions and avoiding the risk of
miscalculations through all available means, including
by reopening communications channels, if none are
open at the moment. We are under no illusions that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea issue can
be resolved any time soon, but it is absolutely essential
that all sides start taking meaningful steps, however
small, to build the necessary trust and confidence,
which could help pave the way for a resumption of
dialogue and negotiations to find a comprehensive
and lasting solution to the issue of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, as well as to achieve the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Everyone
agrees that this is the key to preserving peace and
security in North-East Asia.

17-4441313/24

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We very much welcomed Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman’s visit to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, the first by a senior official of the
United Nations since 2010. It is a small but important
step in the right direction, and we greatly appreciated
the extremely useful briefing that we received on the
range of discussions that he had with North Korean
officials in Pyongyang. What the visit has shown is that
the engagement of the United Nations and, especially, of
the Secretary-General’s good offices, could be helpful.
While nothing concrete came out of Mr. Feltman’s visit,
we believe that the various discussions he held may
contribute to a better understanding of the thinking in
Pyongyang and to devising a strategy of engagement
to bring the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
back to the negotiating table. In our view, that is
absolutely critical.
In the meantime, the full and effective
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions by all Member States remains crucial — as
was pointed out by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) when he reported to the Council (see S/PV.8127)
on the work of the Committee in 2017 — to creating
“conditions conducive to restarting negotiations,
while at the same time hindering the development
of the nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”.
Regardless of that, I would like to point to the
need to pay attention to the humanitarian situation in
the country. We hope that the recent United Nations
engagement with the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will contribute to improving
the provision of lifesaving humanitarian assistance to
the population in need. It might also help to raise the
level of mutual trust, which is currently non-existent.
We welcome the presence of the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at this meeting.
Lastly, it is only through the unity of the Council
that we can avert the dangerous situation on the
Korean peninsula, and at this critical juncture it is only
appropriate to focus on what would help to improve
cooperation among members of Council in ensuring the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We should
not lose hope of the possibility of achieving that goal.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. Kono, for presiding over
our meeting today, and the Secretary-General for his
14/24

15/12/2017

briefing on the situation on the Korean peninsula.
There can be no doubt that we are experiencing one
of the most acute and dramatic phases in the evolving
situation there. We can say without exaggeration that
peace in that region is being seriously tested and the
risk that the situation could be transformed from one
of confrontation to outright conflict is greater than it
has ever been. Military rhetoric, accompanied by rash
muscle-flexing between the participants, has led to a
situation in which the whole world is seriously beginning
to wonder whether there will be a war or not. As we
know, in such tense circumstances one ill-considered
or misinterpreted step could have dire consequences.
Russia has been watching the dangerously evolving
situation in the region with concern. Needless to say,
we are united in our condemnation of Pyongyang’s
provocative nuclear-missile activity, which has gained
dangerous momentum in the past year and a half. A
situation such as that of the latest launch, which was
made from North Korean territory with no warning
whatever, endangering the lives of ordinary citizens,
including those travelling by air and sea in the region,
is absolutely unacceptable. We repudiate any such
action by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
which reinforces our support for all the relevant
Security Council sanctions resolutions, which we have
implemented to the letter. We call on the North Korean
authorities to wind down their banned programmes and
return as a non-nuclear State to the non-proliferation
regime of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the control of the International
Atomic Energy Agency. However, it should be clear
to everyone that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is hardly going to renounce its nuclear-missile
programme while it still feels that its security is directly
threatened, which is exactly how Pyongyang sees the
regular large-scale manoeuvres and exercises that the
United States and its allies conduct in the region.
We want to once again confirm our commitment
to implementing the international sanctions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That said, as
we have emphasized time and again, such measures
should not be an end in themselves but rather a tool
for engaging countries in constructive negotiations
on substantive issues. Diplomacy is not just about
sanctions, and sanctions are not diplomacy at all, in spite
of some partners’ efforts to convince us otherwise — or
at least they are not diplomacy in the traditional sense
but rather a blunt instrument of persuasion when all
17-44413

15/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

other methods have been exhausted. There is a whole
range of other methods in the diplomatic arsenal. All
of the Council’s decisions on sanctions also include the
obligation to fulfil a political component, something
that many people forget, unfortunately, as they focus
on the restrictions alone.
It will be impossible to settle the nuclear issue on
the Korean peninsula through sanctions and pressure
on Pyongyang alone. Sanctions should not be used to
strangle the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
economically or worsen its humanitarian situation.
That applies especially to unilateral restrictions, which
affect civilian sectors that have nothing to do with the
country’s nuclear-missile programmes and are one
reason for the serious deterioration in the population’s
living conditions. Furthermore, unilateral limits that
circumvent or intensify action taken through the
Security Council undermine the effectiveness of the
Security Council’s decisions on a political solution to
the situation on the Korean peninsula, not to mention
the damage that they do to third countries’ legitimate
interests. Incidentally, I would like to inform the
Secretary of State of the United States that the North
Korean workers in Russia are not working in conditions
of slavery but on the basis of an inter-Governmental
agreement with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea that guarantees their rights. And while I am
addressing the Secretary of State, I would like to add
that we very much hope that his four no’s will become
the basis for the United States approach to resolving the
crisis on the Korean peninsula.
With regard to the Security Council sanctions
regime, we have to acknowledge that the humanitarian
exemptions identified in them are not working. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
recently briefed the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) about
this. The ban on correspondent relations with banks
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
complicated not only purchases of food and goods
abroad for the domestic economy but also the financing
of those United Nations agencies that are still
operating there.
There can be no question that the refusal of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions is unacceptable.
But neither are attempts of any kind to resolve the longstanding problems in the region by military means alone.
We only have to look to the history of the Korean War to

S/PV. 8137

understand that. In the current situation, we urge all the
parties concerned to prevent any further escalation of
the tension that accompanies each new cycle of reactions
and counterreactions. We must reconsider the policy of
mutual pressure and intimidation. It does not get results.
In our view, a comprehensive approach to resolving the
situation is essential. The Korean peninsula cannot be
denuclearized without normalizing the military and
political situation generally; refraining from building
up military infrastructure, including the deployment by
the United States in the region of elements of its global
missile defence system; reducing the scale of military
manoeuvres; and establishing an atmosphere of trust
among the States of North-East Asia.
Recently, unfortunately, we have been seeing the
reverse of this picture. In October and December,
Washington and its allies responded to two and a
half months of silence from Pyongyang by holding
unscheduled
and
unprecedentedly
large-scale
manoeuvres and exercises on the borders of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as well as by
introducing new unilateral sanctions and including it
on its list of State sponsors of terrorism. All these steps
make us wonder about the sincerity of all the declarations
about the preferability of peaceful approaches to
resolving the crisis regarding the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
We call on the stakeholders to take practical
measures to de-escalate the situation as soon as possible.
In particular, it would be a good idea to skip the planned
regular military exercises. It goes without saying
that Pyongyang must also cease its nuclear-missile
tests. We are ready to cooperate more closely with all
partners with a view to achieving a speedy settlement
of the issues on the Korean peninsula through political
and diplomatic means, the only possible path, and a
mutually respectful dialogue. That is the aim behind
Russia and China’s road map for a settlement. We call
on all parties involved in the preparation and holding of
the Olympic Games in South Korea to refrain from any
kind of provocation or ill-conceived initiatives during
the period of preparation and holding of the Olympic
Games in South Korea, and to use the time to find a
way to reach a political and diplomatic settlement.
In conclusion, I would like to address Mr. Klimkin,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, who spoke
here today, and to advise him that when he graces the
Security Council with his presence, he should do it at
meetings where his fairy-tales about what goes on in

17-4441315/24

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Ukraine will at least have some vague connection to the
item on the Council’s agenda.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his informative
briefing on this very serious issue. The situation with
regard to North Korea is an issue on which we all have
a unified position.
First, we do not want to see the nuclear club expand
and we will not accept any State’s aspirations to acquire
nuclear weapons. Kazakhstan has been and remains
an active supporter of nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation, which we believe can be achieved
through confidence-building and reaching pragmatic
compromises aimed at building a mutually safe and
peaceful coexistence.
Secondly, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s reckless missile launches and nuclear tests
represent the most serious possible violations of Security
Council resolutions. Kazakhstan has experienced all the
devastating consequences of nuclear tests and therefore
supports their prohibition in the twenty-first century.
To this day, unfortunately, we have still been unable
to achieve the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which could make ending all
tests a reality. We must outlaw nuclear testing in the
modern world.
Thirdly, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
should comply with the requirements of all the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Only thorough and strict
adherence to them will ease the sanctions regime
imposed on Pyongyang. It is in the interests of the
Government of North Korea to engage in a substantive
dialogue and resume the negotiation process in order to
avoid the potentially irreversible negative consequences
of its irresponsible behaviour. In this respect, we
recommend capitalizing on the recent contact between
the Secretariat and the Government of North Korea
with the aim of expanding the window of opportunity it
represents for peaceful cooperation and diplomacy. We
should also reduce the risk of conflict and any further
deterioration of the difficult humanitarian situation
created by funding cuts, which can seriously affect the
lives of ordinary citizens in the country.
The current situation on the Korean peninsula is
the most tense and dangerous there has ever been. We
must prevent all possible miscalculations and strive to
reduce the risk of escalating the conflict. All sides must
refrain from negative rhetoric and actions. We must
16/24

15/12/2017

work to create the conditions necessary for continuing
the contacts initiated between the United Nations and
Pyongyang. Today’s meeting of the Council sends a
clear signal to North Korea that its nuclear path will not
provide any guarantees for the security and well-being
of its own people or anyone else.
Kazakhstan’s non-nuclear path could serve as a
practical guide for the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and other countries striving to obtain nuclear
capabilities. We have built and strengthened our
independence and gained international respect by
renouncing nuclear weapons. My President demonstrated
strong political will in ridding our country of nuclear
weapons and tests in a very challenging environment at
a time of radical transformation of the world order. As
time has shown, it was the right decision. I would like to
thank Secretary of State Tillerson for mentioning that
fact in the recent debate on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in this Chamber (see S/PV.8053).
We therefore call on the leadership of North Korea to
renounce its nuclear weapons for the benefit of all.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Minister Kono for
presiding over our work today and Secretary-General
Guterres for his briefing. We share the concern of the
Security Council’s Japanese presidency and believe
this debate is very timely. It is particularly important
at a time when the situation on the North Korean
peninsula represents a major threat to international
peace and security.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
whether nuclear, chemical or biological, is a serious,
real threat to international peace and security. Such
weapons should not be used by anyone under any
circumstances. Uruguay would like to emphasize
that it is the duty of all States to strictly respect their
disarmament and non-proliferation obligations under
international law as outlined in such documents as the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the Charter of the United Nations.
Uruguay has frequently expressed its categorical
condemnation of North Korea’s nuclear tests and
ballistic-missile launches, and will continue to do so if
North Korea continues its threatening behaviour and its
violations of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We once again urge it to abandon its nuclear programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible way and
immediately cease all related activities, including
17-44413

15/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8137

launching missiles with ballistic technology. We urge
it to return to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the safeguards regime of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). We also thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his briefing, which has contributed to
our debate.

The Security Council’s sanctions represent an
attempt to bring the North Korean Government to the
negotiating table. However, and despite all the calls of
the international community to engage in dialogue, it has
so far not been impossible to get back to the negotiations
that are essential to unblock the situation. The sanctions
imposed on North Korea must be implemented
completely and effectively by all Member States. At
the same time, they must not have adverse effects on
the population. We are therefore concerned that the
sanctions could be having unintended negative effects
on the humanitarian situation in the country, and we
deem it appropriate to carry out a careful analysis of
the problem.

We are again gathered in this forum to discuss the
issue of non-proliferation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Each time we have met, my country,
Senegal, has reaffirmed its firm condemnation of the
many acts of defiance that that country has perpetrated
against the wishes of the international community in
general, and in particular those of the Security Council,
including 17 ballistic-missile launches — two of which
were intercontinental — and a sixth nuclear test in
September, which the North Korean Government itself
presented as a hydrogen bomb test on a previously
unparalleled scale.

Throughout its participation as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, Uruguay has supported
all the actions taken with regard to North Korea.
Likewise, we have consistently stated our position in
support of every initiative that aims to achieve dialogue.
There is no military solution to the North Korea issue.
The denuclearization of the Korean peninsula must be
carried out in a peaceful manner through diplomatic
negotiations that produce a political commitment
among the parties. We must aim to achieve that without
further delay, before it is too late and before we are left
to lament the consequences of a major disaster.
We very much appreciate the recent visit to North
Korea by Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Jeffrey Feltman, which was a concrete step in the right
direction following an extremely prolonged hiatus. It is
crucial to maintain an open channel of communication
between the United Nations and the Government of
North Korea. That will allow us to create the appropriate
conditions for the resumption of negotiations.
It will also be necessary to address the interests
and legitimate concerns of all the parties concerned in
the matter, and efforts to build trust between the parties
should therefore be intensified. As States Members of
the United Nations, we are convinced that there is no
other alternative to dialogue.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
thanks Japan for convening this meeting and is pleased
to see Mr. Taro Kono, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Japan, presiding over this debate on the issue of

We are certainly facing a new scenario. Following its
most recent successful intercontinental ballistic missile
test on 28 November and continuing methodically to
pursue its programmes in the area of nuclear weapons
and missiles, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has displayed, more than ever before, its determination
to acquire a military nuclear capability, if it has not
already done so.
Senegal sees that as a serious threat to the
international non-proliferation regime, considerably
exacerbating tensions, which are already high in the
Korean peninsula and beyond. It also poses a serious
threat not only to the people of the peninsula and the
region, but also to the safety of air navigation in that
part of the world, which is particularly characterized by
density in population and air traffic activity.
In that context, it is the Security Council that faces
a serious challenge, because, despite all the resolutions
and sanctions adopted and other measures taken against
the activities of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, that country is far from abandoning its nuclear
ambitions and has gone as far as to question the very
competence of the Council to address the issue posed
by its illegal military programme.
Clearly, the recent adoption of resolutions 2371
(2017) and 2375 (2017) has not changed anything.
Therefore, the question arises: what more do we
have to do to encourage that country to respect its
international obligations in a clear, irreversible and
verifiable way? To answer that question, and while
taking into account our collective belief that there can
be no military solution to the crisis, my country calls

17-4441317/24

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

for a global, peaceful and negotiated solution through
an open and frank dialogue. We urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to return to its previously
held position, which it regrettably chose to leave, and to
pursue the Six-Party Talks.

15/12/2017

North Korea as their Government diverts energy and
resources towards the development of illegal weapons
of mass destruction.

Senegal calls on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to respect its international obligations. We
emphasize that the targeted measures that have rightly
been taken in the latest Council resolution against
North Korea to meet the challenge of that country’s
nuclear and ballistic programme must be part of a
comprehensive political strategy, as the only viable
option is for the parties to engage in an open dialogue
for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, with
the active support of the international community, so as
to create the conditions for the peaceful coexistence of
the countries and peoples of the region.

We have repeatedly seen how the regime’s
unprecedented provocations in the form of developing
nuclear arms and missile capabilities have caused
tensions to flare up in the Korean peninsula and
beyond, which, in our view, constitutes one of the
gravest threats to international peace and security that
we face today. We strongly condemn those activities
and call on North Korea to abide by its international
obligations. We also call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to abandon its chemical-weapons
programme and immediately adhere to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction, as called for in resolution 2371 (2017).

That means that Member States must redouble
their efforts and fully apply the obligations set forth in
the various resolutions, because the absence of a real
political will or the lack of action on the part of Member
States would result in the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Senegal believes that we must
work to strengthen the primacy of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) through
its universalization and the fulfilment of previously
agreed commitments.

It is clear that a conflict on the Korean peninsula
would be catastrophic for the region and for the world.
Therefore, the Council’s response this year has had to
be forceful and effective. Three new resolutions were
adopted providing for the most comprehensive set of
sanctions in a generation. We have also taken significant
additional measures in the European Union and at the
national level. For instance, Italy recently suspended the
accreditation procedure for the designated Ambassador
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to Rome.

We are convinced that working towards the
universalization of the NPT and the implementation of
its relevant provisions, as well as resolute action aimed
at ensuring the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, would mark decisive
milestones towards general and complete disarmament.

The sanctions are designed to achieve three main
goals: first, to make the North Korean regime realize
that further provocation will lead only to greater
isolation; secondly, to stop the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea from exploiting the interconnected
nature of the global economy in order to fund its illegal
weapons programme; and, thirdly, to provide the
necessary leverage in order to bring about a verifiable
change in that regime’s policies, thereby opening the
way towards a political solution based on complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization. I wish to
emphasize that that strategy will work fully only if two
conditions are met: first, the full and comprehensive
implementation of the sanctions by the entire United
Nations membership; and, secondly, continued unity in
the Council on the issue.

Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, allow me to thank
the Japanese presidency for convening this important
debate, as well as the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We also appreciate the visit to Pyongyang last week
by Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman, and we
support the United Nations efforts to establish a channel
of communication with the authorities of North Korea
aimed at reducing the risk of unintentional escalation.
There can be no ambiguity in our analysis of the
current scenario. The deterioration seen over the past
year is a direct consequence of the North Korean
regime’s illegal and destabilizing activities. The threat
is immediate and global in scope. We once again express
our full solidarity with the citizens of Japan and South
Korea, and we cannot forget the plight of the people of
18/24

As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), Italy
has worked to improve the implementation of sanctions
throughout this year, but many challenges remain. Such
an articulated and broad sanctions regime requires
17-44413

15/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

constant interaction with Member States so as to bridge
information gaps. Furthermore, many countries face
capacity challenges. There is also an issue relating
to timing. The delay in turning sanctions provisions
into national legislation may create opportunities for
evading them. That is why it is crucial to submit national
implementation reports on time. While we have seen a
steady increase in that regard over the past year, there is
room for improvement. Let me underline the importance
and urgency of the submission of implementation
reports by all Member States with regard to all of
the sanctions resolutions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Lastly, I wish to reiterate that sanctions are not
meant to have unintended negative consequences on the
humanitarian situation in the country, which continues
to be a matter of serious concern. Of course, we must
bear in mind that it is the regime of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that bears the primary
responsibility for improving the livelihood of its people.
We continue to engage with all the relevant stakeholders
on that issue. Last week I chaired a productive meeting
of the Sanctions Committee aimed at addressing the
humanitarian situation. In that context, we renew our
appeal to humanitarian actors to make full use of
the relevant existing exemptions provided for in the
various Security Council resolutions. We also believe
that more timely and systematic interaction between
United Nations agencies and the Sanctions Committee
could go a long way to averting unnecessary obstacles
in providing humanitarian assistance to the North
Korean people.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin by
welcoming the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan,
Mr. Taro Kono, to the Security Council today to preside
over our work. We would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his briefing
Bolivia, as a pacifist country, promotes the culture
of dialogue and the right to peace, as well as cooperation
among the peoples of the world, with full respect for their
sovereignty, through diplomacy in their relations with
each other. In that regard, our Constitution prohibits the
manufacture and use of chemical, biological or nuclear
weapons on Bolivian territory.
As part of the first densely populated zone in the
world that declared itself free of nuclear weapons,
through the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear

S/PV. 8137

Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, known
as the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and as the first region to
declare itself a zone of peace, we urge that our example
be replicated in other regions of the world.
In that regard, Bolivia expresses its strongest and
most energetic condemnation of the ballistic missile
launches and the nuclear tests carried out by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We call on that
country to abandon its nuclear and ballistic missiles
programme in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner and to comply with the provisions of Security
Council resolutions and return to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
We would point out the importance of complying
with the Charter of the United Nations, which designates
the Security Council as the only legal organ that can
take the necessary measures to maintain or re-establish
international peace and security, in that way ruling out
any unilateral action.
We therefore reject any act of provocation or
application of unilateral sanctions, not only because
they constitute a flagrant violation of international law
but also because they undermine the efforts and work of
multilateral organizations such as our own, as unilateral
sanctions seek to extend the jurisdiction and internal
legislation of one State to another, thereby violating the
principles of equality, sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of the States. We therefore urge all the parties
involved to avoid increasing tensions or escalating
rhetoric, and we call on them to stop the current spiral
of confrontation and threats of the use of military force.
It must be understood that there can be no military
solution to the situation on the Korean peninsula.
The sanctions imposed in the resolutions adopted
by the Council should not be an end in themselves.
They should serve as a stimulus aimed at bringing
the parties to the negotiating table so that they can
resume dialogue and achieve a peaceful, diplomatic and
political solution that results in the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula.
So far this year, the Security Council has adopted
three resolutions, which are increasingly harsh and,
depending on their degree of implementation, are
also affecting the civilian population with possible
humanitarian consequences. We believe that, as is
clearly stated in those resolutions, it is not only necessary
to work to implement those sanctions, but also to bring

17-4441319/24

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

about a return to dialogue and a resumption of the SixParty Talks. That is essential.
We reiterate our support for the Chinese initiative
of simultaneous suspensions on the Korean peninsula.
On the one hand, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea would stop its nuclear and ballistic missile
tests immediately, and, on the other hand, all types
of unilateral or joint military exercises in the region
would also cease. We also reiterate our support for the
Russian-Chinese proposal and road map, which is, to
date, the only concrete proposal that has been presented
to resolve the situation.
Along those lines, with regard to the efforts made
to re-establish mechanisms for dialogue, we would
highlight the recent visit to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea by Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman. We hope that the
communication channels that could be established will
remain open in order to initiate a dialogue without
preconditions and build mutual trust.
Finally, my delegation would like to state that today
we are meeting at a time of great tension globally. With
regard to the situation on the Korean peninsula, we
feel that it is important to begin a dialogue that will
give rise to stability in the region and achieve just and
lasting peace.
The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): I would like to respond
to what the Russian representative said a few moments
ago. With regard to the point about the proper format
for addressing various issues, our basic view is
that Russia violated the Budapest Memorandum on
security assurances and various other legal written
and unwritten commitments, which has created an
atmosphere of impunity, which has contributed to the
situation in which we now find ourselves.
As I listened to your statement, Mr. President — in
which the narrative was basically about the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s violations of international
law and sanctions, and its taking of hostages — I realized
that the same narrative, in fact, applies to Russia and
its violations of international law and sanctions and its
taking of hostages. There we have one big rogue State
and one smaller rogue State, and the difference is only
one of scale.
20/24

15/12/2017

I also wanted to react to one point that in my view
represents a twisted, irresponsible and astounding
kind of logic. The Russian representative said that in
a way, North Korea’s nuclear and missile programme
is a response to the exercises being conducted on
and around the Korean peninsula. This year, Russia
has been carrying out huge military drills in Belarus
while trying to confuse everyone about their objective
and scale. So, following Russia’s logic, I should now
call for my country to become a nuclear Power and
develop a missile programme. In a way, that embodies
an enormously irresponsible way of thinking that could
trigger a worldwide nuclear arms race tomorrow. In my
view, what it shows is that we must stop trying to find
any excuse we can for any wrongful behaviour. That is
my fundamental point, and I just wanted to take this
opportunity to make it again.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be very brief. I am not going to get into
a substantive discussion with the Foreign Minister of
Ukraine. I just want to say that I am glad that there
are a lot of people in the Chamber today, because they
have been able to see for themselves the Ukrainian
delegation’s lack of respect for the Security Council
and other Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Hyun (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting
and for the opportunity to speak to the Security Council.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Let me start by rewinding the clock to December
2016, after the Council’s adoption of resolutions 2270
(2016) and 2321 (2016) in response to North Korea’s
fourth and fifth nuclear tests, in the hope that that
would change North Korea’s behaviour. When we fast
forward to December 2017, however, the situation has
deteriorated further. This year, North Korea conducted
yet another nuclear test and launched 20 ballistic
missiles. To be fair, the international community
responded by further strengthening and implementing
the Security Council’s resolutions, while not losing
sight of the efforts to resume a dialogue. Those
endeavours, however, have not been enough to bring
17-44413

15/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

North Korea back to the negotiating table for talks
on denuclearization.
A little more than a couple of weeks ago, North
Korea launched its most advanced ballistic missile,
with an intercontinental range. Afterwards, it claimed
to have completed its State nuclear force. Despite
the differing assessments, what is certain is that
North Korea is indeed in the final stages of nuclear
weaponization. If that is in fact completed, it will
fundamentally alter the security landscape in the region
and beyond. Many commentators point out that it will
aggravate tension in an already heavily militarized
region, and they even worry about the risk of nuclear
proliferation to rogue States and non-State actors. North
Korea also threatens to shatter the foundations of the
international non-proliferation regimes and continues
to inflict lasting harm on its own people. Now more
than ever, the international community must grasp the
gravity and urgency of this threat and find ways to halt
North Korea’s nuclear programme and bring it back to
the path of denuclearization.
What matters most now is not mere assessments of
the North Korean threat but rather our united will and
firm action against the regime. North Korea is waging a
fierce battle of wills with the international community.
It wants to be recognized as a nuclear-weapon State
on its own terms and conditions. Our answer should
be absolutely no. We should not be coerced by North
Korea’s continuing provocations but rather uphold
our principles, while responding firmly to its reckless
behaviour. At the same time, we should not be provoked
into conflict nor should we shut the doors to dialogue
and peace. Our common goal is the complete, verifiable
and irreversible denuclearization of North Korea
in a peaceful manner. In that context, I would like
to underscore that the 2018 PyeongChang Olympic
Winter Games should be an Olympics for peace. My
Government urges North Korea to join the Olympic
Games and to seize that opportunity for dialogue.
North Korea is also waging a battle of actions against
the international community. Time and again, it has
found and taken advantage of the loopholes in Security
Council resolution, and it has preyed on the weak links
in the international community. The sanctions are not
an end in themselves. They are meant not to bring down
North Korea but to bring it to the negotiating table for
talks on denuclearization. However, if we are to bring
an unwilling North Korea back to the table, we must
fill in all the gaps identified in the implementation of

S/PV. 8137

the resolutions. In that regard, we deeply appreciate the
active efforts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006).
The international community has made some
progress, including through its restrictions on oil
supplies, the export ban on North Korea’s key products
and its ban on overseas work authorizations. Many
countries, even those with a long-standing relationship
with North Korea, have joined those efforts, including
by expelling individuals on the sanctions list. The record
number of submissions of implementation reports for
resolutions 2270 (2016) and 2321 (2016) is a testimony to
the enhanced awareness of the international community
regarding the North Korean threat.
However, in our race against North Korea, we
need to do more — much more. North Korea’s evasive
tactics are becoming more sophisticated, and the
regime continues to exploit every weak link. In fact,
the Republic of Korea has been actively cooperating
with its partners to identify and stop North Korea’s
attempts to evade sanctions, to seek alternative routes
in order to sell coal and other banned products and to
illegally import oil. Let me emphasize that none of us
should become such a weak link, and none of us should
condone groups or individuals who assist North Korea
in its defiance of the Council. In that regard, sharing
best practices in countering North Korea’s evasive
tactics will be helpful in closing loopholes.
I began my remarks by recalling how we ended 2016
and how North Korea defiantly continued its series of
provocations in 2017. We cannot afford to meet once
again at end of 2018 with the feeling that the situation is
one of déjà vu like in the 2017 situation and regretting
our business-as-usual approach. Council members and
the international community must redouble their efforts
to ensure the seamless and complete implementation of
sanctions, and apply as much pressure as is necessary
until North Korea returns to the negotiation table with a
sincere willingness to commit to denuclearization.
We should convey to North Korea that sense of
urgency, so that it understands unequivocally that it
will pay heavily for its provocations, that it will never
be accepted as a nuclear-weapon State and that dialogue
leading to denuclearization is the only viable option.
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its solid commitment
to achieving the denuclearization of North Korea
and the establishment of lasting peace on the Korean

17-4441321/24

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

15/12/2017

peninsula. We will work closely with all countries to
that end.

maintenance and modernization of its nuclear weapons
over the next 30 years.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.

All of the statistics that I have just mentioned clearly
demonstrate that the United States is the ring leader of
nuclear proliferation. It is also disturbing to witness the
Security Council acting as a tool of the United States and
doing its bidding instead of maintaining impartiality,
which is vital to its activities, and instead of keeping
true to its mission to maintain international peace and
security. While the Security Council has ignored our
repeated requests to raise the issue of the provocative
and aggressive joint military exercises — the most
obvious manifestation of the United States nuclear
threats and blackmail — in this forum, it busies itself
with kowtowing to the United States, which advocates
for sanctions and pressure against us by condemning
our self-defensive measures.

Mr. Ja Song Nam (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): At the outset, I condemn Japan, in the strongest
possible terms, which has assumed the presidency
of the Security Council for December and is, at the
instigation of the United States, evilly taking advantage
of this opportunity to convene a ministerial Security
Council briefing on the issue of non-proliferation
concerning the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
I feel compelled to say that today’s meeting is nothing
other than a desperate move on the part of the United
States, which is terrified of the incredible might of our
Republic, now that we have successfully achieved the
great historic goal of completing our State nuclear force
and building a missile arsenal, as demonstrated by the
great event of November.
I believe that, if the issue of non-proliferation is to
be discussed, the first country to be brought to account
should be the United States, which is the kingpin
of vertical and horizontal proliferation, as it pours
astronomical amounts of funding into modernizing
nuclear weapons and hinders in every way the
denuclearization of the Middle East, as well as Japan,
which maintains a greater-than-necessary stockpile of
plutonium and is seeking every opportunity to produce
nuclear weapons. Our possession of nuclear weapons
was inevitable as a self-defensive measure intended
to defend our sovereignty and our right to exist and
develop from the United States nuclear threat and
blackmail. If anyone is to blame it is the United States,
and it must be held accountable.
There are several nuclear-weapon States throughout
the world today, but there is no other country like the
United States, which continues to threaten and blackmail
other countries openly with its nuclear weapons. That
conclusion is quite evident if we merely consider the
amount of money that the United States spends for the
maintenance and modernization of its nuclear weapons.
It is well known that the United States has stockpiled
more than 4,000 nuclear warheads in its nuclear arsenals
and has deployed more than 150 tactical nuclear bombs
throughout the territory of its NATO allies and is now
planning to earmark approximately $1 trillion for the
22/24

Every time that United States-South Korea joint
military exercises — which seriously threaten the peace
and security of the Korean peninsula, the region and the
world — have been conducted, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has submitted letters to the Security
Council, 11 times since 2014, requesting that the issue be
raised and discussed urgently in the Council. However,
while turning its back on every one of our requests
to address those aggressive joint military exercises,
the Security Council has, on the contrary, adopted 11
sanctions resolutions directed against my country and
has condemned our self-defensive measures as a threat
to international peace and security. Merely by citing
the facts just mentioned, we can easily demonstrate the
unfairness, double standards and petty prejudice of the
Security Council.
As we have clarified on behalf of our Government,
the development and advancement of the strategic
weapons of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
are entirely intended to defend the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country from the United
States policy of nuclear blackmail and nuclear threat,
and ensure a peaceful life for our people. We therefore
do not pose any threat to any country or region, as long
as the interests of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea are not infringed upon. I reiterate once again
that our nuclear force is devoted solely to its mission
as a self-defensive deterrent, and it is fully in line with
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
stipulates the right of the exercise of self-defensive
measures to be taken by an individual United Nations
State Member.
17-44413

15/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in
accordance with the decree of the Supreme People’s
Assembly adopted on 1 April 2013, has established an
absolutely perfect system and order of stockpiling and
maintaining its technology and weapon-grade nuclear
materials in order to fully guarantee that no kind of
illegal transfer of nuclear weapons will take place.
As a result, not a single case has been raised
about our nuclear proliferation to date. All the data
on impunity that has been scattered around by hostile
forces in relation to my country’s proliferation is a totally
groundless plot intending to defame the dignity of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the powerful
nuclear State. Taking up the issue of our strengthening
of national defensive measures is nothing but violent
behaviour of inteference.
The possession of nuclear weapons by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea cannot not
constitute a violation of international law or regulations
in any case, as the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
withdrew from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons in a most justified way. At the
same time, it is clear to everybody that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is not infringing upon any
of the interests of other countries and that the purpose
of possessing nuclear deterrents is only for self-defence
and to safeguard peace in the region.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, no
matter what anyone says, will march forward and
victoriously make great advancements as the world’s
most powerful nuclear and military State, upholding
the line on simultaneous development of the two fronts.
In conclusion, I hereby reaffirm once again that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as a responsible
nuclear Power and a peace-loving State, will sincerely
fulfil its non-proliferation obligations assumed before
the international community and make every effort to
achieve the noble cause of safeguarding world peace
and security.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Tillerson (United States of America): I would
like to take a moment to respond to the statements made
by the Permanent Representative of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
First, I think we have heard all of these things
before from that Government. There is no doubt that the

S/PV. 8137

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s pursuit of a
nuclear arsenal is in clear violation of international law,
directly challenges the global non-proliferation regime
and greatly threatens international peace and security.
This organ has unanimously made those points for
well over a decade now. The international community
condemns North Korea’s pursuit of a nuclear arsenal,
and we will never accept a nuclear North Korea. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s unlawful acts
cannot be ignored, nor can they be explained away. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must be held
accountable for its actions.
In that regard, in response to any notion that the
source of tensions on the peninsula are the fault of no
one party, there is but one party that has carried out
illegal detonations of nuclear devices. There is but one
party that continues to launch intercontinental ballistic
missiles in violation of Security Council resolutions,
overflying another sovereign nation — Japan — and
threatening civil aviation security because, as those
launches are undertaken with no notification. There is
but one party that has been targeted with punishment
and penalties through the most vigorous sanctions
regime ever enacted, and that is the Kim Jong Un
regime in North Korea. They alone are responsible for
these tensions, they alone must take responsibility for
these tensions and they alone can solve these tensions.
The President: I shall now make some concluding
remarks in my capacity as the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Japan.
Japan has consistently devoted itself to creating
a free and democratic country, whilel respecting
human rights and abiding by the rule of law, as well
as supporting peace and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific
region as a peace-loving nation. The path Japan has
walked as a peace-loving nation will not change in
future and will continue contributing to the peace and
prosperity of the world more than ever before.
In our meeting today we have condemned, in
the strongest terms, the acts of provocation by North
Korea in violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We have once again made it clear that the
international community will never accept a nucleararmed North Korea. I call on all Member States to fully
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions
and maximize international pressure on North Korea
in order to realize a denuclearized Korean peninsula.

17-4441323/24

S/PV.8137

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

After our presidency this month, Japan will leave
the Security Council. However, we will continue to
cooperate closely with the remaining and incoming
members, as well as with non-members, so that the
North Korean issue will be properly addressed in
the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Republic of Korea has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.

24/24

15/12/2017

Mr. Cho Hyun (Republic of Korea): I am compelled
to reply to North Korea’s truly regrettable arguements.
As shown in multiple Security Council resolutions,
the international community has repeatedly made
it clear that it will not recognize North Korea as a
nuclear-weapon State in any case. North Korea must
stop its provocations and sincerely return to dialogue
towards denuclearization. Hopefully, North Korea will
recognize that that is the only path towards a secure and
stable future.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

17-44413
