V.

Lebanon, and to take the necessary steps to ensure that
their offices at Beirut are adequately staffed at the senior
leve!;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/200.

Special economic assistance to Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/198 of 8 December 1986 and
its previous resolutions on assistance in the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of Chad, emergency
humanitarian assistance to Chad and special economic assistance to that country,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on special economic assistance to Chad, 95 relating, ínter alia, to the economic and financia! situation of Chad,
the status of assistance provided for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction ofthe country and the progress made in organizing and executing the programme of assistance for
that country,
Considering that the war and the drought are compromising ali the reconstruction and development efforts of
the Government of Chad,
Concerned at the recent invasion of locusts, which has
aggravated the already precarious food and health situation in Chad, in particular that of the people displaced as a
result of the war and the drought,
Taking note of the numerous appeals launched by the
Government of Chad and governmental and nongovernmental organizations regarding the seriousness of
the food and health situation in Chad,
Taking note also of the appeal made by the Government
of Chad for a round table on the rehabilitation and reconstruction needs of the northern region, which has suffered
the most from the effects of the war,
Recognizing the need for emergency humanitarian assistance to Chad,
Also recognizing the need for assistance in the reconstruction and development of Chad,
Recalling the round table on assistance to Chad convened by the United Nations Development Programme at
Geneva on 4 and 5 December 1985, in accordance with the
arrangements agreed upon at the International Conference on Assistance to Chad, held in November 1982,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the States and governmental and non-governmental organizations that responded
and are continuing to respond generously to the appeals of
the Government of Chad and of the Secretary-General by
furnishing assistance to Chad;
2.. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for h1s e!forts t? make the international community aware
of the d1fficult1es of Chad and to mobilize assistance for
that country;
3: Rene~s the re9ue~t made to States, competent
Un!ted Nat1ons orgamzatlons and programmes and internatlonal economic and financia! institutions to continue:
(a) To provide the necessary humanitarian assistance
to the people of Chad, who have suffered as a result of the
9s See A/42/442, sect. 11.C.

169

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

war, the effects of the drought and the invasion of locusts
and predators;
(b) To contribute to the reconstruction of Chad;
4. Again invites States and agencies to take part in the
sectoral meetings scheduled at the round table on assistance to Chad and to honour the commitments they made;
5. Rer¡:Jests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to implement the interim
development plan submitted at Geneva;9 6
(b) To continue to assess, in close collaboration with
the humanitarian agencies concerned, the humanitarian
needs, particularly in the areas of food and health, of the
people displaced by the war and the drought;
(e) To mobilize special humanitarian assistance for
persons who have suffered as a result of the war, the
drought and the invasion of locusts and predators and for
the resettlement of displaced persons;
6. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to organize, in collaboration
with the competent United Nations organizations and
programmes and the Government of Chad, a round table
to formulate an emergency assistance programme for the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the northern region
and for the resettlement of persons displaced by the war;
7. Calls upan the Secretary-General to keep the situation in Chad under review and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/201.

Special assistance to front-line States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/199 of 8 December 1986,
Having considered the initiatives of the SecretaryGeneral on special assistance to front-line States and other
bordering States, 97 namely the establishment of a focal
point at United Nations Headquarters, the formation of
an informal inter-agency consultative group and the setting in motion of a contingency planning process,
Deeply concerned at the continuing deteriorating situation in southern Africa, which has aggravated the economic problems confronting the front-line States and
other bordering States, arising from the apartheid policies
of the Pretoria régime,
Conscious of the responsibility of the international community to address the problems of the region,
Commending the concerted and determined efforts of
the countries of the region to cope with the prevailing adverse conditions by strengthening their economic cooper_ation an~ lessening their dependence on South Africa,
partlcularly m the areas of transportation, communications and related sectors,
Reaffirming the importance of close co-operation between the United Nations and the front-line States,
Mindful of Security Council resolutions 568 (1985) of
21 June 1985, 571 (1985) of 20 September 1985 and 581
(1986) of 13 February 1986, by which the Council, inter afia, requested the international community to render
assistance to the front-line States,

96/bid., sect. 11.C.4.
97 See A/42/422 and Add. l-4.

170

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding assistance to the front-line States;
2. Strongly urges the international community to continue to provide in a timely and effective manner the financia!, material and technical assistance necessary to enhance the individual and collective capacity of the frontline States and other bordering States to withstand the effects of economic measures taken by South Africa, or by
the international community against South Africa, in accordance with their national and regional plans and strategies;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue mobilizing organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system so that they may respond to such requests for
assistance as might be forthcoming from individual States
or the appropriate subregional organization, and further
urges ali States to respond favourably to such requests;
4. Appeals to ali States and appropriate intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support
the national and collective emergency programmes prepared by the front-line States and other bordering States to
overcome the critica) problems arising from the situation
in South Africa;
5. Notes with appreciation the assistance being rendered to the front-line States by donor countries and intergovernmental organizations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
42/202.

Special assistance to Maldives for disaster relief and the strengthening of its coastal defences

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned by the damage caused to the archipelago of Maldives by unexpected tidal waves in April,
June and September 1987,
Acutely aware of the threats posed by such tidal action to
the low-lying islands of Maldives and to their inhabitants,
Mindful of the need to commence urgent protective
measures to minimize the hazards of such tragic events,
Noting that Maldives is one of the least developed countries, with severely limited natural endowments and a narrow-based economic backbone,
Recognizing the efforts of the Government and the people of Maldives to improve and accelerate the socioeconomic development of their country,
Taking note of the emergency relief operations undertaken by the Government of Maldives to assist those affected in the episodes of April, June and September 1987,
and of its determination to strengthen its defences against
such disasters in the future,
Convinced that long-term solutions are imperative,
l. Expresses its gratitude to those States and organizations which rendered support and assistance to the Government of Maldives in its relief and subsequent rehabilitation work;
2. Draws the attention of the international community
to the fact that additional resources are required to carry
out the envisaged plan for preventive action, and that the
assistance already provided or pledged falls short ofthe requirements;

3. Requests agencies and organizations of the United
Nations system to contribute to the formulation and implementation of a planned programme of action;
4. Strongly appeals to the international community to
contribute generously to that goal;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 41/192 of
8 December 1986, to mobilize international support and
assistance in favour of the efforts of the Government of
Maldives to implement the plan of action;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
42/203.

Assistance to El Salvador

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 41/2 of 14 October 1986,
concerning emergency assistance to El Salvador, and
41/194 of 8 December 1986, in which it appealed to ali
States and appropriate organizations of the United Nations system to contribute to the reconstruction and development of El Salvador,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987/16 of 26 May 1987, in which the Council urged
Governments, organizations ofthe United Nations system
and governmental and non-governmental organizations to
continue to contribute generously to the reconstruction of
El Salvador,
Having considered the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral on international humanitarian assistance activities for El Salvador,98
Con cerned that the serious effects of the earthquake that
occurred on 10 October 1986 have not been overcome despite the efforts ofthe Government and people ofEI Salvador and the international assistance received,
Concerned also that the efforts made by the Govemment
of El Salvador have been restricted and hindered by the
existence of serious economic and financia! problems that
have increased as a result of a substantial fati in agricultura! export production and unfavourable conditions in
international markets,
Convinced of the outstanding importance of intemational assistance and co-operation in the processes of national reconstruction following the damage caused by
natural disasters,
Reiterating the continuing need for the intemational
community to adopt suitable measures for effective assistance and co-operation to promote the rehabilitation,
recovery and development of Member States that have
suffered natural disasters,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General for
the efforts and measures undertaken to provide intemational assistance to El Salvador;
2. A/so expresses its gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Intemational Relief
Activities in El Salvador and bis team for the work done
and activities conducted in connection with assistance to
El Salvador;

98 See A/42/442, sect. V.B.
