United Nations

S/PV.5808

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5808th meeting
Tuesday, 18 December 2007, 4.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mantovani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Li Kexin
Mr. Okio
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Christian
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Arias
Mr. Gallardo
Mr. M. Al-Ansari
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Burian
Mr. Sangqu
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-65065 (E)

*0765065*

S/PV.5808

The meeting was called to order at 4.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Warren Sach,
Assistant Secretary-General, Controller.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/738, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Slovakia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Warren Sach, Assistant SecretaryGeneral, Controller. I now give the floor to Mr. Sach.
Mr. Sach: Mr. President, as the SecretaryGeneral’s
designated
representative
on
the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board (IAMB),
I should like to thank you for the opportunity to brief
the Council on the work of the Board.

2

The IAMB, as the audit oversight body for the
Development Fund for Iraq (DFI), was established to
fulfil the mandate set forth in Security Council
resolution 1483 (2003). That mandate has subsequently
been extended under resolutions 1546 (2004), 1637
(2005) and 1723 (2006).
The Development Fund for Iraq was also
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1483 (2003) and holds the proceeds of petroleum
export sales from Iraq, as well as the transferred
balances from the United Nations oil-for-food
programme and other frozen Iraqi assets. From
inception to 31 December 2006, the Board has been
informed that about $70.4 billion has been deposited
from the sale of oil and oil products. Another $10.2
billion has been deposited with DFI from the balance
of the oil-for-food funds held under escrow by the
United Nations, and a further $1.5 billion has been
deposited as proceeds from frozen assets.
The Board helps to ensure that, first, the DFI is
used in a transparent manner for the benefit of the
people of Iraq and that, secondly, export sales of
petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas from
Iraq are made consistent with prevailing international
market best practices.
The
Board
provides
independent
and
international oversight of the operations of Iraqi oil
export revenues and of the use of DFI resources. Thus,
the Board functions as the audit oversight board for the
DFI and has as its members representatives from the
Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development, the
International Monetary Fund, the Government of Iraq,
the United Nations and the World Bank. The Board
also involved the Iraqi Board of Supreme Audit in its
work at an early stage to ensure continuity.
I now turn to the work of the Board. The Board
has met 21 times since December 2003 and has
approved the appointment by the Government of Iraq
of independent public accountants as the external
auditors. It has reviewed the periodic audit results and
requested and approved special audits. The results of
the Board’s work are available on its website,
www.iamb.info.
In terms of findings, the Board early on identified
major issues in contracting practices and pointed
towards the lack of oil metering as a key element with
respect to the establishment of controls over oil
revenues. The Board promoted the strengthening of

07-65065

S/PV.5808

controls in Iraq over oil export revenues and their use
and complemented the work of others, including the
Board of Supreme Audit and the United States Special
Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction.
The IAMB has identified significant control
weaknesses related to oil revenues. These have already
been reported in previous reports and briefings, and
they included weak controls in place over Iraq’s oil
export revenues and the spending ministries. The major
issues reported include, first, the absence of oil
metering.
The
Board
recommended
that
a
comprehensive oil metering system be installed to
achieve financial transparency and accountability. The
Government of Iraq has since installed some meters at
some oil terminals, including the Basra oil export
terminal, as part of the project to establish a
countrywide metering system for the flow of oil, gas
and fuel products. Overall progress has been slow, and
there is still no comprehensive metering at oil fields,
storage facilities or refineries.
The second major issue is the use of barter
transactions. Barter transactions of oil for electricity
with a neighbouring country were recorded by the State
Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO) but were not
accounted for in the DFI as required by Security
Council resolution 1483 (2003). While some reduction
in bartering occurred in 2004 following the allocation
of Iraqi budget funds to import light petroleum
products, SOMO continues to undertake barter
transactions.
Thirdly, there are inadequate controls over
expenditures. The external audit reports received by
the IAMB were critical of the financial and accounting
controls put in place by the spending ministries, as well
as the United States agencies using DFI funds. While
the Board welcomed steps already taken by the
Government of Iraq, it remains concerned about
significant unresolved control deficiencies.
Fourthly, some of Iraq’s oil resources were not
accounted for in the DFI and were smuggled. Without a
comprehensive oil metering system, it is difficult to
control smuggling. The Board has welcomed a number
of controls that have been put in place and has called
for the Government of Iraq to enhance these measures
to curtail smuggling.
Fifthly, the Board objected to certain contractual
practices using DFI funds. A series of special audits,
commissioned at the request of the Board, revealed a

07-65065

number of exceptions from normal procurement
procedures.
Sixthly, subsequently, other audit reports,
including those produced by the Board of Supreme
Audit, the United States Government Accountability
Office and the United States Special Inspector General
for Iraq Reconstruction, also pointed to similar
weaknesses and confirmed the concerns expressed by
the Board.
I now turn to the Committee of Financial Experts.
The Iraqi Council of Ministers has established a
Committee of Financial Experts to prepare for the time
when the Board’s functions will need to be undertaken
solely by the Government of Iraq, upon the dissolution
of the IAMB. The Committee has participated in the
IAMB’s activities and has worked alongside the Board
to oversee the 2007 interim audit. The Committee has
also participated in the two most recent meetings of the
Board, held in June and November 2007.
With regard to the ongoing audits, the External
Auditor is acting under the terms of reference agreed at
the June 2007 meeting. Accordingly, it is anticipated
that the Board will receive the results of the 2007 audit
during the first half of 2008 and, at that time, will
review the reports accordingly.
That completes my briefing. I will be happy to
respond to any questions that members of the Council
may have.
The President: I thank Mr. Sach for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Sach for his briefing, which highlighted
various aspects of the workings of the Development
Fund for Iraq (DFI) and of the International Advisory
and Monitoring Board (IAMB), of which he is a
member. We believe that the briefing was extremely
useful because of the transparency of the process. The
Russian delegation supports the conclusions and
recommendations presented by Mr. Sach, particularly
with regard to improving the effectiveness of the
verification process.
As for the briefing by the representative of the
Secretary-General, we have some brief comments to
make and one wish to express.

3

S/PV.5808

As members are aware, the Secretary-General, in
accordance with a decision taken by the Security
Council, must submit to the Council regular reports by
his representative to the IAMB. We wish to recall that
the last such document was received in June 2006. We
note that the DFI and the IAMB were not officially
established by the Security Council. Paragraph 12 of
resolution 1483 (2003) states that the Council notes the
establishment of the Fund and looks forward to the
early meeting of the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board. The Board, in turn, must facilitate
the implementation of resolution 1483 (2003). It
proceeds from that logic that United Nations Member
States are entitled to receive reports about the activities
of
the
financial
structures
facilitating
the
implementation of important Security Council
decisions.
Now to our wish. During the discussions in
preparing the resolution to extend the mandates of the
multinational force, the DFI and the IAMB, a number
of delegations referred to the possibility of organizing,
in the near future, a briefing on DFI activities in
Washington, at the headquarters of the International
Monetary Fund, which currently chairs the Board. We
believe that that sort of idea could be useful,
particularly in terms of the transparency of the process.
Such a briefing could be held for representatives of
embassies of Security Council member States in
Washington. Russia is interested in organizing such a
meeting. If there are no objections from our Council
colleagues, we wish to propose to Mr. Sach that he
represent the United Nations in the IAMB and that he
take the steps necessary to organize such a briefing at
the beginning of next year.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
now put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

4

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1790 (2007).
I now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the adoption of this resolution
to extend through 2008 the authorities for the
multinational force — Iraq (MNF-I), the Development
Fund for Iraq (DFI) and the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board (IAMB).
During the past year, there have been significant
and positive developments in Iraq. Iraqis should be
proud of their efforts, which have resulted in decreased
violence, improved essential services and greater
engagement with the Middle East region and the world.
We are pleased that the Council has chosen today
to support the request of the Government of Iraq to
sustain that momentum and to extend those mandates.
This vote complements the decision taken by the
Council last August to expand the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the
launching of the International Compact with Iraq last
May in Sharm el-Sheikh. Together, those actions signal
that the international community recognizes that what
happens in Iraq has profound consequences for us all
and that the Iraqis’ striving to establish a stable,
peaceful and prosperous democracy merits our
continued support. They also signal the progress that
the Iraqi people and Government have made on the
path towards economic and security self-reliance. I call
on the Iraqi leaders to make similar progress with
regard to national reconciliation.
The Government of the United States is proud of
its role in helping Iraq combat the challenges of
terrorism and other violent acts besetting the country.
We believe that the extension of these Council
mandates is critical, as these authorities provide a
framework for the international community to sustain
its support for the people and the Government of Iraq
as they work to consolidate and extend the gains made
this year. In particular, this resolution will enable the
MNF-I to continue to participate in the maintenance of
security and stability in Iraq; it will enable the DFI to
continue to ensure that the Government’s revenues are
used for the benefit of the Iraqi people; and it will
enable the IAMB to continue to provide critical
oversight, advisory and monitoring functions.

07-65065

S/PV.5808

In conclusion, I should like to restate the
commitment of the United States to work in
collaboration with the Government of Iraq in order to
help Iraq achieve the objectives that it has set for itself
as an independent and sovereign State.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): The
resolution that we have adopted today is a unanimous
response by the Security Council to a request from the
Government of Iraq. The resolution recognizes the
Iraqi request to retain the presence of the multinational
force (MNF) in Iraq and extends for 12 months that
force’s mandate on the terms set out in resolution 1546
(2004), as well as the arrangements for the
Development Fund for Iraq and the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board. The resolution comes
with the assurance that the Iraqi Government may, at
any time, seek a review of the arrangements or, indeed,
the termination of the MNF’s mandate.
The United Kingdom will continue working in
close partnership with the Iraqi Government, both
bilaterally and as a contributor to the multinational
forces.
On 16 December, last Sunday, security
responsibility for Basra province passed from the
MNF-I to Iraqi control. Basra was the last of the four
southern provinces of Iraq previously under the
security control of the United Kingdom-led
Multinational Division South-East and the Iraqi
authorities now have security responsibility and control
in nine out of Iraq’s 18 provinces.
Handing back lead responsibility for security in
Basra to the Iraqi Government is not the end of the
United Kingdom’s involvement in Iraq or in the south.
We are determined to fulfil our obligations and
commitments to the Government and the people of
Iraq. United Kingdom forces will continue to operate
in an overwatch capacity, providing training, mentoring
and advice into the future, retaining the capability to
re-intervene in support of the Iraqi security forces, if
required. We will take a decision in spring of next year
on the next phase of our military presence.
As security continues to improve, we are
continuing our efforts to promote effective economic
governance in the south and are stepping up our work
to support investment and business activity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.

07-65065

Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to congratulate you for assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month and to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia, for his successful presidency last month. I
would also like to express my gratitude to the
non-permanent members of the Security Council whose
membership concludes at the end of this month, and to
congratulate the new members of the Council, wishing
them every success in their work in the Council.
It is an honour for me to address the Council on
this historic day, as it adopts, upon the request of my
Government, the resolution for the extension of the
mandate of the multinational forces in Iraq for the last
time.
The last few months have been a decisive test for
the commitment and courage of the Government and
the people of Iraq in their efforts to establish a stable
democratic system in an exceptionally difficult
environment. Iraq has completed the establishment of
its constitutional and legal institutions and now
possesses a permanent constitution, voted upon by the
people of Iraq, a parliament representing all different
social segments of society and a national unity
Government consisting of all political parties.
The Government of Iraq has made enormous
strides towards the day when a self-sustaining Iraqi
security force would be able to provide security to the
Iraqi people. While Iraqis remain grateful to all
friendly countries that assisted in the liberation of Iraq
from the previous tyrant and dictator, Saddam Hussein,
no Iraqi Government official — indeed, no Iraqi
citizen — wants the presence of foreign troops on Iraqi
soil one day longer than they are needed. The presence
of the multinational forces in Iraq today, and for the
coming year, is essential to accomplish the mission
they started when Iraq was liberated.
It is also necessary to mention here what was
accomplished on 16 December 2007, namely, the
handover of security responsibility to the Iraqi
Government in Basra province, the second largest in
Iraq and the ninth province to be handed over to the
Iraqi Government by the multinational forces. This
handover is a positive indication that the Iraqi forces
are capable of assuming control over the important city
of Basra.
I would like to concentrate on the main
challenges facing Iraq. One such challenge is terrorism,

5

S/PV.5808

which is placing a heavy burden on the Government
and the people of Iraq. The security plans carried out
by the Iraqi army and the national security forces with
the assistance of the multinational forces have
contributed to surrounding the terrorists in isolated
pockets in Iraq. The remnants of Al-Qaida along with
their allies have suffered continued defeats, which is
clearly reflected in a tangibly improved security
situation in Iraq and a decline in the levels and number
of terrorist activities, together with a reduction in the
threat of civil war in the country.
We look forward to Iraq’s playing an active role
in achieving stability and security in the Middle East.
Iraq aspires to become an arena where all parties can
engage in dialogue rather than a region for settling
issues. Towards that end, we initiated the neighbouring
countries’ meeting and hosted the American-Iranian
dialogue in Baghdad.
The Government of Iraq has also signed a
declaration of principles with the United States with a
view to establishing a long-term cooperative and
friendly relationship between the two countries.
Establishing stability and security in Iraq reflects
positively on the security and stability of the whole
region and will contribute to the enhancement of
international peace and stability.
The Government of Iraq continues its efforts to
achieve national reconciliation, ensure expanded
political participation of all national political forces,
guarantee respect for human rights and the supremacy
of law, achieve economic growth, and provide basic
services for the Iraqi people. The Iraqi Government is
working towards the adoption of ambitious plans to
rebuild its economy on a sound and modern basis,
which would enable the Iraqi economy to contribute
effectively to the international economy.
Towards that end, the Iraqi Government, in
partnership with the United Nations, is working to
implement the initiative of the International Compact
with Iraq, which is contributing to the enhancement
and strengthening of national and international
counter-obligations in the political and economic fields
and in the areas of the rule of law, the promotion and
protection of human rights and the establishment of
democracy.
The continued efforts of the Iraqi Government
have resulted in activating a national dialogue and
reconciliation process and in disseminating tolerance,
moderation and brotherhood. The Government also
succeeded in preventing a sectarian war which had

6

threatened the whole country. It has supervised a
number of conferences to promote national
reconciliation, including conferences of Iraqi tribes,
political
forces,
civil
society
organizations,
intellectuals and army officers, in addition to
conferences held outside Iraq.
The Government has also sent delegations to
meet with political figures and parties in several
countries in the region. Among the main results of the
national reconciliation process is the openness and
cooperation with Iraqi tribes which has had a positive
influence in eliminating terrorist organizations and in
restoring Government control and the rule of law. The
provincial support councils, which emerged from the
national reconciliation process, are a pioneering
exercise in combating terrorism and a reflection of the
Government’s strategy of not relying solely on the
military option in the handling the security situation.
The Government also succeeded in recruiting
350,000 volunteers in the army and security forces in
Iraq. It has also made progress in training and
equipping those forces and has recruited 27,500 tribal
members to combat Al-Qaida fighters. Members of a
number of factions that have split from Al-Qaida in
Baghdad and served other provinces and that have
joined training centres total more than 14,178
individuals. The Iraqi Government has also
reintegrated 73,622 officers and soldiers from
previously dismantled ministries into different Iraqi
ministries, in addition to reintegrating 21,893 officers
and soldiers into the military services. It has also reemployed 2,586 members of the previous security
institutions into the new Ministry of Interior.
It should also be mentioned that the joint efforts
of the Iraqi and multinational forces over the last few
months have resulted in the return of 6,000 displaced
families to their homes. The joint efforts between the
forces have also resulted in the killing and detention of
the main leadership of Al-Qaida, the takeover of
thousands of weapons and ammunition depots, the
ending of sectarian killing and forced displacement all
over Iraq, the reduction of violence in Baghdad and
other provinces by more than 75 per cent, and the
tracking down of militias and all other outlaws. In
addition, the capacity and capability of the Iraqi army
and police have increased with respect to numbers and
equipment through the efforts of the Ministries of
Interior and Defence.
Despite the apparent improvement in the security
situation, we realize that Iraq needs still more time and

07-65065

S/PV.5808

continued intensive efforts to enable our armed forces
to take over the security responsibilities from the
multinational forces in all of the country, as they
continue to play a very important role in supporting
and backing our troops in combating terrorism, militias
and outlaws.
My Government, while reaffirming the
importance of the role of the multinational forces,
alongside our national forces, in contributing to the
efforts to establish security and the rule of law,
requests that the Security Council consider extending
the mandate of the multinational force in the light of
Iraq’s achievements over the past few years, namely
the strengthened capacity of its army and security
forces and significant successes in the security,
political and economic spheres. This progress calls for
a review of the role and authority of the MNF in order
to strike a balance between the need to extend the
mandate of the force one last time and the progress
made by Iraq in the area of security. It is also essential
for the Iraqi Government to be treated as that of an
independent and fully sovereign State.
My Government would also like to emphasize
that it welcomes today’s resolution on the
understanding that the functions of recruiting, training,
arming and equipping the Iraqi army and Iraq’s
security forces are the responsibility of the Iraqi
Government. The Government would also assume
responsibility for command and control of all Iraqi
forces; the MNF, in coordination with the Iraqi
Government, would provide support and backing to
those forces. The Iraqi Government would also be
responsible for arrest, detention and imprisonment
tasks; when those tasks are carried out by the MNF,
there will be maximum levels of coordination,
cooperation and understanding with the Iraqi
Government.
We welcome this resolution on the understanding
that it is the final extension of the mandate of the MNF
and expect that, in future, the Security Council will be
able to deal with the situation in Iraq without the need
for action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. My Government also welcomes the
reflection in the resolution of its request to include
language reaffirming respect for the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and
reaffirming further the importance of the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of Iraq.
We believe that the provisions of resolution 1546
(2004) on the deposit of proceeds into the

07-65065

Development Fund for Iraq (DFI) will help to ensure
that proceeds from Iraq’s natural resources are used to
serve the interests of the Iraqi people. The role played
by the International Advisory and Monitoring Board
serves the same purpose. We recognize that the DFI
plays an important role in helping Iraq to convince
donors and creditors that it is managing its resources
and debts in a reasonable way, in the interest of the
Iraqi people. Towards that end, the Government of Iraq
has requested the Security Council to continue to apply
the provisions of paragraph 22 of resolution 1483
(2003) until 31 December 2008, including in respect of
the funds, financial assets, and economic resources
described in paragraph 23 of resolution 1483 (2003).
Before concluding, I would like to stress that for
Iraq to achieve its goals, development programmes and
reconstruction, Iraq must be capable of advancing
itself; it should release itself from the legacy of the
former regime and be liberated from its financial
burdens. Iraq is still suffering from the heavy burden of
compensation for the invasion of Kuwait by the
Saddam regime, and it remains in need of the support
of the international community and donor countries.
Iraq has paid large sums, which add up to more than
$22 billion — and it continues to pay.
In this regard, I would like to highlight the letter
of the Prime Minister annexed to the resolution, in
which he requested the Security Council to review its
resolutions relating to the deposit of 5 per cent of
Iraq’s proceeds from oil into the Compensation Fund
with a view to reducing that percentage as much as
possible. The deposit of such a high percentage creates
a financial burden for the Iraqi people at a time when it
is in dire need of those funds to rebuild its
infrastructure. Furthermore, the increase in oil prices
means that the real amount represented by that 5 per
cent is at least five times what it was.
Finally, allow me to express our gratitude and
appreciation to all members of the Security Council, to
the United Nations and to all friendly and brotherly
countries who have assisted the Government and the
people of Iraq in ending long decades of dictatorship
and injustice and in building a democratic, federal and
prosperous Iraq in which generations will enjoy the
fruits of security, stability and prosperity.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

7
