\

A /73/PV.107

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

107th plenary meeting

Monday, 16 September 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolutions (A/73/L.117 and A/73/L.120)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jamaica to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.117.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): It is my distinct honour to
present draft resolution A/73/L.117, under agenda item
14, on the International Labour Organization (ILO)
Centenary Declaration for the Future of Work, also
known as the Centenary Declaration, which was adopted
by the International Labour Conference at its 108th
session on 21 June. The draft resolution was introduced
by Belgium and Jamaica as co-chairs of the Group of
Friends of Decent Work for Sustainable Development.
The Centenary Declaration highlights the need
to ensure a just transition to the future of work while
harnessing the fullest potential of technological
progress and productivity growth, including through
the critical role of social dialogue and international
labour standards. It stresses the importance of
promoting the acquisition of skills, competencies and
qualifications for all workers throughout their working
lives and emphasizes the role of the private sector as a
principal source of economic growth and job creation.

It reminds us all that promoting workers’ rights is key to
the attainment of inclusive and sustainable growth and
that achieving gender equality at work is of the utmost
priority. The shift to a human-centred approach is vital
to building a future that is sustainable, equitable, just
and inclusive.
The draft resolution welcomes the adoption of
the ILO Centenary Declaration in the context of the
implementation of the Agenda 2030 for Sustainable
Development and Addis Ababa Action Agenda of
the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development and calls for its implementation. It
welcomes with appreciation the positive contributions
that the International Labour Organization, including
its constituents — namely Governments, employers
and workers — have made during its century of work.
It stresses that full and productive employment and
decent work for all are key elements of sustainable
development and should remain a priority objective of
both national policies and international cooperation.
It recognizes the particular relevance of the ILO
Centenary Declaration to informing the work of the
United Nations system in shaping a people-centred
approach to the future of work and encourages active
dialogue and collaboration among various components
of the system, including with employers’ and workers’
organizations, the private sector, civil society and other
non-governmental organizations.
The draft resolution provides a platform for
cooperation and policy coherence within the United
Nations system by requesting United Nations funds,
programmes, specialized agencies and financial

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-28180 (E)

*1928180*

A/73/PV.107

institutions to continue to mainstream the goals of full
and productive employment and decent work for all in
their policies. The draft resolution also encourages the
integration of the policy contents of the ILO Centenary
Declaration into the work of United Nations country
teams as part of the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework, as appropriate
and according to national priorities. The adoption
of the draft resolution will contribute to the further
strengthening of multilateralism, while enhancing
the critical role of social dialogue and international
labour standards.
With this draft resolution, we encourage Member
States to consider applying the principles set out in the
Centenary Declaration at the national level in an effort
to promote policy coherence around the promotion of
full and productive employment and decent work for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Gabon to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.120.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): Draft
resolution A/73/L.120, which is before the General
Assembly this morning, is the fourth on the issue
of tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife, which is
indicative of the international community’s resolve to
effectively combat and eradicate this phenomenon. As
Members know, the President of the Republic of Gabon,
His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, attaches
particular importance to these repeated resolutions,
reflecting Gabon’s commitment to pursuing advocacy
for this cause, together with other nations, especially
Germany. Allow me to thank my friend Ambassador
Heusgen of Germany, who has worked tirelessly in our
common quest to put an end to poaching.
(spoke in English)
Allow me to express once again, on behalf of
Gabon and Germany, our gratitude to everyone
who took part in the achievement of this successful
outcome. Co-sponsored by Gabon, Germany and more
than 50 countries, the draft resolution, to be adopted by
consensus, is, we hope, tangible proof of the success
that we, the United Nations Members States, can
achieve together when working on matters of common
interest. We would like to express our sincere gratitude
to the Secretary-General and his team for the report
on tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife (A/73/947),
which provides very valuable information based on
extensive research. Special thanks go to United Nations
2/29

16/09/2019

Office on Drugs and Crime Executive Director Yury
Fedotov, Jorge Eduardo Rios and his team for their
great work.
Gabon and Germany have for years now been
raising awareness of and calling the international
community’s attention to the urgency of finding
common ground and concerted responses in order
to eradicate illicit trafficking in view of its negative
impact upon our societies, national economies,
ecosystems and national security. In fact, with regard
to national security, illicit trafficking in wildlife boosts
the activities of non-State groups as well as rebels in
many regions of the world. As such, it constitutes a
serious threat to stability. In addition, the growth in
online trade and cybercrime in the context of illicit
trafficking constitutes a new form of threat to State
security, which requires innovative strategies and
increased intergovernmental cooperation. With the
present draft resolution, we have once again made
important progress in addressing these challenges.
With regard to the Earth’s ecosystem and
environment, illicit trafficking leads to disparity in
biodiversity and its subsequent consequences. We are
facing a destructive level of species extinction and
endangerment, putting the diversity in our ecosystem
under threat. The draft resolution that is to be adopted
today shows the link between trafficking in wildlife,
protection of different species and biodiversity. As for
our national economies — and Gabon has been pointing
this out — this phenomenon hampers investments,
notably in regions where illicit and criminal activities,
such as trafficking in small arms, are being carried out.
Last but not least, illicit trafficking negatively
impacts our well-being. The draft resolution therefore
puts a new light on the role of wildlife protection in
the creation of sustainable livelihoods and emphasizes
the need to develop context-specific solutions for
sustainable and resilient coexistence between humans
and wildlife.
Gabon and Germany, along with the Group
of Friends, encourage Member States to ratify the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species and Wild Fauna and Flora, welcome the
efforts made by the Group of 20, and further commend
the efforts by the African Union translated into the
implementation of the African Strategy on Combating
Illegal Exploitation and Illegal Trade in Wild Fauna
and Flora. The adoption of draft resolution A/73/L.120
19-28180

16/09/2019

A/73/PV.107

will undoubtedly strengthen the legal proceedings of
our respective States as well as policies on sustainable
development by exploring alternatives that would be
beneficial to rural communities affected by poaching
and illicit trafficking.

The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt
draft resolution A/73/L.120?

I would like to conclude by encouraging all
Member States to efficiently cooperate with the
United Nations specialized agencies in implementing
the recommendations contained in the present draft
resolution. Once again, Gabon and Germany, on
behalf of the Group of Friends, would like to thank
all delegations that actively participated in a spirit
of compromise and flexibility in bringing this draft
resolution to success.

The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to delegations in explanation of position, may
I remind delegations that explanations are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by the delegations from
their seats.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolutions A/73/L.117
and A/73/L.120, one by one.
We first turn to draft resolution A/73/L.117,
entitled “International Labour Organization Centenary
Declaration for the Future of Work”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/73/L.117?
Draft resolution A/73/L.117
(resolution 73/342).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.120,
entitled “Tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/73/L.120: Albania, Angola, Benin,
Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, the
Central African Republic, Chad, the Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cyprus, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Haiti, Israel, Kiribati, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Mali, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Panama, the
Philippines, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
South Sudan, the Sudan, Tunisia, Ukraine, the United
States of America and Zambia.

Draft resolution A/73/L.120
(resolution 73/343).

was

adopted

Mr. Smith (United States of America): We would
like to thank the facilitators, Belgium and Jamaica,
for their leadership on the resolution just adopted on
the International Labour Organization Centenary
Declaration (resolution 73/342).
Today, the United States is pleased to join consensus.
We agree that full and productive employment and
decent work for all our key elements of sustainable
development. As we noted at the Centenary Declaration’s
adoption on 21 June, the United States dissociates itself
from certain issues in the Declaration, and with regard
to our concerns with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Addis Ababa Action Agenda as well
as the term “inclusive economic growth”, we refer
delegations to the general statement we delivered in the
Second Committee on 8 November 2018.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of position following
the adoption of resolution 73/342.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): The European
Union and its member States are pleased to again
co-sponsor resolution 73/343, on tackling illicit
trafficking in wildlife. The resolution addresses a major
form of trafficking that continues to be one of the most
profitable forms of organized crime, with devastating
effects on biodiversity and livelihoods, as well as on
security and stability in some parts of the world. A year
before the United Nations summit on biodiversity and
the conference that will agree on the post-2020 global
biodiversity framework, this resolution is an important
contribution to better tackling one of the many drivers
of biodiversity loss. This year’s reiteration of the
resolution contains updated language on important
elements, reflecting findings of the United Nations
report that range from the links to financial crime to the
need for more research on reducing consumer demand
for illegally traded wildlife products.

19-281803/29

A/73/PV.107

We particularly welcome references to the
2019 assessment report of the Intergovernmental
Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services. While we strongly support the substance
of the resolution with regard to wildlife trafficking,
we would like to express our concern with regard to
language such as that in the thirteenth preambular
paragraph. We agree with the call for holistic and
integrated approaches to sustainable development that
will guide humanity to live in harmony with nature and
restore the health and integrity of the Earth’s ecosystem,
which is in line with the 2050 Vision of the Convention
on Biological Diversity. However, the selective quote
of the Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2) that
that would contribute to the creation of a shared future
based upon our common humanity is not clear. It is
partly tautological and, without the wider context of the
Declaration, appears to echo politically driven language
from one Member State. It is therefore inappropriate
to include it in a United Nations text. The terminology
does not reflect internationally agreed principles
and should therefore not constitute a precedent for
other resolutions.
In conclusion, we call on all Member States and
relevant stakeholders to fully and swiftly implement the
commitments made in the resolution and to continue
international cooperation and information-sharing in
order to tackle the organized criminal networks involved.
For our part, we will continue to do so in line with the
European Union action plan on wildlife trafficking.
Mr. Smith (United States of America): The United
States is pleased today to once again co-sponsor the
important resolution 73/343, on illicit trafficking.
Wildlife trafficking threatens what we value,
our governance structures and the rule of law. It
undermines economic prosperity and the livelihoods of
communities, encourages corruption, spreads disease
and pushes species to the brink of extinction.
The United States is pleased to see the addition
of some of today’s most pressing wildlife trafficking
challenges, in particular the inclusion of pangolins, the
most trafficked mammal species. The United States
remains committed to fighting the scourge and to
stopping the criminals who profit from this illegal trade.
The United States greatly appreciates the efforts
of the facilitators and Member States that actively
participated in the negotiations and displayed their
sincere commitment to finding a compromise and to
4/29

16/09/2019

making progress on this important issue. However,
we were disappointed that not all Member States
approached the negotiations in a similar spirit of good
faith and compromise. We regret that we were not able
to make progress in modernizing and updating outdated
language that not only lacks any connection to the topic
of the resolution but which the United States and many
other Member States have repeatedly made clear is
inappropriate for inclusion in multilateral settings.
We join consensus today because we place great
importance on combating wildlife trafficking. In the
future, we hope to see a common commitment to a
spirit of compromise and flexibility by our fellow
Member States.
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese Government has attached great importance
to the protection of wildlife. We have actively
participated in the international cooperation to combat
illicit trafficking in wildlife. We have banned the trade
in ivory, rhino, tiger and related products.
In line with United Nations resolutions and the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, we have established
a compliance and enforcement coordination group
and the system of a trade ministers’ joint meeting
on combating this illicit trade. We have striven to
increase domestic control and monitoring as well as
international cooperation.
Combating illicit trafficking in wildlife is a common
challenge facing the international community. In order
to overcome the problem, we should address the root
causes and strive to find effective solutions in order to
identify and overcome those causes. We should also
focus on poverty reduction and economic development.
While protecting wildlife and tackling illicit
trafficking, in the light of the needs of developing
countries the international community should help such
countries to develop their economies, improve people’s
livelihoods and avoid providing fertile ground for the
poaching of wildlife and illegal trade in flora, thereby
fundamentally tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife.
An uneven emphasis on market drivers and rectifying
consumer behaviour addresses only the symptoms of
the issue. Developed countries should provide financial,
technical and capacity-building support to developing
countries so as to help them better protect wildlife and
actively build effective partnership.
19-28180

16/09/2019

A/73/PV.107

We have just adopted by consensus resolution
73/343, on tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife. That
will help to send a positive signal to the international
community that we will do a better job. We are against
the politicization of United Nations topics, since that
will not be conducive towards enhanced cooperation
on tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife on the United
Nations platform. We hope that in future sponsors will
leave sufficient time for consultations so that more
developing countries can participate. China looks
forward to increased cooperation with all relevant
stakeholders and hopes that we can better tackle illicit
trafficking in wildlife. We hope to build a community
of a shared future for humankind that promotes
harmonious coexistence among humans and nature.

the world. It is also sorely needed. It is happening at a
time when the world is being torn apart by divisions,
mistrust, hate speech and the loss of what brings
us together, our humanity. This initiative offers us
something that can glue us back together, that can
once again tie us to human values, cooperation and
multilateralism, and that is what is needed most in the
world today — which is to learn to live in peace, by
peace and for peace. That is the spirit that has inspired
this initiative in a country with different religious and
ethnic backgrounds, a garden of many beliefs and many
faiths, but with one purpose under the sun. From its
people’s many differences, they have learned to live
together, respect one another and cherish what binds
them together — their Lebanon.

The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of position after the vote.

The President of the Lebanese Republic launched
this initiative establishing an academy from this
very rostrum two years ago in 2017. Draft resolution
A/73/L.107 now has more than 175 sponsors, a number
that is a testament to our collective willingness to
strengthen our core values. I want to thank every
country that has sponsored the draft resolution,
especially the member States of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the countries of the Group
of Asia-Pacific States that have endorsed the initiative.
But I also want to thank all who promised to vote in
favour of the draft resolution, those who may withhold
their vote and even those who will vote against it.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 14?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/73/L.107)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.107.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Peace be upon us all.
Before I start, on behalf of Lebanon I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for all your support and
help in this process. I would also like to thank you for
your leadership of the Assembly over the past year. You
led with dignity, talent, understanding and love for the
United Nations and its peoples.
I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.107, entitled “Academy for Human Encounters
and Dialogue”. It is an initiative by President Michael
Aoun of Lebanon designed to give Lebanon, the region
and the world a new space where peace, dialogue,
understanding and a culture of peace can exist and
thrive. It will happen in a place that has known glory
but has also known pain, that has experienced war but
has learned to turn swords into ploughshares. It will
flourish in a place that introduced the alphabet, cedar
trees, the colour purple and Gibran Khalil Gibran to

We are all here because we believe in peace, but we
differ on the road that will take us there. I still hope that
everyone will vote in favour of the draft resolution. The
members’ support will be a vote for peace and a human
encounter that is different from the one we see today.
The members of the Assembly give us hope. The draft
resolution before us today consists of 11 preambular
and three operative paragraphs. It recalls all the
relevant resolutions pertaining to a culture of peace
and welcomes the initiative to establish the Academy
for Human Encounters and Dialogue in Beirut. It
encourages the Secretary-General and the relevant
United Nations agencies to support, within existing
resources and in accordance with their respective
mandates, the efforts to establish the Academy. I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly
and Member States for enriching the draft resolution
with their active participation and constructive input
during the three informal consultations and bilateral
negotiations. I would like to add that the negotiations
were conducted in a transparent and open manner.

19-281805/29

A/73/PV.107

16/09/2019

Lebanon remains a beacon of coexistence despite
its difficulties and history. We, the Lebanese people,
have learned the hard way that there is no alternative to
dialogue for resolving conflicts. We have learned that,
and now we want to share our experience and teach it
to our children and the children of the world who are
interested, because peace should be taught like any
other discipline. We call on everyone to support this
initiative by voting in favour of this draft resolution,
which seeks to further contribute to our collective
efforts to achieve a culture of peace in line with the
ideals promoted in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. I thank
the Assembly and count on everyone to promote peace
in Lebanon, our region and our world because our
existence depends on it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/73/L.107, entitled “Academy for Human Encounters
and Dialogue”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution,
and in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.107: Albania,
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, the Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, the Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, the
Republic of Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, the Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho,
6/29

Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, the Niger,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, the State of
Palestine, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
the United Arab Emirates, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The President (spoke in Spanish): A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
19-28180

16/09/2019

Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Draft resolution A/73/L.107 was adopted by 165
votes to 2 (resolution 73/344).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Oman informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to those wishing to speak in explanation of
vote after the voting, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): The
United States appreciates Lebanon’s regional role with
respect to religious freedom and diversity. While we
commend its commitment to tolerance and interfaith
dialogue, resolution 73/344 is problematic for a number
of reasons, and unfortunately we cannot support it.
The United States cannot support resolutions that
highlight specific initiatives of particular Member
States or leaders, as that practice detracts from the
General Assembly’s credibility and focus in addressing
global challenges. The resolution that has just been
adopted proposes the establishment of an institution
in Lebanon that is endorsed by the United Nations but
stands outside United Nations association mechanisms.
Resolution 73/344 offers neither a precise plan of
operations nor specifics regarding the mandate of the
Academy for Human Encounters and Dialogue. While
we appreciate the facilitator’s efforts to informally

A/73/PV.107

provide clarifying details, the resolution itself remains
problematically vague.
Finally, we remain concerned that implementing the
resolution may require resources to be drawn away from
other important initiatives of the Secretary-General
and United Nations specialized agencies without an
appropriate budgetary or prioritization process. The
United States therefore voted no on the resolution.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): The preamble to resolution
73/344 addresses the need to promote education for
peace, universal coexistence among peoples, and
respect for the life, dignity and integrity of human
beings. Those are all values that Israel strongly
supports and seeks to promote. However, it is not
enough to adopt a resolution containing words such as
“peace”, “tolerance”, “dialogue” and “diversity”. Those
are values that have to be lived. Lebanon, the sponsor
of the resolution, acts in stark contrast to those words.
To start with, it has a recognized terrorist organization
inside its Government. It allows Hizbullah to turn
Lebanon into a launching pad for attacks on Israel and
works with Iran to develop precision-guided missiles. It
is also a nation that prosecutes individuals for peaceful
speech and has archaic laws that make child marriage
and marital rape legal. Does that sound like a nation
committed to a culture of peace and human dignity?
Unlike other Member States that work to promote
a global agenda, the primary purpose of Lebanon’s
resolution is to promote its President. In its eleventh
preambular paragraph, the resolution expresses its
“appreciation to the President of Lebanon for his
efforts to strengthen the role of Lebanon as a centre
of dialogue and diversity”.
A centre of dialogue? Tell that to the Lebanese
people, who live in a country where criticizing the
President is a criminal offence punishable by up to
three years in prison. As for diversity, if you believe
that mixing Hizbullah terrorists and weapon caches
in civilian neighbourhoods is a measure of diversity,
then I suppose Lebanon is a model of diversity. It is the
height of hypocrisy to introduce a resolution supporting
human encounters and dialogue while at home Lebanon
suppresses free speech and degrades its citizens. Israel
voted against the resolution because we cannot endorse
such hypocrisy and will not support wasting the time of
the Assembly.

19-281807/29

A/73/PV.107

16/09/2019

The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution.

will address the high-level commemorative event to
mark the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, to be held on
25 September.

Mr. Salovaara (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.

In that connection, and as announced in letters from
the President circulated on 4 and 13 September, the
President proposes that as Ms. Yousafzai is unable to
attend this high-level commemorative event, it should
also feature a statement by Ms. Muzoon Almellehan,
the youngest UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador, and that
Ms. Almellehan should speak immediately after the
Secretary-General and before the Executive Director
of UNICEF. In order for the Assembly to take up this
proposal, it must first agree, under rule 81 of its rules
of procedure, to reconsider the provision contained in
paragraph 2 of resolution 73/301.

The European Union thanks Lebanon for presenting
resolution 73/344, which we have just adopted, and for
the exemplary way in which it conducted the informal
consultations. Cultural diversity and intercultural
dialogue are an integral part of the values of the European
Union and play an important role in the promotion of
human rights, tolerance and non-discrimination across
the world. They are at the core of our multilateral
system and are a source of stability, sustainable growth
and job creation. The European Union fully supports
all initiatives aimed at promoting those principles.
Mr. Beleffi (San Marino), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
The resolution is designed to inform the General
Assembly about the creation of the Academy for Human
Encounters and Dialogue in Lebanon and to ensure its
full cooperation with other structures already in place
at the United Nations level. We appreciate Lebanon’s
long-standing efforts to promote dialogue and tolerance,
and we welcome its resolve to encourage coherence on
the global stage. For these reasons, the members of the
EU voted in favour of the resolution.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 15?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 70 (continued)
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
The Acting President: Members will recall that, in
its resolution 73/301 of 20 June, the Assembly decided
that in addition to the participation of the President of
the General Assembly and the Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), Messenger of Peace Ms. Malala
Yousafzai, and representatives of Poland, as the
initiator of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
and the first Member State from each regional group
to have ratified the Convention, in a national capacity,
8/29

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
reconsider the provision contained in paragraph 2 of
resolution 73/301?
It was so decided (decision 73/562A).
The Acting President: May I also take it that the
General Assembly wishes to decide that the high-level
commemorative event will also feature a statement by
Ms. Almellehan and that she will speak immediately
after the Secretary-General and before the Executive
Director of UNICEF?
It was so decided (decision 73/562B).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 70 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Commemoration of the abolition of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade
Draft resolution (A/73/L.119)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.119.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): On behalf of the 14
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) member States, I
have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.119,
entitled “Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”. The
draft resolution is a procedural resolution with technical
19-28180

16/09/2019

A/73/PV.107

updates, in keeping with resolutions previously adopted
by the General Assembly. It once again underscores
the importance of continued educational outreach and
public awareness of the transatlantic slave trade and
slavery. It once again requests the Secretary-General
to organize a series of activities on an annual basis to
commemorate the International Day of Remembrance
of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave
Trade and to report thereon.
If I may, I would like to read out an oral revision
to paragraph 3 to correct the name of the office
administering the trust fund. “Office of Central
Support Services” should be replaced by “United
Nations Department of Operational Support”.
In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude to all Permanent Missions and observer
missions for the flexibility they displayed during
the consultation meetings last week. We value the
constructive engagement and spirit of compromise they
showed throughout the process. I also invite delegations
that have not yet done so to become sponsors of the draft
resolution. CARICOM looks forward to its adoption by
consensus, as in previous years.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.119, entitled
“Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the
victims of slavery and transatlantic slave trade”, as
orally revised.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.119, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Austria, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium,
Benin, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Canada, the Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Dominica, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mali,

Malta, Mauritius, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain,
the Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United Republic of Tanzania, the United States of
America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.119,
as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/73/L.119, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 73/345).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 121?
Agenda item 127
Multilingualism
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/761)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.114)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.114.
Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): I am
pleased to introduce, on behalf of the sponsors, draft
resolution A/73/L.114, on multilingualism, under
agenda item 127, at the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly.
Multilingualism, in addition to being a core value
of the United Nations, is also one of the engines of
multilateral diplomacy that contributes to the promotion
of the values ​​of the United Nations. It facilitates access
to information, promotes unity in diversity and protects
and preserves the richness of languages ​​and cultures
around the world. At the same time, multilingualism
has direct and tangible effects, helping to improve the
efficiency, results and transparency of our Organization.
First of all, this year’s draft resolution reiterates
our gratitude for the initiatives taken under the
leadership of the Coordinator for Multilingualism and

19-281809/29

A/73/PV.107

the designation of the Coordinator for Multilingualism
as lead entity on multilingualism at the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination level.
The draft resolution reiterates support for the ongoing
development of a Secretariat-wide coherent policy
framework on multilingualism, which is essential to
a comprehensive and coordinated approach within the
United Nations.
With regard to the role of the Department of
Global Communications in multilingualism, the draft
resolution requests the Secretary-General to ensure
the full implementation of existing mandates in the
area of multilingualism as they relate to information
and communication, and in this regard encourages the
Secretariat to explore the opportunities offered by the
new information and communications technologies.
At the same time, it requests the Secretary-General to
ensure that any decisions made by the Department of
Global Communications, including those justified by
budget limitations or reductions, do not undermine the
principles of multilingualism.
The text acknowledges the increasing importance
of social media in order to reach the widest possible
audience, and as such welcomes the growing popularity
of the United Nations official social media accounts, and
encourages the Department of Global Communications
to continue to expand, within existing resources, its
multilingual presence across outlets by providing timely
updates on the work and priorities of the Organization
in the six United Nations official languages, as well as
in other languages.
On the same subject, the draft resolution notes
the use of innovative translation technologies and
encourages, within existing resources, the Secretariat
to explore additional technologies for use by United
Nations entities with appropriate quality controls. At
the same time, it stresses that all the initiatives on
leveraging technology, including those introduced on
a trial basis, shall comply with the principle of parity
among the official languages of the Organization.
With regard to human resources management
and staff training, the draft resolution welcomes the
inclusion by the Secretary-General of a managerial
indicator related to multilingualism in all his compacts
with senior managers, including senior managers in the
field, requiring that all workplans and, where applicable,
mission plans and budgets integrate multilingualism
and/or language considerations.
10/29

16/09/2019

The draft resolution also welcomes the ongoing
harmonization exercise that aims to produce a
United Nations language framework ensuring greater
consistency in language learning, teaching and
assessment, and recognizes the key contribution of
the Language and Communications Programme to
promoting multilingualism within the United Nations.
Finally, the draft resolution acknowledges the
contribution of multilingualism to the three pillars of
the United Nations: peace and security, development
and human rights.
In short, the draft resolution on multilingualism
that we are introducing today seeks to promote and
strengthen the equality of the six official languages, as
well as the recognition of the importance of non-official
languages. I hope that we have succeeded in proving why
that is an essential element of multilateral diplomacy.
In conclusion, I would like to express Romania’s
sincere gratitude to all delegations for their active and
constructive engagement in the negotiation process. I
count on the support of all delegations for the adoption
of the draft resolution by consensus.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): It is a great honour for me to make this
statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of Spanish at
the United Nations. After arduous negotiations on draft
resolution A/73/L.114, which has brought us together
today, the Group of Friends of Spanish wishes to offer
its vision with regard to the status of the implementation
of multilingualism within the United Nations system
through the review of the various aspects related to the
services and use of relevant languages, including access
to information. Strengthening multilingual websites
and multilingual social media to ensure equality among
the official languages of the Organization bolsters
the democratization of international relations and the
promotion of the key values of the United Nations.
In that regard, we must underscore the context of
the economic reality on the financial shortcomings
that the Organization is experiencing. That has led to
a trend towards monolingualism, which increasingly
appears to be far from dying out, such as the almost
hegemonic use of one language — English — over the
other five official languages of the Organization.
The Group of Friends of Spanish believes that it
is crucial to ensure the effectiveness of monitoring the
controls and that the equality of the six official languages
19-28180

16/09/2019

is fully upheld. We also believe that it is crucial that
multilingualism be fully implemented, which is
ultimately a shared and collective responsibility, given
that Member States are called upon to promote its use
as a means of protecting and preserving linguistic and
cultural diversity at the global level.
The protection and promotion of multilingualism
as a crucial value of our Organization are linked to the
goal of strengthening all its work and, of course, its
continuing impact. Our Group, comprising 20 Spanishspeaking countries from three different continents,
believes that the cross-cutting nature of multilingualism
is the solid basis for genuine multilateral dialogue as the
very essence of the United Nations based on respect,
equality, the promotion of multiculturalism, inclusion,
diversity and international peace.
In that context, we highlight the fact that the
content of public information and communication is at
the heart of the strategic vision of the United Nations.
We believe that it is crucial that the improvement of
communications and the culture of transparency
must be a priority at all levels of the Organization so
as to fully inform the peoples of the world about the
objectives, activities and results achieved by the United
Nations, pursuant to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Indeed, multilingualism
must clearly ensure coherent communication consistent
with the commitment of reflecting and equalizing
linguistic and cultural diversity as an obligation of the
Organization, enhancing the impact of its daily work,
not only as a matter of efficiency but also as a question
of global necessity, bearing in mind the demand for
content in each of the official languages.
In that regard, we again highlight the importance
of Spanish as the second most widely spoken language
in the world and its impact on United Nations work and
that it is the second most consulted language of the
United Nations web page, accounting for 28 per cent
of web users in 2018. However, despite such ongoing
demand, only 32 per cent of the information published
on the United Nations website is available in Spanish.
That is why we urge the Secretariat to take measures to
increase the amount of content available in our language,
including through equitable distribution among the six
official languages within the available resources.
We also recognize the key importance of
multilingualism, which complements international
cooperation by strengthening consistency among

A/73/PV.107

the three pillars of the United Nations — peace and
security, development and human rights — all the more
so at a time when the United Nations is going through a
substantial reform.
We note with concern that the recruitment and
management of human resources in most departments
and offices continue for the most part to be in two
languages: English and French. Furthermore, in
addition to generating documents in the six official
languages, it is also important that existing documents
be regularly updated. For example, the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management should
ensure that the notes for the presiding officers of the
main organs and subsidiary bodies be available in the
official language of the United Nations spoken by the
presiding officer of the particular meeting.
In that regard, the Group of Friends of Spanish
believes it crucial to include in the current draft
resolution the reference to 2019 as the International
Year of Indigenous Languages, thereby serving to
raise awareness of the need to preserve, revitalize
and promote the use of such languages throughout
the world. The Group of Friends of Spanish also
recognizes the work undertaken by the Department
of Global Communications to provide documents and
high-quality services in the six official languages. We
also underscore the role of the United Nations centres
of information in that regard, given the positive impact
of the use of local languages on the dissemination
of information.
For all of these reasons, the Group once again
reiterates its concern about the financial limitations
that could affect all departments involved in this issue,
in particular the provision of services in Spanish,
reaffirming the trend towards monolingualism. In that
regard, the consideration of drafting a strategic action
plan for the reallocation of resources that prioritize the
issue of multilingualism is of paramount importance
and efforts to that end must be made in light of the
fact that the implementation of multilingualism is a
collective and shared responsibility.
In conclusion, we stress that multilingualism is
an essential factor for communication among peoples,
as it promotes tolerance and ensures the broader and
more effective participation of society. The Group
of Friends of Spanish therefore once again reiterates
its commitment and readiness to strive and work
constructively to constantly improve the valuable

19-2818011/29

A/73/PV.107

efforts provided by the United Nations Department of
Global Communications.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 127.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/73/L.114, entitled “Multilingualism”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/73/L.114: Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada,
the Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, the Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czechia, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Gabon, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia,
Jordan, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Panama,
Paraguay, Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, South Sudan,
Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Uruguay, Uzbekistan and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.114?
Draft resolution A/73/L.114 was adopted (resolution
73/346).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 127?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
Draft resolution (A/73/L.118)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.118.
12/29

16/09/2019

Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): On behalf of the 14
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) member States,
I have the honour of introducing draft resolution
A/73/L.118, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Caribbean Community”.
Due to significant capacity and time constraints,
the members of the Caribbean Community chose
to present a technical update to resolution 71/329,
adopted during the seventy-first session. The draft
resolution before us today therefore contains only
technical updates, taking note of the tenth general
meeting held in Guyana on 23 and 24 July between
representatives of the Caribbean Community and the
United Nations system, and the joint statement issued
thereafter. The draft resolution provides for the rollover
of the agenda item to the seventh-fifth session of the
General Assembly. In that way, we can be sure that the
strong foundation of partnership between CARICOM
and the United Nations can continue to be pursued
vigorously, given the urgency of the needs of our small
island developing States (SIDS) with regard to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
During the tenth meeting, the representatives
of both organizations recognized the challenges and
vulnerabilities of the CARICOM member States within
the international system and the many priority issues
relating to financing for development, including tax
blacklisting and the withdrawal of correspondent
banking relations. Other initiatives, such as the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean debt-for-climate swap initiative, were
also highlighted.
With regard to the sustainable development
challenges, the meeting recognized the need for
enhanced global action and resources. While
applauding CARICOM’s commitment to transforming
the Caribbean into the world’s first climate-resilient
zone, the meeting expressed the hope that the upcoming
high-level meetings during the seventy-fourth session
will result in increased support for the region. The
meeting further agreed to strengthen collaboration for
the full implementation of the Caribbean recoveryto-resilience facility and the joint preparation of a
regional report on progress on the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), using a
core set of indicators developed by CARICOM. The
meeting also called for the full implementation of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 20152030 and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change as a
19-28180

16/09/2019

necessary mechanism for achieving the SDGs. In that
connection, the importance of improving the resilience
of communities in support of resilient energy supplies,
agriculture and food security and the sustainable use
of and management of living marine resources was
recognized. CARICOM looks forward to collaboration
in that regard.
The issue of human mobility is also an area of
growing opportunities for collaboration. CARICOM
member States could greatly benefit from capacitybuilding on the international protection of human rights
principles, migration governance, labour mobility and
disaster risk reduction, given that there are opportunities
to do more before disasters strike in order to reduce the
risk of displacement.
For CARICOM, achieving gender equality and
ensuring the development of young people and children
are top priorities. We appreciate the support rendered to
the ongoing development of a regional gender-equality
strategy and the development of a youth mainstreaming
strategy for multisectoral planning, as well as action
to realize youth and child development outcomes in
CARICOM member States, including the revision and
strengthening of the CARICOM youth development
action plan.
The Georgetown Declaration: Towards 2022,
adopted at the closing of the 2018 least developed
countries (LDCs)/SIDS Trust Fund workshop for
the Caribbean region, sets out courses of action for
continued engagement between CARICOM and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
through the LDCs/SIDS Trust Fund and the United
Nations Human Rights Council. CARICOM looks
forward to the operationalization of those initiatives
to support our continued capacity-building, which will
ultimately redound to all our peoples’ enjoyment of
human rights.
CARICOM and the United Nations continue
to collaborate in major areas of health, HIV and
non-communicable diseases and pandemics with a
view to strengthening the public health system in the
Caribbean, improving its impact at the country level
and advancing regional development. In addition,
the support of the United Nations in advancing
the regional security agenda continues to provide
increasing dividends for citizen security. CARICOM
and the United Nations are also seeking new areas
of collaboration. They include the advancement of

A/73/PV.107

cultural development at the national and regional levels
in order to increase the contribution of culture to the
sustainable development of the region. Another area for
collaboration is in the aviation sector, especially given
the importance of air connectivity and transportation to
CARICOM’s socioeconomic growth and development.
When next we take up consideration of the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community, CARICOM looks forward to
a full report and a comprehensive resolution that will
cover the implementation of those areas of collaboration
and identification of other areas that can be leveraged
to optimize the crucial partnership our region enjoys
with the United Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to express our sincere
gratitude to all Member States. We valued the
constructive engagement and spirit of compromise
that they showed throughout the usual and fast-tracked
consultation process. We also invite delegations that
have not yet done so to become sponsors of the draft
resolution. CARICOM looks forward to its adoption by
consensus, as in previous years.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.118, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of draft resolution A/73/L.118,
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of the
draft resolution: Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas,
Barbados, Canada, Cabo Verde, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Dominica, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
India, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica, Mauritania, Mexico,
Morocco, Nicaragua, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Portugal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain,
South Sudan, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.118?
Draft resolution A/73/L.118 was adopted (resolution
73/347).

19-2818013/29

A/73/PV.107

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda item 128 and
agenda item 128 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 34 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
(b) Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2018,
the Assembly decided to include this sub-item in the
agenda of the seventy-third session. In connection
with this item, the President has received a letter dated
24 June 2019 from the Permanent Representatives of
Finland and Turkey to the United Nations, as the Chairs
of the Group of Friends of Mediation, requesting the
inclusion of this sub-item in the provisional agenda of
the seventy-fourth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this sub-item
and to include it in the draft agenda of its seventyfourth session?
It was so decided (decision 73/563).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 34?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 37
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2018, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the seventy-third session. In connection with his item,
the President has received a letter dated 6 September
2019 from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to
the United Nations requesting that the item be included
in the draft agenda of the seventy-fourth session of
the Assembly.
May take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
include this item in the draft agenda of the seventyfourth session?
14/29

16/09/2019

It was so decided (decision 73/564).
The Acting President: May take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 37?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 41
The situation in the occupied territories
of Azerbaijan
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2018, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the seventy-third session. In connection with this item,
the President has received a letter dated 14 August
2019 from the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan
to the United Nations requesting that consideration of
this item be deferred to the seventy-fourth session of
the Assembly.
I give the floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): My delegation would
like to dissociate itself from the decision to include
agenda item 41 on the draft agenda of the seventyfourth session of the General Assembly.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to defer consideration
of this item and to include it in the draft agenda of its
seventy-fourth session?
It was so decided (decision 73/565).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 41?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 42
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2018, the
Assembly decided to include this item in its agenda on
the understanding that there would be no consideration
of the item by the Assembly. In connection with the
item, the President has received a note verbale dated
16 April 2019 from the Permanent Mission of the
Comoros to the United Nations requesting the inclusion
19-28180

16/09/2019

of this item in the provisional agenda of the seventyfourth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include this item in the draft agenda of the seventyfourth session?
It was so decided (decision 73/566).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 42?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 67 (continued)
The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine
Letter dated 17 April 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine addressed to the
Secretary-General (А/73/840)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2018, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda
of the seventy-third session. In connection with the
item, a letter dated 17 April 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General has been issued as
document A/73/840, in which it is requested that the
item be included in the draft agenda of the seventyfourth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
include the agenda item entitled “The situation in the
temporarily occupied territory of Ukraine” in the draft
agenda of the seventy-fourth session?
I now give the floor to delegations wishing to make
statements of position.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): My delegation has taken the floor in order
to explain to the members of the General Assembly
our position of principle with regard to the proposal of
the Ukrainian delegation to once again introduce this
politicized item into the agenda of the next General
Assembly session.
What the Ukrainian delegation is really trying to
promote in the General Assembly is not an agenda item
but rather its own biased and falsified interpretation of
the events that have taken place in their country since
2014. And yet its initiators are not the least embarrassed

A/73/PV.107

that in order to do so they have to create a split within
the General Assembly on the eve of the opening of its
new session, and it is being proposed that this decision
be taken at the last minute without due consideration.
We would like to remind the Assembly that the 2014
coup d’état led Kyiv into an internal armed conflict
with its own population in its eastern regions, which
refused to support the new regime’s discriminatory
policy aimed at undermining fundamental rights and
political freedoms. The Russian Federation has nothing
to do with this apart from providing services as a
mediator in establishing a direct dialogue between the
Ukrainian parties within the framework of the Minsk
Contact Group. We particularly want to draw attention
to the fact that this destructive undertaking by the
Ukrainian delegation contradicts and undermines the
only internationally recognized mechanism for settling
the crisis in Ukraine, that is, the package of measures
for implementing the Minsk agreements, which was
endorsed by Security Council resolution 2202 (2015).
As the Assembly is aware, that unanimously adopted
resolution makes no reference to any temporarily
occupied territories.
The Russian Federation is more interested than
anyone in ensuring that its neighbour’s conflict is
resolved through peaceful means in full accordance
with the Minsk agreements affirmed by the Security
Council. We consider it unacceptable that the aim
of the Ukrainian initiative is the opposite, and that
instead of establishing direct dialogue and trust-based
communication with its own people in Donetsk and
Luhansk, Kyiv and its initiatives are only making the
prospects for a settlement less likely. If the General
Assembly succumbs to Ukraine’s provocative proposal,
it will amount to its condoning the non-implementation
of the Minsk agreements. That is why we oppose the
inclusion on the agenda of the new item proposed by the
Ukrainian delegation and why we are requesting a vote
and calling on all delegations to vote against it.
Mr. Madriz Fornos (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Nicaragua would like to state that with
respect to this issue, the only internationally recognized
format for resolving the situation in Ukraine is the
Minsk agreements, which were endorsed by the
Security Council in resolution 2202 (2015), and the
words “occupied territories” appear nowhere in those
agreements. The inclusion of this item in the agenda of
the seventy-fourth session of the Assembly is therefore
highly politicized and does not have consensus. That

19-2818015/29

A/73/PV.107

is why my delegation does not support the inclusion of
the item on the situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine in the agenda of the seventyfourth session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic): My delegation
has taken note of the letter of the Permanent Mission of
Ukraine to the Secretary-General, issued as document
A/73/840, as well as the explanatory memorandum
issued in the annex to document A/73/193. However,
my delegation reiterates its position with regard to the
request for the inclusion of the agenda item entitled
“The situation in the temporary occupied territories
of Ukraine”. We consider it a clearly politicized step
that hampers our efforts here in the General Assembly
to guarantee consensus on its agenda items during the
coming seventy-fourth session. Based on that, we want
to express our opposition to the item’s inclusion.
For some time now my delegation has noted with
deep concern that some delegations have requested the
inclusion of items in the agenda of General Assembly
sessions for the purpose of exploiting the platform it
provides and for reasons that are merely political, in
a manner that undermines the fundamental principles
and purposes of the United Nations, not to mention
attempting to clog up the General Assembly’s schedule.
Our legal understanding is based on the fact that the
situation in the areas in question is subject to the
provisions of the Minsk agreements, which were
endorsed by Security Council resolution 2202 (2015),
together with all its annexes, and by the Security
Council’s presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12. My
delegation believes that the implementation of the
Minsk agreements and resolution 2202 (2015) requires
the genuine political will of all the parties to restore
security and stability in Ukraine.
The introduction of an artificial term such as
“temporarily occupied territories” does not change
the fact that this issue falls within the purview of the
Security Council. On that basis, and in accordance
with Article 12 of the Charter of the United Nations,
the General Assembly has no mandate to take action on
the matter, since the Security Council is still working
on this agenda item.
Finally, and in conclusion, my delegation calls on
the General Assembly to consider these facts and to
take appropriate action by refraining from including
this item in the agenda of the General Assembly at its
16/29

16/09/2019

seventy-fourth session, since it would have negative
repercussions for the Assembly’s work.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): As delegations have
already been informed, at its 3rd meeting under the
presidency and guidance of the current President, the
General Assembly decided to include in the agenda of
the current session a new item entitled “The situation
of the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine” (see
A/73/PV.3). I would like to emphasize that the decision
was adopted by a recorded vote, the result of which
became self-explanatory. An absolute minority — only
13 Member States — voted against its inclusion,
thereby attempting to impede the General Assembly’s
special authority. Today we are seeing a repetition of
that attempt to undermine the Assembly’s particular
responsibility to consider an issue brought to it by a
member of the United Nations.
I believe, as has been stated by the United Nations
membership on numerous occasions, that as the main
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of
our Organization, the General Assembly is entrusted by
the Charter of the United Nations with a duty to discuss
questions related to the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Assembly is well aware that due
to the military aggression in the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol in Ukraine in
2014, the General Assembly, by its resolution 68/262,
entitled “Territorial integrity of Ukraine”, affirmed its
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders. Since then, in
three subsequent resolutions in 2016, 2017 and 2018,
the General Assembly has condemned the ongoing
temporary occupation of parts of the territory of
Ukraine (resolutions 71/205, 72/190 and 73/263). I
therefore want to underline that the foreign occupation
in Ukraine that continues to this day is not a new topic
for the General Assembly. The inclusion in the agenda
of the item entitled “The situation in the temporarily
occupied territories of Ukraine” has given the Assembly
a much-needed framework and venue for considering
the issue comprehensively and in all its complexity,
encompassing its political, security, humanitarian,
social, human rights, gender and other dimensions.
The consideration of the item in plenary meeting
of the General Assembly on 20 February 2019
demonstrated the international community’s significant
and close attention to the issue of the ongoing unlawful
military actions against Ukraine, which continue
19-28180

16/09/2019

to undermine international peace and security (see
A/73/PV.67 and A/73/PV.68). The positions of 46 States
Members of the United Nations were clearly expressed
during the meetings. The Assembly’s close attention
to this international conflict has had a positive impact
on the quest for peace, as it presents the international
community as a whole with a unique opportunity for
supporting existing peace initiatives and exploring
possible new ones. For instance, I am confident that
the constant awareness of the conflict on the part of
the entire United Nations membership facilitated the
successful return on 7 September to Ukraine from
the Russian Federation of 35 detainees, and that has
become the first important step in the quest for further
ways of solving the conflict. That is why close attention
to this issue and its consideration by the General
Assembly has to be consistently maintained until the
territorial integrity of Ukraine is fully restored within
its internationally recognized borders, and until all
detained Ukrainian citizens are released and returned
to Ukraine.
In conclusion, I want to underline that retaining
this agenda item is by and large a procedural step
aimed at maintaining a framework and streamlining
consideration of the issue of foreign occupation in
Ukraine in the General Assembly in all its aspects. I
call on all Member States to support the inclusion of
the item entitled “The situation in the temporarily
occupied territories of Ukraine” in the draft agenda of
the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly and
to vote yes.
Mr. Hoeseb (Namibia): Namibia encourages
the resolution of conflicts through dialogue. We are
heartened by the recent positive developments between
the Russian Federation and Ukraine, which showed
that substantive negotiations on the future of eastern
Ukraine are under way. Including an additional item on
the situation in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine in the agenda could inflame the situation, and
for that reason Namibia will vote against its inclusion
in the agenda of the Assembly at its seventy-fourth
session. It is Namibia’s sincere hope that the Russian
Federation and Ukraine will find a mutually acceptable
solution through negotiations very soon.
Ms. Millard (United States of America): The
United States supports retaining this item on the agenda
of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session.
It is entirely appropriate that the General Assembly
continue debating and deliberating on this important

A/73/PV.107

matter. We ask all Member States to vote in favour
of including the item on the agenda of the seventyfourth session.
Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
taking the floor to explain our vote before the voting
on the inclusion in the General Assembly’s agenda for
the coming session of the item entitled “The situation
in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine”. We
are of the view that debating multifaceted issues of a
highly political and controversial nature will not be
very helpful in furthering efforts to achieve workable
solutions to an issue that has been already agreed on
in the Minsk agreements of 2015, endorsed by Security
Council resolution 2202 (2015).
When there is an agreed international mechanism
in place supported by the Security Council, inserting
this dispute into the General Assembly’s agenda could
emphasize existing differences and sow division among
Member States rather than bridging them. It could
even undermine the internationally recognized agreed
framework for a settlement in Ukraine. It would be
wise to give the already agreed-on mechanism more
time and refrain from taking hasty decisions. Iran’s
principled position supports a peaceful resolution of
the dispute between Ukraine and Russia, and we firmly
believe that the issue primarily concerns the two States
involved. A solution reached outside that framework
will not work unless it is endorsed by both States. The
Islamic Republic of Iran does not support the inclusion
of any supplementary item entitled “The situation in
the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine” on
the agenda of the seventy-fourth session of General
Assembly. We think it has adverse implications for
the internationally agreed modalities and format for
reaching a settlement of the dispute that are represented
by the Minsk agreements, as endorsed by resolution
2202 (2015).
Mr. Salovaara (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries of North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania and the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland, Liechtenstein
and Norway, members of the European Economic
Area, as well as the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this explanation of vote before
the voting.
The European Union reaffirms its resolute support
for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial

19-2818017/29

A/73/PV.107

integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
We reiterate that we do not recognize, and continue to
condemn, the illegal annexation of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol by the
Russian Federation, which is a violation of international
law. It remains a direct challenge to international
security, with grave implications for the international
legal order that protects the unity and sovereignty of
all States.
The EU continues to call for full compliance
with international human rights standards in the
Crimean peninsula. All pending cases of human rights
violations and abuses, such as forced disappearances,
torture and killings, should be thoroughly investigated.
International human rights observers must be granted
full, free and unhindered access to the whole territory
of Ukraine, including the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol. The EU would like
to recall resolutions 68/262, of 27 March 2014, 73/194,
of 17 December 2018, and 73/263, of 22 December 2018,
and calls for their full implementation, including the
Russian Federation’s fulfilment of its obligations under
applicable international humanitarian law.
The EU reaffirms its full support for the endeavours
of the Normandy format, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), including the
work of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine, and the Trilateral Contact Group. The EU
stresses the importance of enhancing negotiating
efforts aimed at the sustainable and peaceful resolution
of the conflict in view of the full implementation of
the Minsk agreements by all sides and of measures
aimed at rebuilding confidence, while underlining
the responsibility of the Russian Federation in that
regard. For all of those reasons, the member States
of the European Union and countries aligned with it
will vote in favour of including the item entitled “The
situation in the occupied territories of Ukraine” in the
regular agenda of the General Assembly at its seventyfourth session.
Mr. Mikeladze (Georgia): My delegation welcomes
the inclusion of the item entitled “The situation in the
temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine” in the
agenda of the General Assembly. The debate on this
item in February (see A/73/PV.67 and A/73/PV.68)
gave the United Nations membership an opportunity
to deliberate on a topic of critical importance to both
regional and global peace and security. My delegation
will therefore vote in favour of retaining this item on
18/29

16/09/2019

the agenda of the General Assembly at its seventyfourth session.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested on the proposal to include agenda item 67 in
the draft agenda of the General Assembly at its seventyfourth session.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa
Rica,
Croatia,
Cyprus,
Czech
Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Burundi, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Islamic Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Philippines, Russian Federation, Serbia,
Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belize, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chile, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea, India, Iraq,
Israel, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia,
Namibia, Nauru, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
The decision to include agenda item 67, entitled
“The situation in the temporarily occupied
19-28180

16/09/2019

territories of Ukraine”, in the draft agenda of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session
was adopted by 65 votes to 17, with 54 abstentions
(decision 73/567).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Armenia to make a statement in
explanation of vote after the voting.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): We asked for the floor
to explain our vote on the inclusion of agenda item 67,
on the situation in the temporarily occupied territories
of Ukraine, in the draft agenda of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fourth session. We reiterate our position
that a comprehensive and lasting settlement to the
conflict can be achieved between the parties concerned
through negotiations within the established formats and
the implementation of mutually agreed arrangements.
Armenia continues to believe that there is no alternative
to an exclusively peaceful settlement of the conflict. We
would like to stress the importance of building on the
positive developments in order to create an environment
conducive to a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Mr. Hoeseb (Namibia): My delegation requests
that we withdraw the statement that we made earlier.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 67?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 89
Request for an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice on the consequences
of legal obligations of States under different sources
of international law with respect to immunities
of Heads of State and Government and other
senior officials
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2018, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the seventy-third session.
In connection with the item, the President of the
General Assembly has received a note verbale dated
5 September 2019 from the Permanent Mission of
Uganda to the United Nations, as Chair of the Group of
African States for the month of September, requesting
that the item be included in the draft agenda of the
seventy-fourth session of the Assembly.

A/73/PV.107

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to include the agenda item entitled “Request
for an advisory opinion from the International Court
of Justice on the consequences of legal obligations of
States under different sources of international law with
respect to immunities of Heads of State and Government
and other senior officials” in the draft agenda of the
seventy-fourth session?
It was so decided (decision 73/568).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 89?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Appointment of members to fill vacancies in
subsidiary organs and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Board of
the 10-Year Framework of Programmes
on Sustainable Consumption and
Production Patterns
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now turn to the appointment of members of the
Board of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on
Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns, in
order to replace those members whose term of office
expired on 15 September 2019.
Members will recall that by its resolution 67/203, of
21 December 2012, the Assembly decided to establish
the 10-member Board, consisting of two members from
each United Nations regional group.
Members will also recall that by its resolution
69/214, of 19 December 2014, the Assembly decided
that the duration of subsequent terms for members of
the Board shall continue to be two years, starting on
16 September of every second year, and that United
Nations regional groups may renominate one of their
existing two members of the Board for one consecutive
term, while ensuring that no Member State is eligible
to serve more than two consecutive terms and taking
into account the importance of ensuring continuity and
rotation in the work of the Board. In that regard, the
Secretariat has received the nomination of Switzerland.
I would like to note that Switzerland has already
served one term, from 2017 to 2019, and that it has been
renominated by the Group of Western European and

19-2818019/29

A/73/PV.107

other States for another term, from 2019 to 2021. In that
connection, may I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to appoint Switzerland as a member of the
Board of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on
Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns for
a term beginning on 16 September 2019 and ending on
15 September 2021?
It was so decided (decision 73/423).
The Acting President: In the absence of any other
candidates, it is my understanding that it would be
desirable to include this sub-item in the draft agenda of
the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly to
allow the regional groups additional time to nominate
candidates for the remaining nine seats on the Board.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include sub-item (g) of agenda item 117 in the draft
agenda of the seventy-fourth session?
It was so decided (decision 73/569).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (g) of agenda item 117 and of agenda item 117
as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 122
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2018, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda
of the seventy-third session. It is my understanding
that it would be desirable to include this item in the
draft agenda of the seventy-fourth session of the
General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to include the agenda item entitled “Implementation
of the resolutions of the United Nations” in the draft
agenda of its seventy-fourth session?
It was so decided (decision 73/570).
The Acting President: May I also take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 122?
It was so decided.
20/29

16/09/2019

Agenda item 156 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2018, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the seventy-third session. It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item
to the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of agenda item 156
and to include it in the draft agenda of its seventyfourth session?
It was so decided (decision 73/571).
The Acting President: May I also take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 156?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 168 (continued)
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Note verbale dated 5 September 2019 from
the Permanent Mission of Denmark to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the General Assembly (A/73/995)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 3rd plenary meeting, of 21 September 2018, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the seventy-third session.
In connection with the item, a note verbale dated
5 September 2019 from the Permanent Mission of
Denmark to the United Nations, also on behalf of the
Permanent Missions of Guatemala, the Netherlands,
Romania, Rwanda, Ukraine and Uruguay to the United
Nations, addressed to the President of the General
Assembly, has been issued as document A/73/995, in
which it is requested that this item be included in the
draft agenda of the seventy-fourth session.
I now give the floor to delegations wishing to make
statements of position on the proposed inclusion of this
agenda item in the General Assembly’s draft agenda.
19-28180

16/09/2019

Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would once again like to express
its surprise and concern about certain delegations’
insistence on having this item on the responsibility to
protect included in the agenda of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fourth session. We have concerns about
the procedure, formulation and substance related to this
repeated request for the item’s inclusion.
Members will recall that two years ago, two
delegations asked for this item to be included in the
agenda and assured the Assembly that it would be
a one-time occurrence, not to be repeated. The same
scenario happened the following year, when other
States joined in the request for including the item,
also as a one-time occurrence not to be repeated.
Regrettably, in doing so they blocked the possibility of
convening non-formal interactive dialogue meetings on
the subject. This year, other States are now once again
making the same request, using the same exclusionary
method for including this item in the agenda. The
request is not in keeping with the rules of procedure
but is, rather, a manipulative one that undermines the
good practices that we have established in the General
Assembly in order to ensure consensus on the agenda
of each of its sessions.
The States that made the request this year continue
to insist, in a rather non-transparent way, on ignoring
the intrinsic and deep divisions that exist among
Member States regarding what is called the concept of
the responsibility to protect, and on which, as I said,
there continue to be irreconcilable and deep-rooted
divisions regarding its third controversial and serious
pillar. All those present in this Hall, including the staff
of the Secretariat, are aware that we have so far been
unable to develop genuine foundations and limitations
that can prevent certain Member States from the misuse
of the concept of the responsibility to protect. When
I say misuse, I think everyone understands what is
meant — one example being how some States invoked
the responsibility to protect in order to destroy Libya.
My delegation and those of many other Member
States continue to be unconvinced of the need to include
this item on the agenda of the Assembly at its seventyfourth session. We believe it will not be useful to conduct
discussions collectively and freely on the concept of the
responsibility to protect. As I said, we have so far not
given this concept a real opportunity for discussion by
holding interactive informal dialogue meetings in order

A/73/PV.107

to overcome the divisions among Member States on this
controversial and serious concept and its third pillar.
All of us here are aware that disastrous
consequences, even war crimes on the part of the
Governments of certain States, have resulted from
distorting the principles of international law and
invoking the responsibility to protect, individually and
without an international mandate. Those same States
have frequently carried out acts of military aggression
or occupation, thereby undermining other States’
sovereignty and independence, and have used the
responsibility to protect as a pretext for their behaviour.
As I just said, Libya, with all its concomitant tragedies
and disastrous consequences for the Libyan people, is
a case in point.
To be clear, what we are talking about in principle is
not really the responsibility of States to protect their own
citizens. There can be no doubt about the importance
of the role of the United Nations in preventing wars
and conflicts through action based on the genuine
and positive concept of preventive diplomacy, and on
strengthening early-warning systems so as to prevent
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. However, we cannot accept certain
States’ ongoing attempts to distort and exploit that
concept and its noble humanitarian objectives in
order to justify military aggression, occupation and
interference in States’ internal affairs. The States that
have once again asked for this item’s inclusion on the
agenda are therefore responsible for deepening the
divisions among the States Members of the United
Nations. Above all, they undermine the consensus
among Member States on the agenda of each of the
General Assembly sessions.
In conclusion, and as a matter of principle, we
oppose the inclusion of this item in the agenda for the
seventy-fourth session. We ask the President to provide
clarifications regarding the legal basis, underpinned
by the Charter of the United Nations and our rules of
procedure and established practices, for considering the
note verbale before us, taking into account what I have
pointed out concerning States’ pledges last year and
the year before that their requests were for a one-time
inclusion only.
Mr. Salovaara (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.

19-2818021/29

A/73/PV.107

16/09/2019

The European Union supports the rollover of
agenda item 168, on the responsibility to protect
and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity, to the draft
agenda of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth
session. Preventing the item’s rollover would send a
negative message about the role of the Assembly, which
is the most representative organ of the United Nations
and the best place to address differences and forge
consensus. The Assembly voted in favour of including
the responsibility to protect on the formal agenda of
its seventy-second and seventy-third sessions. The two
highly attended formal debates that took place in 2018
and 2019 (see A/72/PV.99 and A/72/PV.100 and A/73/
PV.93 et seq.) offered Member States an opportunity to
share their views and promote better understanding on
all sides. It is essential that we continue on that positive
path and allow all Member States to forge consensus
on that issue. For that reason, the EU member States
support the rollover and call on other States Members
of the United Nations to do the same.

therefore believe that at the moment it is not viable for
the Assembly to continue to keep the responsibility to
protect on its formal agenda, and we propose that the
issue be discussed in an informal interactive dialogue.

Ms. Guardia González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba’s delegation is taking the floor with regard to
the request to include in the agenda of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fourth session the item on
the responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.

“This item, which has not yet been considered
by the General Assembly at its seventy-third
session, remains under the agenda of that session.
Its inclusion in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-fourth session is subject to any action
the Assembly may take on it at its seventy-third
session.” (A/74/50, p. 4)

In that connection, Cuba reiterates its determination
to combat the horrendous crimes that beset humankind.
However, we also support the statement of the Syrian
delegation, and we reject the inclusion of this item on
the Assembly’s agenda for the seventy-fourth session,
since, as many delegations expressed during the most
recent debate on this topic in this Hall (see A/73/PV.93
et seq.), this item was intended to be included on the
agenda for one session only, as its advocates made clear
at the time.

We want to understand the meaning and
interpretation of the word “action” during a session. In
that regard, before proceeding further, we should see a
detailed explanation or clarification from the Office of
Legal Affairs on the dual positions on the issues that
my delegation is raising. Such a clarification is very
important, as it will generate a common understanding
and interpretation among Member States on the General
Assembly’s rules of procedure regarding the inclusion
of an agenda item.

We are concerned about some delegations’
insistence on undermining the practices and regulations
of the General Assembly in ways that seek to disrupt
consensus in the adoption of the programme for
each session, while also ignoring the deep divisions
among numerous Member States on the concept of the
responsibility to protect. In that regard, we note that
including the item on the Assembly’s agenda does
not guarantee that we will reach consensus. On the
contrary, as we have seen, it can worsen the division
and disagreement on the responsibility to protect. We

Ms. Wegter (Denmark): Denmark fully aligns
itself with the statement just made on behalf of the
European Union.

22/29

Mr. Bayyapu (India): My delegation is taking
the floor to request a clarification on the rules for
the inclusion of agenda items for General Assembly
sessions. We understand that rules 12, 13, 14 and 15 of the
Assembly’s rules of procedure pertain to the inclusion
of agenda items. However, we do not understand how
any of those rules allow the inclusion or rollover of
an agenda item, thereby circumventing the General
Committee process. We realize that there are specific
time frames prescribed for the referral of the inclusion
of agenda items, through provisional or supplementary
lists, to the General Committee. However, in our view,
the current scenario seems to be an attempt to bypass
the Committee’s consideration of the item in question.
With regard to some items, the provisional agenda for
the seventy-fourth General Assembly notes,

Denmark,
together
with
Guatemala,
the
Netherlands, Romania, Rwanda, Ukraine and Uruguay,
has requested the inclusion of agenda item 168, on the
responsibility to protect and the prevention of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, in the draft agenda of the General Assembly
at it seventy-fourth session. As this is a procedural
19-28180

16/09/2019

request, we will limit our remarks in our national
capacity to our two main arguments for that request.
First, we believe that it is important for the General
Assembly to debate the issue of the prevention of the
most serious crimes and our shared, unanimously
agreed responsibilities in that regard. The Assembly has
done so for two consecutive sessions (see A/72/PV.99
and A/72/PV.100 and A/73/PV.93 et seq.), and we have
found the results encouraging. In both years, statements
were made on behalf of more than 100 Member States,
providing an overwhelming number of national,
regional and international examples of best practices
and recommendations on how to prevent such crimes.
Secondly, during both debates, numerous calls were
made for keeping the item on the Assembly’s agenda.
During the debate held during this session, more than
70 States made such appeals. Questions about the value
of the item and critiques were also raised during the
debate, and we listened carefully to every statement.
We are not convinced, however, that ceasing to share
examples of prevention or look for opportunities
for the international community to work together
on prevention will help to prevent the most serious
crimes. By requesting a rollover of this agenda item,
we are providing Member States with an opportunity to
continue to share best practices, and we urge all States
to support its inclusion.
As for the question of whether this item was
introduced with a view to discussing it on a one-time
basis, we would like to clarify that when it was
included in the agenda for the seventy-third session,
the proponents of its inclusion made the clear point
in the request that after the debate Member States
would be provided with an opportunity to continue to
debate the issue of the prevention of the most serious
crimes. That is what we are considering here today,
in a fully transparent manner and in accordance with
relevant procedures.
The President returned to the Chair.
Regarding the procedure here today, we note that
requesting the President of the General Assembly to
include items in the draft agenda of future sessions is a
fully legitimate and common practice in the Assembly
that has been used on numerous past occasions when
there was not full agreement among Member States.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela is firmly

A/73/PV.107

committed to respecting and protecting all human rights
and fundamental freedoms. We therefore condemn
crimes against humanity, war crimes, genocide and
ethnic cleansing, and affirm the role of States as
guarantors of the security of their peoples at all times.
We also express our support for the pursuit of justice
whenever such crimes are committed.
Nevertheless, the concept of the responsibility to
protect is one that many States, including Venezuela,
are concerned about, not only because of the lack of
agreement on its definition and scope, but also because
in practice the concept has been used to promote
interventionist agendas and invasions that have
resulted in suffering, death and destruction and have
never protected the peoples involved. Instead, they
have merely been a pretext for inciting unconstitutional
changes in Governments and looting the resources of
sovereign States.
A certain nefarious notion that in the beginning
may have had good intentions has now forfeited all
legitimacy because it uses such pretexts to interfere
in the internal affairs of States and undermine their
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
it is now attempting to do in my country. We therefore
reject the inclusion of the concept as an item on the
agenda of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth
session, since it is clear that differences remain on the
issue. Proceeding any further with it would destroy any
of the consensus that may have existed on it between
2005 and 2017.
Mr. Chekeche (Zimbabwe): Zimbabwe is grateful
for this opportunity to articulate its concerns about
the inclusion on the General Assembly’s agenda of an
item on the responsibility to protect in order to enable
Member States to continue exchanging ideas on the
modalities for that important principle’s application.
We are convinced that the United Nations needs to
seek the broadest possible conceptual, political and
operational consensus on the responsibility to protect
in order to gather support from all Member States on
its implementation.
That broad consensus currently remains elusive.
We want to stress that the prevention of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity is
the primary responsibility of individual Member States,
not a pretext for interference in the national affairs of
Member States by some members of the international
community. That was the fundamental understanding

19-2818023/29

A/73/PV.107

and spirit of the 2005 World Summit, and that is why
we are concerned about the premature elevation of
the responsibility to protect from concept to concrete
action before we have a mutual understanding on its
objectives, justification and transparent application.
If preventive and protective intervention is to
become a global policy, an appropriate international
legal framework will be needed in order to discourage the
propensity to use military force against Member States
in the name of the responsibility to protect. The current
efforts being made in the name of the responsibility to
protect are highly interventionist rather than focusing
on ending hostilities through diplomacy, mediation and
other capacity-building tools. We therefore continue
to support the call for more dialogue on the issue
and reiterate the importance of holding open, sincere
and transparent dialogue in order to bridge existing
conceptual gaps among member States. We believe that
we have yet to reach a way forward that we can agree
on for that important principle.
Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation disagrees with the inclusion of the
concept of the responsibility to protect as an item in
the provisional agenda of the General Assembly at
its seventy-fourth session, not because we oppose the
basic ideas of the concept, but rather because we want
to draw the attention of member States to the fact that
a formal discussion at the General Assembly is not an
appropriate way to arrive at an acceptable conceptual
framework for its implementation.
We would like to underline that the lack of an
intergovernmental agreement on the scope of the
application and the definition of this initiative will
increase uncertainties around the responsibility to
protect and the risk of its biased interpretation and
application. Discussions on the issue should therefore
be devised in a way that properly addresses the legal
uncertainties and existing conceptual differences
among Member States. Formal discussions in the
Assembly will only deepen the existing divisions. In
our view, continuing the informal interactive dialogues
on the subject, as agreed in 2009, is a more appropriate
way to address those differences.
Mr. Zambrana Torrelio (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): With regard to the request
for including the concept of the responsibility to protect
as an item on the agenda of the General Assembly at its
seventy-fourth session, Bolivia believes that it should
24/29

16/09/2019

not be included, given that the item does not have
the consensus of all States necessary for its formal
discussion, and because the way in which the issue is
being considered does not meet the criteria established
in the rules of procedure, which stipulate the ways and
time frames in which such issues should be considered.
The responsibility to protect is exclusively an
obligation of States to their own peoples. However,
beyond that notion, there is no agreement on its
conceptual framework, methodology or scope. Given
that, and until its substantive elements are duly analysed,
clarified, agreed on, accepted and acknowledged by all
States, the issue should not be included as an item on
the Assembly’s agenda. Not to mention the fact that
without those elements, there is every likelihood that
the concept could become a tool for interfering in the
affairs of States and could be selectively employed for
political purposes.
Mr. Guo Jiakun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, China commends you, Madam President, for
your achievements during your tenure. We congratulate
you and thank you and your team for your endeavours.
This is the second time that the General Assembly
has discussed whether the responsibility to protect
should be included in its draft agenda. Members
explicitly stated their positions during a previous vote
and in the plenary on the issue in June (see A/73/PV.93
et seq.). It appears that no consensus has been reached
on the definition of the concept or the criteria for
defining it, and there are even greater differences on its
implementation. Many developing countries are very
concerned about the possibility that the concept could
be expanded or even abused in its interpretation. It is
deeply regrettable that certain countries are abusing the
Assembly’s rules of procedure and attempting to force
the inclusion of the concept as an item on the agenda of
the Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, despite their
knowledge of countries’ differences on the issue.
China is deeply concerned about this issue. Such
an approach will serve only to exacerbate existing
differences, poison the atmosphere in the Assembly
and undermine mutual trust among member States.
It is not conducive to consensus-building. China will
therefore vote against the inclusion of the subject of the
responsibility to protect as an item on the agenda of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session. We urge
the parties concerned to apply the outcome document
of the 2005 World Summit as a basis for returning to
19-28180

16/09/2019

informal channels in the Assembly for discussing the
issues concerned. We also call on them to give due
regard to all countries’ legitimate concerns and to
reduce differences through dialogue and consultation
so as to build consensus incrementally.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The source of the concept under discussion
was the consensus outcome document of the 2005 World
Summit (resolution 60/1). However, since then, States
have been unable to agree on a common interpretation
of the meaning of its provisions.
Moreover, references to the application of the
concept with regard to the situation in Libya have
seriously undermined its authority and led to further
polarization. The concept has begun to be associated
with attempts to bring about the violent overthrow
of lawful Governments and other forms of unlawful
interference in the internal affairs of States.
In order to eliminate such negative associations and
seek common ground, it would be productive to hold
discussions through an informal dialogue. Instead of
that, in the autumn of 2017, a group of States forced a
vote in the General Committee and then in the General
Assembly to include the corresponding agenda item on
that body’s agenda. In 2018, the agenda item was once
again included by means of a vote. That has only led to
further confrontation. In this way the States promoting
the concept are taking it further and further from the
consensus of 2005. One could say that that consensus
no longer exists, which is regrettable. The debate held
in the General Assembly in June of this year on the
topic (see A/73/PV.94) had basically no added value.
We believe that returning to the tested format of an
informal interactive dialogue would help to improve
the existing situation. In view of that, we believe that
including an agenda item on the responsibility to protect
would be counterproductive.
In conclusion, we regret that we arrived at this
meeting a little late, but I would like to recall that the
Syrian and Indian representatives asked a procedural
question, as I understand it, and requested certain
explanations and clarifications from the Secretariat. I
would be very grateful if you, Madam President, could
assist and help us get the answer to that question.
Mr. Moussa (Egypt): My delegation takes the
floor regarding the request to include on the agenda
of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session
the item entitled “The responsibility to protect and the

A/73/PV.107

prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity”. Yet again, we are left
perplexed and somewhat dismayed by the incessant
persistence of some delegations to hastily push for an
item that gives rise to much controversy and clearly
does not garner the full support of the international
community to be included on the official agenda of the
General Assembly.
We note that the debate now taking place dispels
any conceptions or illusions that there is consensus
on the notion of the responsibility to protect (R2P) or
how to move forward in that regard. We would once
again like to reiterate Egypt’s steadfast and unwavering
commitment to the noble call for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict when executed in the proper
channels and forums.
In 2016, during our presidency of the Security
Council, along with a group of countries Egypt drafted
and successfully adopted resolution 2286 (2016), on
the protection of health care in armed conflict. The
resolution was a milestone document, which sent
a strong and clear message from the international
community that attacks targeting hospitals and medical
workers were unacceptable and would not in any way
be tolerated.
However, we believe that the notion of R2P as it
now stands still contains a number of political and legal
gaps, which, if left unaddressed, would do more harm
than good with regard to its universal acceptance. Such
gaps first need to be addressed and consensus reached
on the conceptual framework of the notion before any
further steps are taken to mainstream the notion of R2P
across the United Nations system.
In a similar vein to the request made by the
representative of India, we ask for clarity as to whether
or not the rules of procedure allow for a rollover to take
place and whether or not the General Committee can be
bypassed in that regard.
Moving forward, we ask for the presenters of this
proposal to abide by their continuous promises, which
they took upon themselves, namely, that the decision to
include the agenda item would not be brought forward
following the General Assembly’s prior considerations
of the item.
Ms. Hutchinson (Australia): Today’s General
Assembly debate on the responsibility to protect
and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic

19-2818025/29

A/73/PV.107

16/09/2019

cleansing and crimes against humanity has been
extremely helpful in exploring the challenges involved
by sharing different experiences and perspectives.
There is significant value in ongoing dialogue on such
issues, especially the responsibility to protect and its
implementation, precisely because there are differing
views among Member States. Australia will vote in
favour of including the item on the General Assembly
agenda at its seventy-fourth session.

a decision with respect to inclusion of the item on the
provisional agenda in that it will not bypass the General
Committee. The General Committee will consider the
recommendation with respect to this item at its meeting
on Wednesday, 18 September. The General Assembly
again can make a final decision with respect to the
inclusion on the actual agenda on Friday, 20 September,
of this week. We call on all States to vote in favour of
the inclusion of this item on the provisional agenda.

Mr. Kim In Ryong (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The responsibility to protect (R2P) people
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity is the sovereign right of a State. As
Member States are aware, there has not yet been global
consensus on the R2P concept mentioned in the 2005
World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1). It involves
many issues that are contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Differing views
still exist among Member States. The most preferable
approach is to continue informal negotiations in order
to reach consensus instead of discussing it at the
General Assembly.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote.

The R2P concept to protect civilians has been
abused by some countries to undertake a collective
armed invasion against sovereign developing countries
in order to interfere in another’s internal affairs and
ultimately overthrow or change the independent
Government. The collective intervention revealed as a
collective armed invasion conducted under the pretext
of protecting civilians in developing countries in recent
decades showed the danger of the R2P concept.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea reiterates once again its opposition
to the proposal to include the dangerous concept of the
responsibility to protect on the formal agenda of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): The
United States supports the inclusion of the responsibility
to protect on the provisional agenda of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fourth session. Debate in this
Hall of this important issue is healthy. If there are
differences of view and a lack of consensus, they can
be discussed here in this Hall.
Regarding the procedure, I would note that several
other agenda items were included on the provisional
agenda. That was done by consensus this very
morning. It is entirely appropriate to do the same with
regard to this item. Our understanding is that this is
26/29

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat to clarify precisely the procedural questions
that were asked by several Member States.
I must say that the representative of the United
States delegation already made the point and he
was right.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The General Assembly
has before it the proposal to include this item on the
draft agenda of the seventy-fourth session of the General
Assembly. That was requested by the delegation of
Denmark in document A/73/995, which contains a note
verbale from that delegation. Similar requests were
made and then considered and approved by the General
Assembly at today’s meeting, including on sub-item (b)
of agenda item 34, concerning strengthening the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, as
well as agenda items 37, concerning a zone of peace
and cooperation of the South Atlantic, 41, concerning
the situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan,
and 89, concerning the situation in the temporarily
occupied territories of Ukraine.
If the General Assembly decides to include this
item, like all of the items I just mentioned, in the draft
agenda for the seventy-fourth session, the whole draft
agenda will be considered on Wednesday by the General
Committee, which will make recommendations one
way or the other for the Assembly’s consideration at its
2nd plenary meeting, on Friday.
The President: I thank the Secretariat for
the clarification.
In the absence of a request for a recorded vote, may
I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to include the agenda item entitled “The responsibility
to protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity” in the
19-28180

16/09/2019

draft agenda of the General Assembly at its seventyfourth session?
The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I should like to draw attention
to this touching moment for all of us in this Hall.
My colleagues and I are saddened, Madam, that this
is your last day on this rostrum as President of the
General Assembly, and we wish you every success in
your professional, political and diplomatic endeavours,
which you fully deserve.
Regarding the issue before us today, the
responsibility to protect, no one has so far requested
a vote for its inclusion, as the President indicated.
Like others, however, my delegation was frankly
and openly not convinced by the legal explanations
provided either by certain delegations or, with all due
respect, by the Secretariat. We therefore call for a vote
against the inclusion of this item in the agenda of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session. We
urge Member States to resolutely support respect for
the Charter of the United Nations and consensus among
us all, and therefore to support a debate on this item
through informal interactive dialogues.
As the Assembly is aware, I mentioned previously
that informal interactive dialogues have not been
given the opportunity that they deserve. Two years
ago, certain countries cut off the opportunity to hold
such discussions when they surprised everybody
by submitting the request that led to adopting a
non-exclusionary method for dealing with the agenda
of the General Assembly. Before voting, I would like
to remind the Assembly of two facts. First, a report of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the responsibility
to protect (A/69/981) explicitly noted that the conduct of
certain States in Libya showed that the implementation
of the responsibility to protect was not optimal and
continued to be far from free of politicization and
interests. The report made it clear that the Secretariat
had concerns about certain States’ implementation of
the principle of the responsibility to protect.
Secondly, the concept of the responsibility to
protect itself is controversial, especially its third pillar.
The fact is, we all know that ideals and good intentions
have no place in addressing controversial issues.
When we address such a controversial issue what we
need is political realism. The Assembly is well aware

A/73/PV.107

that there are Governments that in the past, present
and future have wanted and will continue to want to
exploit the responsibility to protect simply because they
possess the necessary political, military and economic
influence both within and beyond the United Nations.
They will continue using it in order to impose military
interventions and unilateral economic measures on
various peoples of the world, including countries
with which they have political disagreements. What
is therefore really at stake here is not the protection
of civilians. Those Governments simply invoke the
concept whenever they have political differences with
one country or another.
This is why we have resisted and will continue to
resist the inclusion of a controversial concept such as
the responsibility to protect on the Assembly’s agenda,
because we still believe that the United Nations, our
Organization, must not become a party that accedes to
the legitimization of military aggression or punitive
economic and political measures against certain
peoples of the world. To do so would blatantly run
counter to the responsibility of the United Nations to
maintain international peace and security. I therefore
call on all States to oppose the inclusion of this item on
the Assembly’s agenda and to once again give informal
interactive dialogue a chance. We do not oppose
the responsibility to protect in itself, but rather its
exploitation by certain States for political and selfish
reasons that are well known to us all.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the proposal to include agenda item
168, entitled “The responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity”, in the draft agenda of
the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall

19-2818027/29

A/73/PV.107

Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay
Against:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Kyrgyzstan, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Belize, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam, Central African Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Gabon, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Mali,
Namibia, Oman, Pakistan, Serbia, Singapore, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Viet Nam, Zambia
The decision to include agenda item 168, entitled
“The responsibility to protect and the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity”, in the draft agenda of
the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session
was adopted by 92 votes to 15, with 27 abstentions
(decision 73/572).
The President: I now give the floor to delegations
wishing to explain their vote after the voting.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): I would like to join others
in expressing our thanks to you, Madam President,
for your stewardship and leadership of the General
Assembly during this session.
Exactly two years ago, we gathered in this same
Hall to consider the same question of whether to include
the subject of the responsibility to protect as an agenda
item of the General Assembly. Two years ago, we voted
yes on this question. For Indonesia, the responsibility to
protect all people is an unquestionable obligation of the
State. It is enshrined in our Constitution. However, we
are fully cognizant of the efforts since the 2005 World
28/29

16/09/2019

Summit, when leaders first considered this subject,
and of the fact that there has been no agreement on
its definition or implementation. For those reasons,
we believe that at this time, devoting an agenda item
to the responsibility to protect would help advance
discussion on the subject, in order to provide a venue
for sharing best practices on how States can strengthen
their ability to uphold their primary responsibility to
avoid atrocities, genocide, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. We have done that.
We now have a better understanding of the
differing perspectives among Member States on its
implementation. In the understanding that there are
divergent views regarding the modalities surrounding
this concept and whether it should stand as an agenda
item at all, my delegation reiterates its belief that
deliberations on the topic should be based on consensus,
so that any process we may choose to advance is one
that has collective support and ownership and is not
imposed by a few or even a majority.
Having said that, my delegation abstained in the
voting on decision 73/572. Cognizant of the universal
principle of consensus and the collective ownership
of all States Members of the United Nations, we
share the firm belief that pursuing a constructive
engagement with all Member States is key to ensuring
the effectiveness of our discussion of this agenda item
in the forthcoming session.
Mr. Pye Soe Aung (Myanmar): My delegation
voted against decision 73/572 based on the following
position. First, we have been engaged in intense debate
on the concept of the responsibility to protect for more
than a decade. The interpretation of the concept so far
has failed to reach consensus on how to translate it into
practice. It is therefore premature and inappropriate to
include the subject of the responsibility to protect as a
formal and regular agenda item of the General Assembly.
Secondly, the primary responsibility to protect
against immediate threats and atrocities rests with
States. The measures taken by States should include, but
not be limited to, the peaceful resolution of conflicts,
the strengthening of the rule of law, the promotion
of human rights, the building of peace and harmony
among citizens, and socioeconomic development.
Regional and international communities should render
assistance or necessary expertise to countries that need
to strengthen their domestic capacities for fulfilling
19-28180

16/09/2019

that responsibility. The capacity to protect must come
before the responsibility to protect.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 168?
It was so decided.
The President: I should like to remind delegations
that the following agenda items remain open for
consideration during the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly: 9, 16, 18, 18 (d), 19, 20 and its
sub-items (a), (b), (d) and (h), 22, 22 (b), 23, 23 (b), 25,
31, 34, 34 (a), 35, 36, 38, 39, 44 to 50, 65, 66, 71, 71 (a),
74, 74 (b), 75, 75 (a) through (c), 78, 78 (a), 101 and its
sub-items (a) through (oo), 109, 116 and its sub-items
(a), (b) and (e), 119, 120, 125, 125 (a) and (b), 126, 129,
131, 134 to 155 and 157 to 166.
As Member States are aware, those items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the seventy-fourth
session of the General Assembly, with the exception of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 22, entitled “International
migration and development”; sub-items (j), (l), (o),
(s), (t), (u), (y), (z), (cc), (dd), (ff), (gg), (ii) and (mm)
of agenda item 101; sub-item (b) of agenda item 116,
entitled “Election of members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law”; sub-item
(e) of agenda item 116, entitled “Election of the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme”; sub-item (b) of agenda item 125, entitled
“Central role of the United Nations system in global
governance”; agenda item 144, entitled “United Nations

A/73/PV.107

pension system”; and agenda item 149, entitled “Scale
of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations”.
In connection with agenda item 16, entitled “The
role of the United Nations in promoting a new global
human order”, members will recall that the President
of the General Assembly received a letter dated
1 November 2018 from the Permanent Representative of
Guyana to the United Nations requesting that the item
be removed from the agenda of the General Assembly,
in keeping with the ongoing efforts of the Assembly to
streamline its agenda and enhance the efficiency of its
work. I reiterate my congratulations to Guyana for its
initiative in that regard.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration at the current
session of agenda items 9, 16, 18, 18 (d), 19, 20 and its
sub-items (a), (b), (d) and (h), 22, 22(b), 23, 23(b), 27,
31, 34, 34 (a), 35, 36, 38, 39, 44 to 50, 65, 66, 71, 71 (a),
74, 74 (b), 75, 75 (a) through (c), 78, 78 (a), 101 and its
sub-items (a) through (oo), 109, 116 and its sub-items
(a), (b) and (e), 119, 120, 125, 125 (a) and (b), 126, 129,
131, 134 to 155 and 157 to 166?
It was so decided.
The President: I would also like to inform Member
States that as announced in today’s Journal of the United
Nations, the closing of the seventy-third session will be
held this afternoon at 3 p.m. I will see you all there.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

19-2818029/29
