United Nations

A/RES/56/242

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 January 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 124

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/737)]

56/242. Pattern of conferences
The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of 18 December
1985, 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 43/222 A to E of 21 December 1988, 50/11 of
2 November 1995, 54/248 of 23 December 1999 and 55/222 of 23 December 2000,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences1 and the reports of
the Secretary-General,2
Having also considered the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,3
Reiterates the provisions of its resolutions 51/211 A to E of 18 December 1996,
52/214 of 22 December 1997, 53/208 A to E of 18 December 1998, 54/248 and 55/222;
I
Calendar of conferences and meetings
1.
Notes with appreciation the work of the Committee on Conferences, and
endorses the recommendations contained in its report,1 subject to the provisions of the
present resolution;
2.
Approves the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings of the United
Nations for 2002–2003, as submitted by the Committee on Conferences,4 taking into
account the observations of the Committee,5 and subject to the provisions of the present
resolution;
3.
Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make any adjustments to the
calendar of conferences and meetings for 2002–2003 that may become necessary as a
result of actions and decisions taken by the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session;
_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/56/32).
A/56/120/Rev.1, A/56/133 and Corr.1, A/56/188, A/56/213 and Corr.1, A/56/277, A/56/293, A/56/299,
A/56/300, A/56/339 and A/AC.198/2001/8.
3
A/56/475.
4
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/56/32), annex.
5
Ibid., paras. 22 and 23.
2

01 49639

A/RES/56/242

4.
Notes with satisfaction that the Secretariat took into account the arrangements
referred to in General Assembly resolutions 53/208 A, 54/248 and 55/222 concerning
Orthodox Good Friday and the official holidays of Id al-Fitr and Id al-Adha, and requests
all intergovernmental bodies to observe those decisions when planning their meetings;
5.
Reaffirms its decision that the headquarters rule shall be adhered to by all
bodies, and decides that waivers to the headquarters rule shall be granted solely on the
basis of the calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations as recommended
by the Committee on Conferences for adoption by the General Assembly;
6.
Also reaffirms the general principle established in the headquarters rule and, in
particular, that all meetings related to the environment and to human settlements that are
organized by the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Centre
for Human Settlements (Habitat), respectively, should be held at Nairobi, headquarters of
the Programme and Habitat;
7.
Further reaffirms the relevant provisions established by the General Assembly
in its resolution 50/11 on multilingualism;
8.
Requests the Committee on Conferences and the Secretary-General, when
planning the calendar of conferences and meetings, to avoid simultaneous peak periods at
the various duty stations and to avoid scheduling meetings of related intergovernmental
bodies too closely together;
II
Utilization of conference-servicing resources and facilities
1.
Approves the guidelines on limiting meeting duration contained in the annex to
the present resolution;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to enhance further the established practice of
workload sharing among duty stations in documentation services as a means to improve
the utilization of conference-servicing resources, and to include information on these
efforts in the context of a single, comprehensive report to be submitted to the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session;
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General, bearing in mind the recent organizational
changes, to ensure that the Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference
Services of the Secretariat is considered the appropriate executive authority to oversee,
coordinate and enhance the global management and delivery of United Nations conference
services, under the legislative authority of the General Assembly and through oversight
and examination by the Committee on Conferences;
4.
Reaffirms the terms of reference and main functions of the Committee on
Conferences as formulated in section I, paragraph 1, of resolution 41/213 and in resolution
43/222 B;
5.
Welcomes the improved participation of observers in the work of the
Committee on Conferences, the changes in the procedure governing the participation of
observers and the decision of the Committee to keep this procedure under review;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at
its fifty-seventh session on the mechanisms available for addressing the concerns of
Member States about the efficiency, quality and delivery of conference services, including
information about the way in which the concerns of Member States are recorded and
reported, and on the grouping of these issues in reports to the General Assembly;

2

A/RES/56/242

7.
Welcomes the establishment of a permanent interpretation service at the United
Nations Office at Nairobi, and notes with satisfaction that the conference-servicing facility
at the United Nations Office at Nairobi is becoming organizationally, functionally and in
terms of the budget an integral part of the Department of General Assembly Affairs and
Conference Services;
8.
Notes with appreciation the increase in the number of multilingual meetings to
be held at the United Nations Office at Nairobi and with the participation of the Nairobi
interpretation team elsewhere in 2001 and 2002, as well as the cost-saving effect of the
establishment of the Nairobi interpretation service for the regular budget in terms of
temporary assistance;
9.
Emphasizes the importance of providing adequate conference-servicing
resources to all United Nations conference centres, for the effective and efficient discharge
of their mandates;
10. Notes the improvement in the rate of utilization of conference facilities at the
United Nations Office at Nairobi, as recorded during the most recent reporting period;
11. Urges all subsidiary bodies of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme and the Commission on Human Settlements, and encourages
Member States, intergovernmental bodies and regional and other major groupings, to
increase their use of the conference facilities at Nairobi;
12. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to assist the bodies mentioned in
paragraph 11 of the present section in improving this situation, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session, through the
Committee on Conferences, on the actions taken to that end;
13. Encourages all United Nations bodies and expert groups not subject to the
headquarters rule to hold some of their meetings at the United Nations Office at Nairobi;
14. Strongly discourages any invitation for hosting meetings which would violate
the headquarters rule, in particular for United Nations centres with a low utilization level;
15. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to intensify efforts being made
by the United Nations Office at Nairobi to attract more meetings to its facilities;
16. Reiterates its request to the Committee on Conferences to consult with those
bodies that consistently utilized less than the applicable benchmark figure of their allocated
resources for the past three sessions with a view to making appropriate recommendations
in order to achieve the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources;
17.
priority;

Reiterates that meetings of Charter and mandated bodies must be serviced as a

18. Decides to include all necessary resources in the budget for the biennium
2002–2003 to provide interpretation services for meetings of regional and other major
groupings of Member States upon request by those groups, on an ad hoc basis, in
accordance with established practice, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session, through the Committee on Conferences, a
report on the implementation of this decision;
19. Notes the importance of meetings of regional and other major groupings of
Member States for the smooth functioning of the sessions of intergovernmental bodies, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, as far as possible, all requests for conference
services for meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States are met;

3

A/RES/56/242

20. Notes with concern the difficulties experienced by some Member States owing
to the lack of conference services for some meetings of regional and other major groupings
of Member States;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to provide information on meetings of regional
and other major groupings of Member States not serviced by conference services in the
context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2002–2003;
22. Also requests the Secretary-General, when preparing budget proposals for
conference services, to ensure that the level of resources proposed for temporary assistance
is commensurate with the full demand for services, estimated on the basis of current
experience;
23. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on the utilization
rates of interpretation services and conference facilities at all duty stations;
24. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to consider improving and
modernizing the conference facilities at the United Nations Office at Nairobi in order to
accommodate adequately major meetings and conferences, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its resumed fifty-sixth session, through the Committee on
Conferences;
III
Documentation- and publication-related matters
1.
Notes with deep concern the low rate of compliance with the six-week rule for
the issuance of documentation, and encourages the Secretary-General, in view of the
impact of late submissions on the timely issuance of documents, to deal with this alarming
situation;
2.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that documentation is
available in accordance with the six-week rule for the distribution of documents
simultaneously in the six official languages of the General Assembly;
3.
Deeply regrets the failure of author departments to abide by section III,
paragraph 5, of its resolution 55/222, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to
take corrective measures to ensure the full implementation of this provision and to report
to the General Assembly in the first part of its resumed fifty-sixth session;
4.
Notes that the failure to abide by that provision also connotes failure to abide
by the six-week rule for the availability of documents as well as General Assembly
resolution 50/11 on multilingualism, in which the Assembly recalled the need to ensure the
simultaneous distribution of documents in the six official languages of the United Nations;
5.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to direct all departments to
include, where appropriate, the following elements in reports originating in the Secretariat:
(a)

A summary of the report;

(b)

Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;

(c)

Relevant background information;

6.
Reiterates that all documents submitted to legislative organs by the Secretariat
and expert bodies for consideration and action should have conclusions and
recommendations in bold print;
7.
Requests the Office of Internal Oversight Services to submit its reports in
accordance with paragraph 12 of General Assembly resolution 53/208 B;
4

A/RES/56/242

8.
Regrets that, if a report is issued late, some departments of the Secretariat still
do not indicate the reasons for the delay when the report is introduced;
9.
Reiterates its decision that, if a report is submitted late to conference services,
the reasons therefor should be included in a footnote to the document;
10. Decides to approve the report of the Secretary-General on measures taken by
the Secretariat to strengthen responsibility and accountability in the submission of
documentation,6 with the exception of those described in paragraph 12 of the present
section, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session on measures taken to ensure full
implementation of the report;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to develop an effective accountability and
responsibility system within the Secretariat in order to ensure timely submission of
documents for processing, and to report thereon, through the Committee on Conferences,
to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the organs
concerned, when they are taking action on draft resolutions and decisions, rules 78 and 120
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;
13. Notes with concern the delay in the issuance of verbatim and summary records,
and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to
ameliorate the situation;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to study the possibility of further measures in
this regard, including enhanced cooperation between the production of press releases by
the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat and the preparation of summary
records by the Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, bearing
in mind the different nature of press releases and summary records;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the communication of
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly to the States Members of the United Nations
within fifteen days of the close of each session;
16. Welcomes the new format for the issuance of the Official Records of the
resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session, in
accordance with the request contained in resolution 54/248, section C, paragraph 3;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure fully the issuance of all documents
and publications of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia in Arabic,
which is most relevant to the requirements of the Member States of the region, as well as
in the other working languages of the Commission to meet the requirements of readers
outside the region, as appropriate, and to report thereon to the General Assembly by its
fifty-seventh session;
IV
Translation- and interpretation-related matters
1.
Requests the Secretary-General not to conduct further pilot projects on remote
interpretation until technological developments so warrant;

_______________
6

A/56/300.

5

A/RES/56/242

2.
Also requests the Secretary-General to provide a comprehensive comparative
cost-benefit analysis on the use of remote interpretation at all United Nations duty stations,
as recipients and as providers of that service, covering, inter alia, direct and indirect related
costs and utilization rates, as well as issues pertaining to the working conditions of
interpreters;
3.
Decides to approve, for an initial period of one year, the training initiative for
interpreters who, on the first competitive examination, scored higher than the benchmark
of 55 per cent and who possess those language combinations that are insufficiently
represented on the roster of successful candidates, subject to the submission to the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session of information on the results of the training activities,
the continuing need for the programme and related financial arrangements;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide updated information to the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session, under the agenda item entitled “Human resources
management,” on current practices related to the special ceiling on the United Nations
annual earnings for United Nations retirees employed on a short-term basis in language
services, as established by the Assembly in its decision 51/408 of 4 November 1996, with a
view to reviewing this issue;
5.
Decides to conduct a comprehensive review of the current norms and standards
of productivity in the language services and the impact of ongoing technological
innovations on their work, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a detailed report
on the subject, through the Committee on Conferences, to the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session;
6.
Reiterates its concern at the high rate of self-revision in the translation
services, which exceeded the benchmark, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General
to accord high priority to the post of reviser and to reduce reliance on self-revision to the
maximum extent, and to take these considerations into account when filling vacancies in
the translation services;
7.
Notes with deep concern that some official documents are not translated into
all the official languages of the Organization;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Secretariat undertakes to
translate all United Nations documents into all the other official languages of the
Organization simultaneously, including documents for which circulation is requested under
agenda items of the principal deliberative bodies of the United Nations, regardless of their
length;
9.
Also requests the Secretary-General to fill expeditiously the remaining
vacancies in the interpretation service at the United Nations Office at Nairobi and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its resumed fifty-sixth session;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to accelerate his efforts to fill vacant
posts in interpretation and translation at Headquarters and at all other United Nations duty
stations;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to refrain from using the terms “different
languages” or “multilingual” in official documents when referring to the six official
languages of the United Nations;
12. Expresses concern about the quality of interpretation services provided to
intergovernmental meetings, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the highest
standards of quality for interpretation services provided to these meetings;

6

A/RES/56/242

13. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that training
opportunities in the six official languages are equally available to all language staff,
including those at duty stations away from Headquarters;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that efforts continue to be made to
improve the quality control of language services at all duty stations;
15. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that translation, in
principle, reflects the specificity of each language;
16. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in order to improve further
the quality of translation of documents issued in the six official languages, to ensure
continuous dialogue between translation staff and interpretation staff, among United
Nations headquarters at New York, Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi, and between translation
divisions and Member States with regard to the standardization of the terminology used;
17. Further reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to hold informational
meetings in order to brief Member States periodically on the terminology used;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to conduct consultations, with Member States
concerned, on the improvement of translation services;
V
Information technology
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fiftyseventh session a progress report on the use of information technology in the Department
of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, including voice recognition, remote
translation, computer-assisted translation, the Electronic Documents Registration,
Information and Tracking System, the new stock control system for documents and
publications, digitization of meeting recording systems, electronic planning and servicing
of meetings, and computerized terminology data banks, specifying in particular the impact
of these technologies on the working methods and productivity of the personnel of the
Department;
2.
Notes with concern the content of paragraph 7 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral,7 which stresses that progress in the development of the United Nations web site
on the Internet in the six official languages has been slower than expected, and that the
realization of a truly equal multilingual web site will remain elusive.
92nd plenary meeting
24 December 2001

_______________
7

A/AC.198/2001/8.

7

A/RES/56/242

Annex
Guidelines on limiting meeting duration
1.
Meetings normally should be held during regular meeting hours, namely, from
10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m., on working days;
2.
The Secretariat should intensify coordination between its relevant units with a
view to planning for the provision of conference services;
3.
Intergovernmental bodies should undertake a review of their meeting patterns
and, in coordination with the Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference
Services of the Secretariat, adjust their meeting requests for subsequent sessions
accordingly;
4.
Requests for the extension of sessions beyond the originally scheduled dates,
resumed sessions and other inter-sessional departures would continue to be submitted to
the Committee on Conferences and handled in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 43/222 B and with past practice as agreed by the Committee.

8
