S/PV.7107

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7107th meeting

Thursday, 30 January 2014, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Jordan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Antueno
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Bertoux
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Tatham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Letter dated 22 January 2014 from the Coordinator of the Group of Experts on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo extended pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2078 (2012) addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/42)

14-22126 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1422126*

S/PV.7107

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I take the floor to explain
Rwanda’s vote on resolution 2136 (2014), which was
just adopted unanimously.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Letter dated 22 January 2014 from the
Coordinator of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo extended
pursuant to Security Council resolution
2078 (2012) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/42)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/55, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/42, which contains a letter dated
22 January 2014 from the Coordinator of the Group
of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
extended pursuant to Security Council resolution
2078 (2012) addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President (spoke in Arabic): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2136 (2014).
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wishes to make a statement after the
voting.

2/8

30/01/2014

I want first of all to commend France, the penholder
for this important resolution, for its determination and
patience in finding a consensus on the text. I want
especially to thank the French Ambassador and his
colleagues in his delegation. I also thank Jordan, the
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004), for the way it has conducted the
business of the Committee in a challenging period. It
is not easy to be the Chairman of that Committee and
at the same time to preside over the Security Council.
I also thank other Council members for their valuable
contributions aimed at ensuring that the resolution will
be an additional tool for lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Rwanda voted in favour of the resolution because
we believe that a sanctions regime for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is of the utmost importance
in fighting the armed groups that are still active in
the country, especially the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda, recalled today by the Council as
“a group under United Nations sanctions whose
leaders and members include perpetrators of
the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda,
during which Hutu and others who opposed the
genocide were also killed, and have continued to
promote and commit ethnically based and other
killings in Rwanda and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo” (resolution 2136 (2014), thirteenth
preambular paragraph).
We share the Council’s deep concern at reports
indicating collaboration between this genocidal group
and, unfortunately, the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo. We call on the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to abide by
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
stress the need for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism
to urgently investigate this matter.
Although resolution 2136 (2014) takes note of the
final report of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2014/42), Rwanda rejected the
report. We did so because the report lacks objectivity,
transparency, material evidence and credible sources.
We deplore the flawed methodology used by an

14-22126

30/01/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

unaccountable and unprofessional Group of Experts
allowing itself the right to accuse a whole nation without
a shred of evidence. However, we support the extension
of the Group of Experts’ mandate for an additional year
because we believe that the Group could assist the 1533
Committee in monitoring the sanctions regime for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I take this opportunity to reiterate my Government’s
call on the Council to demand that the members of the
Group of Experts behave in a more neutral, impartial
and professional manner for the sake of regional and
international peace. We reiterate our deep regret over
the way the current Group of Experts is conducting
its activities. It should be made clear that the use of a
United Nations sanctioned and funded mechanism to
launch deliberate attacks against States Member of the
United Nations by making grave, unsubstantiated and
damaging accusations without any credible evidence
is totally unacceptable. Such offensive allegations may
actually undermine the ongoing efforts focused on
forward-looking solutions.
Let me conclude by once again reiterating Rwanda’s
unwavering commitment to supporting the work of the
Group of Experts, which, if conducted within the strict
mandate of the Council and by well-intentioned people,
could contribute to addressing the root causes of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
thereby bringing stability to the region. Any failure
to clearly understand and report objectively on the
dynamics in the region would continue to undermine
ongoing peace efforts. In that regard, Rwanda
remains committed to finding a lasting solution to the
recurring crises in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, bilaterally or through the mechanisms of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give floor
to the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me, Mr. President,
as the Jordanian presidency of the Security Council comes
to an end, to express to you the pleasure of my delegation
at seeing you presiding over this public meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, particularly on the final report of

S/PV.7107

the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2014/42, annex).
As the month of January comes to an end,
my delegation welcomes the fact that the work of
the Security Council is being conducted by the
representative of Jordan, a country with which my
country shares excellent relations marked by mutual
esteem and consideration. I should like to take this
opportunity to fulfil a most agreeable duty, that of
congratulating you, Sir, most warmly, speaking both
for myself and for my delegation, on the work carried
out during your presidency of the Security Council.
I would like, first of all, on behalf of the Government
and the entire people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to thank the Group of Experts, which, as was
the case two years ago, has once again produced an
acceptable final report. It is a report that highlights the
repeated patterns of two neighbouring countries used
to swimming against the current with respect to the
precepts of peace proclaimed by the United Nations, the
African Union and subregional organizations to which
they claim to belong and which persist unabashedly
in destabilizing the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo wishes to recall that the violations listed in the
final report before the Council have not been identified
by an anonymous organization or one without a
mandate or one merely trying to attract the attention
of the international community for its own sake. Those
serious violations of the relevant provisions of Security
Council resolutions and the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region have been observed and
documented by a team of trustworthy persons appointed
by the Security Council on the basis of their skills and
expertise. That is why my Government welcomes the
fact that the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, has carefully considered the
final report of the Group of Experts, in line with its
mandate to monitor compliance with sanctions.
My delegation would like to draw the attention
of the Security Council to the report of the Group of
Experts and the credible information contained in the
report (S/2013/773) of the Secretary-General that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of Congo, Mr. Martin Kobler,

14-221263/8

S/PV.7107

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

30/01/2014

submitted to Council members on 13 January 2014 (see
S/PV.7094). The two reports detail the resurgence of
the defunct Mouvement du 23 Mars (M-23) and the
ongoing support of Rwanda and Uganda for that former
terrorist group.

used by Rwanda to destabilize the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We wish to reassure
the Security Council that the settlement of the issue
remains a priority for my Government, even after the
defeat of M-23.

The final report of the Group of Experts clearly
establishes the fact that the former M-23 rebels
continue to recruit members in Rwanda despite their
defeat in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It also confirms that the M-23 has received
continued support from Rwandan territory. Finally, the
Group of Experts confirms the fact that it had received
credible information to the effect that M-23 leaders
could move freely in Uganda and travel outside that
country. They reported the case of an M-23 leader who
went to Europe from Uganda. Moreover, the report of
the Secretary-General sets forth credible information
according to which the M-23 has continued to recruit
members after the statements declaring the end of
hostilities made in Nairobi in December and has once
again become active in Ituri. That information was
also confirmed by Mr. Kobler in his statement to the
Council on 13 January 2014.

That resolve is emphasized in the report that my
Government sent to the Security Council under cover of
a letter dated 16 January 2014, in which my delegation
reminded the Council of the efforts of the joint military
operations that the armies of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda had carried out several
years earlier, as well as the joint operations that were
carried out between the FARDC and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC) in 2004 and 2005, the Kimia I and
Kimia II Operations, in 2008 and 2009, respectively,
carried out with the support of MONUC, the Amani
Leo Operation, carried out with the support of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
from 2010 to 2012, and the active involvement, first, of
MONUC, and then of MONUSCO, in the repatriation to
their countries of origin of FDLR members who chose
to participate in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process.

My delegation notes that, despite the renewed
activity of the M-23 launched from Rwandan and
Ugandan territory — two countries that are signatories
of the Framework agreement and hosts former M-23
combatants — the report of the Panel of Experts
unfortunately does not contain a single recommendation
on the resurgence of the M-23, neither with respect to
its leaders nor with respect to Rwanda and Uganda,
which continue to violate their commitments under the
Framework agreement.
In its report, the Group of Experts also describes
allegations whereby the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) cooperate to a certain
extent with the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR), to which it supplies weapons. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo is serious about
peace. We wish to live peaceably within our borders,
but we also wish to see peace for all the countries of the
region. It is from that point of view, therefore, that my
Government would like to have some avenues of inquiry
and specific intelligence as to the alleged collaboration
between the FARDC and the FDLR, in order to enable
it to begin investigations and establish responsibility
with a view to taking the resulting necessary measures.
Moreover, my Government is aware that the matter
of the FDLR is one of the pretexts most frequently

4/8

It was therefore in good faith that the Congolese
authorities committed themselves, together with the
Rwandans, to continue to hunt the FDLR. And it is in
good faith that the Congolese army, which defeated
the M-23, undertakes to continue its efforts in that
direction. The Democratic Republic of the Congo,
whose civilian population is the only one in the region
since the Rwandan genocide to have to pay the heavy
price of the recurrent FDLR attacks, has no interest
in cooperating in any way whatsoever with hostile
Rwandan forces.
To conclude this part of my statement, it is
appropriate to point out that, in addition to the military
solution to the FDLR issue, my Government wishes to
remind the Security Council of the recommendation
made at the most recent joint summit of the Southern
African Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held on
4 November 2013 in Pretoria, which called on the
members of those two organizations to work for the
repatriation of hostile forces to their countries of origin.
It is against that backdrop that my Government calls
on Rwanda to agree to the repatriation of the FDLR to

14-22126

30/01/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

their country of origin, Rwanda. The same applies to
other neighbouring countries.
In addition to what I have stated here, the report
also denounces and documents the many incursions of
the Rwandan army into Congolese territory in violation
of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of my country. Such an attitude constitutes
an act of aggression, which must be acknowledged and
condemned by the Security Council pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. Rwanda’s attitude in that regard, highlighted
by a United Nations Group of Experts operating under a
mandate set out by a binding resolution, constitutes an
illegitimate use of force against the territorial integrity
and political independence of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In flagrant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, it contravenes the principles of
peaceful coexistence, international humanitarian law,
the protection of human rights and the peremptory
norms of international law.
As I address the issue of consecutive sanctions
violations of the arms embargo, allow me also to recall
the sanctions imposed on certain M-23 leaders last year.
It is appropriate to note that sanctions are useful only
when they have a direct impact. In other words, they
have to demonstrate their effectiveness by achieving
the designated goal. The sanctions announced by the
United States Department of the Treasury and by the
United Nations last year fall far short in addressing
all the conclusions of the Group of Experts, which,
in addition to the M-23 rebels, has clearly implicated
Rwanda and Uganda, the host countries helping them
to reorganize in order to perpetuate instability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In spite of the overwhelming evidence reported by
МONUSCO and the Group of Experts, Rwanda — as
always — denies the facts brought before it, unable to
refute even a single fact overwhelmingly implicating
it in the destabilization of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Likewise, that country, which is also a
member of the Security Council, continues to refuse to
implement the sanctions on which it has voted. That is
especially clear in the case of the leaders of the former
M-23 who have long remained on the current list of
persons targeted by sanctions imposed by the United
Nations, the European Union and the United States, and
who have been protected by Rwanda, where they have
found shelter.

S/PV.7107

In July 2013, my Government formally requested
the extradition of four M-23 leaders in Rwanda, to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, namely, Innocent
Zimurinda, Baudouin Ngaruye, Eric Badege and JeanMarie Runiga Lugerero. Rwanda has never responded
to my Government’s request. It is incumbent upon the
Council to require those countries, and Uganda, to
cooperate in arresting and transferring the criminals
to the appropriate international and Congolese judicial
bodies.
My Government again thanks the entire international
community for having clearly reported, through the
Group of Experts, Rwanda’s involvement in destabilizing
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I request that the Council account for all of the
consequences arising from the violation by Rwanda and
Uganda of the Council’s own resolutions regarding the
arms embargo and the sanctions regime.
The Council is aware of human, material,
testimonial and documentary evidence of Rwanda’s
aggression. Faced with this tragedy, the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, along with the
entire Congolese people and the rest of the international
community, expect the Council to take a firm and
unequivocal stand in line with the implementation of
sanctions. In order to be credible and effective, sanctions
must be carefully targeted and vigorously enforced.
We firmly believe that sanctions will enable the swift
restoration of peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and throughout the region. They will also prevent
the continuing illegal exploitation of natural resources
and other wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, against the backdrop of rebellions supported by
external Powers.
With respect to resolution 2136 (2014), which
the Council just adopted, everyone is familiar with
the practice established by the Council regarding
the drafting of such a resolution. Nevertheless, it
seems to us that the method followed in drafting
the current resolution did not respect such practice.
The resolution is based on the report of the Group of
Experts and concerns the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It involves obligations on the
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all
of its people. We believe that all of the explanations
provided regarding the FDLR could have been included
in another resolution on Rwanda on the occasion of
the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide,
which was committed by Rwandans against Rwandans,

14-221265/8

S/PV.7107

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

on Rwanda territory — a genocide in which the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was never involved,
either closely or from a distance. On the other hand,
all of the contents of the original text upon which basis
the Council should have expressed its concern about
reports indicating the resumption of the M-23’s military
activities — namely, recruitment — were simply set
aside, perhaps to please Rwanda.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to take
this opportunity to especially thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki- moon for his personal involvement in resolving
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Equally, thanks also go to Her Excellency Mrs. Mary
Robinson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region of Africa, for her remarkable
efforts in carrying out the important mission entrusted
to her by the Secretary-General.
I cannot forget the positive work of MONUSCO,
headed by Mr. Kobler, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, whose courage and determination I commend,
as well as the support of the МONUSCO Intervention
Brigade to the FARDC. Finally, I cannot sufficiently
thank the members of the Security Council for the
continued valuable initiatives taken to re-establish
peace in my country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Rwanda has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): I would
like to briefly respond to what my colleague, the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
has just said. I was not supposed to take the floor, but
he has pushed me to do so.
I listened to the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo speak about Rwanda. It is
important to mention that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is 80 times larger than Rwanda — larger
than nearly all of Western Europe — while Rwanda
represents a tiny spot on the African continent. One
would think the opposite is the case. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a very large and rich country;
whereas Rwanda is a small, land-locked country that is
trying move on from its many problems.
During yesterday’s debate, the President himself
referred to the United Nations Operation in the Congo,
a missison deployed 54 years ago. Rwanda was still

6/8

30/01/2014

under the colonial yoke at that time. It has been more
than half a century that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has had these problems.
Rwanda is there to help. When I hear the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
accuse countries such as Uganda, it sounds like a total
lack of gratitude to Mr. Museveni, who was the Chair
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and who tried to help that country. I do not
know if the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo asked its representative to come to the
Council to accuse Uganda, but it is painful to hear him
say such things. I am not the representative of Uganda,
but those of us from the region ought to thank President
Museveni for everything he has done to ensure regional
stability. I will stop there on the issue of Uganda.
I now return to Rwanda. The representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo spared no words
in his statement concerning the illegal exploitation of
the resources of his country. But those resources are
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Why then
does the Democratic Republic of the Congo have such
problems? Let us say that there are those who have gone
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to steal its
resources. What is the current situation there? We are
ready to help the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
we did after the genocide. We did everything we could
to help the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to stabilize the country. The representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo might not
even be in the Council today in his current capacity
if Rwanda and the Rwandan army had not helped his
country.
We are not there to destabilize the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We have absolutely no interest
in destabilizing the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is true that more than 600 rebels of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) are in Rwanda. Since last year
the Council has heard me implore and plead for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to come get those
people, but nobody lifts a finger. What do they want us
to do? Should we shoot them? No, we uphold the rule
of law and we respect human rights. If the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees does
not want to do its work, it is not for us to ask it to do
so. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has asked us
to extradite people. If international courts want access
to these people in Rwanda they should come retrieve

14-22126

30/01/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

them, as we did with others who belonged to M-23. We
abide by international law.
The time has come for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to stop whining every time it comes before the
Council and to stop bashing Rwanda. The representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo comes to the
Council to shout loud and clear in praise of the so-called
Group of Experts and its report (S/2014/42, annex). He
should read the report carefully because it states that
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo are collaborating with the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR). Obviously, we have
our own information. Perhaps the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo wishes to retract his
praise?
To summarize, we have no interest whatsoever in
seeing the Democratic Republic of Congo collapse.
We are neighbours and we share many things. We have
shared many good things together, and his Government
knows that very well, as does he. It is not for us to start
smashing things up.
I ask that we end this scurrility of coming time
and again to this Chamber to sow discord. Enough is
enough. It is time to stop. Let us sit around the table,
try to help each other and see how the region could
be peaceful. The representative of the Democratic
Republic of Congo alluded to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. We are ready to sit
down with the Democratic Republic of Congo. We are
ready to help the Democratic Republic of Congo and
its inhabitants with our meagre resources. We did so
before, we are doing so now and we will continue to
do so.
I do not believe that this is the appropriate forum to
throw stones at Rwanda, which is in a position to help
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As for the FDLR,
it is true that the genocide was committed by Rwandans
against their Rwandan brothers, but unfortunately they
now live in the Democratic Republic of Congo. That
is where they are. The evil resides in the Democratic
Republic of Congo. They are our brothers; we cannot
reject them. When they return, we will take care of
them. We will try to integrate them into everyday social
life. However, if certain mentalities persist and if the
Democratic Republic of Congo continues to help people
who espouse a genocidal ideology, we will never get
beyond this chapter.

S/PV.7107

If necessary, certain punitive measures will be
taken. However, I hope that today will be the very last
time that we come to the Council to throw stones, as if
we had no other place to solve our own problems in the
days to come. It is for the good of the entire region and
the world. Uganda will not set up a concentration camp
for the M-23. Measures are in place and will be taken,
and that is also the case for Rwanda. A framework is in
place to deal legally with those problems. This is not
the context in which to address those issues.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Democratic Republic of Congo has asked to take
the floor a second time. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of Congo) (spoke in French): I would like to respond to
the statement just made by the representative of Rwanda,
a Security Council member. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo is a sovereign country that does not take
orders from the representative of Rwanda, even if his
country is a member of the Security Council. He has
no business forbidding us to come to this international
body to present our problems, as other States do.
What we said earlier is not something we have
invented; the information was provided by the experts
whom the Security Council has mandated to go into
the field. It is those experts who gathered the facts and
recorded them. If Rwanda wishes to object to what
the experts say, it must address itself to the experts
appointed and mandated by the Council, including
Rwanda itself. But the representative of Rwanda cannot
tell the Democratic Republic of the Congo to shut up
and to never bring its problems before the Council
again. We are a sovereign country. He must respect us
as such and end such arrogance.
With regard to the FDLR, as that is the important
issue which he keeps coming back to, the Council has
heard what I said. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains open. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo chooses a constructive solution because it wants
peace. As I said, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
wants peace not only throughout its territory but also
with its neighbours, because it is by living in peace that
we can bring about integration projects and develop
our region. Ambassador Gasana said that Rwanda was
helping the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
wanted to help it. We want to have a dialogue with
people who are sincere, who are not hypocrites and who

14-221267/8

S/PV.7107

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

say clearly what they want, but not to people who say
“yes” when they really mean “no”.
The Council well knows that the United Nations
initiated an instrument that should restore peace in
the region — the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. That agreement is not observed by
Rwanda or Uganda. It is not us who are saying that. On
13 January here before the Council, you, Mr. President,
heard the briefing by Mrs. Robinson (see S/PV.7094). In
her intervention, she clearly said that. Let Rwanda tell
Mrs, Robinson that she, not the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, is telling lies because we want peace. When
we point out those facts, are we supposed to come here
to be lectured to by Ambassador Gasana. He should
respect our country. He should stop that arrogant
attitude. We are a sovereign State. We can come here
and speak about our country because we know that we
should bring all such problems here in order for peace
to be restored in our country.
As I said with regard to the FDLR — the Council
followed my statement — we are open. We do not reject
things, as they do. Members are here in the Council
with them all the time and follow the discussions. But
we know how that country behaves here in the Council.
It has never accepted anything, but systematically
denies all the evidence, even what is clear to everyone.
It fails to see it.
On the FDLR, agains we say that we are open.
We want the experts to help us and give us specific
information and avenues that we can follow to carry out
investigations. That desire of ours is clearly reflected
in the report before the Council (S/2014/42, annex).
Members themselves can see that in the report, and
see the efforts that my country has made to combat the
FDLR and hunt them down.
Rwanda is present in our Congo — I do not know
how long it has been — and Ambassador Gasana could
tell us how many FDLR members his country’s army
has arrested. On the other hand, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) can also provide
evidence. Our army has handed over FDLR members to
MONUSCO, who were sent to Rwanda and then were
recycled and sent back to the Congo in order to continue

8/8

30/01/2014

to perpetuate this ongoing situation, of which we are all
aware. The evidence is there, so Rwanda cannot come
here and tell us that it wants to help us. The Congo has
helped Rwanda. You yourself, Ambassador Gasana,
were trained by the Congo. You know that. I will not
dwell on that.
I say once again that we desire to peace. We want
peace and to enter into dialogue with people who are
sincere and who want to be constructive and forget the
past, as you, Mr. President, said here in yesterday’s
debate (see S/PV.7105), so that the Great Lakes region
can move forward. But we do not want to talk to people
who have other ideas in mind and want to stop the
Great Lakes region from making progress, who want
to continue to stir up difficulties and war for others
because that makes them happy. We do not want that.
That is what I wanted to say in answer to
Ambassador Gasana. I thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing me to come and talk about such things,
although this is not really the sort of discussion that we
should really be having here.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
As this is the last meeting of the Council for
the month of January, I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of Jordan to the
members of the Council, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives, their respective staff and
the secretariat of the Council for all the support that
they have given to us.
It has been a busy month, in which we rallied to
consensus on several important issues within our
purview. We could not have done it alone and without
the hard work, support and positive contributions
of every delegation and the representatives of the
Secretariat, as well as the interpreters, translators,
meetings services personnel and sound engineers. As
we end our presidency, I know that I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of Lithuania
good luck in its presidency of the Council in the month
of February.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

14-22126
