United Nations

S/PV.6728

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6728th meeting
Wednesday, 29 February 2012, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-24698 (E)

*1224698*

S/PV.6728

challenges and its efforts, and what it is planning to
accomplish in the short period before elections to a
national congress provide the basis for a new
Government and the drafting of the constitution.

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Ian
Martin, who is joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Tripoli.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Mr. Ian Martin and Ambassador José Filipe Moraes
Cabral, Permanent Representative of Portugal, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. Martin.
Mr. Martin: On 17 February the people of Libya
marked the first anniversary of the beginning of their
revolution. People took to the streets of Tripoli,
Benghazi and other cities and towns in celebration.
Many of the celebrations were spontaneously organized
in neighbourhoods. Libyans remarked on the contrast
with the State-organized demonstrations that
characterized the previous regime. While remembering
those who died in the struggle for freedom, they
signalled hope and determination for the future.
Despite concerns that there might be attempted attacks
or disruptions by elements of the former regime, the
anniversary passed peacefully, with effective security
operations coordinated among State security forces,
local civilian authorities and brigades of former
revolutionary fighters.
While it is one year since the uprising began, the
new Libya has still only had a Government for three
months. Next week the Council will hear from Prime
Minister Abdurrahim El-Keib his account of its

2

It is clear that the Libyan people are eager to
move forward with the transition to democracy. Their
most central expectation of the United Nations is that
we will support them in doing so. When I last briefed
the Council, on 25 January (see S/PV.6706), the
National Transitional Council (NTC) had adopted the
electoral administration law and appointed the High
National Electoral Commission, and was continuing
consultations on the main electoral law. That law was
adopted on 28 January, with the final amendments
approved on 7 February.
The law provides for a mixed parallel electoral
system, with 120 seats to be elected by majoritarian
races reserved for individual candidates, and 80 seats
to be elected by proportional races reserved for lists to
be submitted by political or other groups. Like all
electoral frameworks, this parallel system is a
compromise among competing views and interests, but
our judgment is that the law provides a reasonable
foundation for the election of the national congress,
although some gaps and shortcomings remain. While
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) had encouraged the NTC electoral
committee to ensure that the right to vote should be as
inclusive as possible, the law excludes members of the
armed forces from voting. There is also a need for
measures to ensure the participation of internally
displaced people in the electoral process.
It is particularly welcome that the law includes a
formula, albeit a modest one, to ensure the
participation of women in the national congress, as
UNSMIL had urged. The special measure requires that
the candidates on the lists for proportional races be
listed alternately by gender; thus for multi-seat
constituencies where there will be party lists, every
other candidate on the lists must be a woman.
The proposed division of the country into
constituencies and the allocation of seats is being
finalized and has not yet been published. The
distribution among the regions, cities and towns may
well be controversial, but it is important that this issue
be resolved without further delay to allow election
preparations to proceed.

12-24698

S/PV.6728

It is understandable that the process for
developing an electoral law took longer than
envisaged, in view of the political complexities
involved in deciding the basic electoral foundation for
any country and the fact that this will be the first
election in Libya in more than 40 years. Despite the
delays, the NTC has publicly confirmed its intention to
hold the elections according to the timeline envisaged
in the constitutional declaration, although the official
call for the elections has yet to be made.
To achieve that timetable, activities to implement
the legal framework must begin immediately and
progress swiftly. I commend the 15 Commissioners of
the High National Electoral Commission, who were
sworn in on 12 February, for immediately commencing
work on establishing subcommittees to address the
core issues as well as a functional administration. I met
with them myself this morning, and confirmed that
they have high expectations that UNSMIL’s assistance,
which has been well appreciated by the electoral
authorities during the legislative period, will now be
carried forward in the operational phase. In response,
the United Nations is expanding its support to the
Electoral Commission by strengthening its advisory
role within the Commission, launching support of voter
education and coordinating the assistance of other
international actors.
Meanwhile, the determination of communities to
establish the legitimacy of local representation has
been displayed in the election of a new local council in
Misrata on 20 February. An eight-member local
elections committee, appointed by the local council in
early January, organized the election, including the
administrative division of the city, the allocation of
seats and the registration of voters. Approximately
65 per cent of the eligible population registered and
57 per cent of registered voters cast their votes for
28 seats. The candidates elected were announced
following a two-day counting period in a peaceful and
amicable environment. The police and brigades
provided comprehensive security within the city and
outside of the 78 polling stations.
In other cities I visited during the reporting
period, local councils viewed the Misrata elections
positively and expressed their desire to hold their own
elections. Of particular significance, given recent
controversy there, is the appointment by the Benghazi
local council of a well-respected judge to oversee the
formation of a committee charged with preparing for

12-24698

local elections in Libya’s second-largest city, where the
uprising for democratic transformation began.
Of the utmost importance to the successful
conduct of elections nationwide is, of course, a positive
evolution of the security situation. The Libyan
authorities well recognize that their foremost challenge
is to address the future of the revolutionary fighters
and the wide circulation of weapons and to develop
professional State security institutions under civilian
control. However, while the diverse armed brigades
continue to lack clear lines of command and
coordination, there is some appreciable progress in the
development of State authority over brigades in the
provision of security, including through the
establishment of local security committees under the
direction of the Ministry of the Interior to coordinate
security operations among participating brigades. The
coordinated deployments during the 17 February
anniversary celebrations were a significant illustration
of that progress. The brigades continue to perform
important security functions, as they have for long
periods, often without payment.
Contrary to the impression given by some media
reports, although they seek guarantees that the
transformation for which they have fought is securely
on track, there is little indication that they wish to
perpetuate an existence outside State authority. The
Government issued a decision last week regarding the
transfer of control of land, air and sea port
infrastructure from the brigades to the Ministry of
Interior, which when implemented will be a significant
step forward in exerting State control.
At the same time, Government plans for the
registration and integration or demobilization of former
fighters are proceeding. The registration process for
ex-combatants that started in January is nearing
completion. The Warriors Affairs Commission for
Rehabilitation
and
Development
reports
that
approximately 148,000 have registered to date, and
will be referring those preferring to join the police to
the Ministry of the Interior and those who choose the
army to the Ministry of Defence.
Approximately 15 per cent appear to be opting
for each of those entities, so the majority of excombatants are seeking, and must be afforded,
educational or vocational training and employment or
self-employment opportunities. The Ministries of the
Interior, Defence and Labour are developing their plans

3

S/PV.6728

for integration and reintegration, including an initial
recruitment of 10,000 former fighters under the
Ministry of Interior and 5,000 under the Ministry of
Defence.
On 20 and 21 February, UNSMIL, upon the
request of the Prime Minister, facilitated an interministerial retreat to review the most critical security
challenges confronting Libya and to decide upon
immediate steps to address them in a coordinated
manner. In opening the retreat, the Prime Minister
highlighted border security, security in Libyan cities,
weapons proliferation and human rights violations as
the major security preoccupations. He also emphasized
the need to strengthen Libya’s security and defence
forces swiftly within the remaining four months of his
Government’s tenure, urging the relevant Ministries to
pool their efforts and coordinate closely.
The retreat developed a priority action plan, with
key recommendations that include strengthening police
deployment and security coordination among all
relevant actors in the lead-up to elections and securing
the southern border in an integrated action plan against
human trafficking, arms smuggling and other illegal
activities. All participants welcomed the commitment
to strengthened inter-ministerial coordination and
cooperation, a marked difference from the practice of
the previous regime. They recognized the need for an
overarching national security framework and strategy,
including a national security coordinating committee
under the Prime Minister. The Deputy Prime Minister
briefed international partners on the outcomes of the
workshop in order to further enhance coordinated
assistance in those areas.
In addition to the support to inter-ministerial
coordination and communications, UNSMIL continued
to support the efforts of the Government in
coordinating with bilateral and multilateral partners in
the areas of arms proliferation, border security and the
rehabilitation of the police. There are now three
UNSMIL advisers embedded in the Ministry of the
Interior, supporting the Ministry in the areas of police
training, logistics and communication and media
relations. UNSMIL is also assisting the Government in
preparations for the high-level regional conference on
border security that Prime Minister El-Keib announced
Libya’s intention to convene when he addressed the
African Union Summit in Addis Ababa on 29 January.

4

The new Government faces tremendous
challenges and a heavy legacy from the former regime
as it tries to tackle illegal migration and smuggling,
effective border control, the proliferation of weapons
and the need to reverse policies of long-standing
discrimination against minority communities and foster
national reconciliation among tribes. The latter has
been tragically highlighted in recent days by deadly
clashes that erupted between the Tabou and the Zwaya
tribal brigades in the southern city of Kufra over a
two-week period, with approximately 100 reported to
have died and many seriously injured. While those
clashes appear to have been triggered by the initial
killing of a Zwaya man and the subsequent death of a
Tabou youth, it is the latest incident in a long history of
conflict of simmering tribal tensions fuelled by policies
of the former regime, including State-sponsored
discrimination against the Tabou, and by local disputes
over control over smuggling, including illegal
migration.
Religious leaders and tribal chiefs, among others,
negotiated a ceasefire to restore calm. The Government
dispatched units of the national army to the area,
although there were criticisms of too slow a response
by the authorities. A joint mission of United Nations
agencies and UNSMIL visited Kufra from 23 to 26
February to assess the most urgent priorities, including
support to third-country nationals and vulnerable
communities whose services were interrupted by the
fighting. United Nations agencies have delivered
humanitarian assistance through the Libyan Red
Crescent and the Ministry of Health, but difficulties
have yet to be overcome to ensure that the Tabou areas,
isolated by the fighting, receive sufficient humanitarian
support.
Since the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and I briefed the Council on 25 January, further
information regarding torture and ill-treatment of
detainees, including deaths in custody, has come to
light through non-governmental organizations and
UNSMIL’s own visits to places of detention. I and my
colleagues have discussed immediate measures to
prevent further incidents of torture and mistreatment in
several meetings with the Prime Minister, the Minister
of Justice and other ministers and senior officials. On
31 January, Deputy Prime Minister Mustafa Abu Shagur
announced that the Government had issued a circular to
clarify the rights of detainees, including a directive that
torture and mistreatment of detainees was forbidden

12-24698

S/PV.6728

and that allegations would be investigated. Addressing
the Human Rights Council in Geneva yesterday, Prime
Minister El-Keib reiterated the Government’s human
rights commitment and cooperation with the United
Nations and others in that domain. Strong and urgent
measures are essential to give effect to those
intentions.
I have particularly stressed the need for a task
force that brings together the Ministries of Justice,
Defence and the Interior to regularly inspect facilities
still under the control of various brigades, to identify
all detention locations and to implement an overall
strategy on conflict-related detentions. The Ministry of
Justice has indicated that such inspections have
commenced, and the Prime Minister has given
assurances of the formation of a committee to
investigate allegations of torture and stated yesterday
that such investigations are now under way. UNSMIL
has visited or revisited detention facilities in Misrata,
Zawiya and Tripoli to identify those that should be
scrutinized as priority and has made an initial
submission to the Office of the Prime Minister and the
Ministry of Justice. We will continue to work closely
with the authorities and to encourage them to ensure
that inspections of known facilities are undertaken, that
secret locations are identified and brought under
Government control, and that abuses are investigated.
UNSMIL has also strongly urged the
investigation of the attack on 6 February on the
Tawergha camp for internally displaced persons at the
Janzur marine academy in Tripoli, when a brigade
entered the camp in heavy force and attempted arrests.
When camp detainees took to the streets to protest,
they were also fired upon. The combined attacks
resulted in the deaths of seven people, including three
children and two women. The United Nations has
pressed for better security not only at this camp, but
also at locations of displaced Tawergha in other parts
of the country. This latest incident underscores the
urgent need for the responsibility for arrests and
detention to be exercised by the Ministry of Justice
alone. As a contribution towards reconciliation,
Tawergha tribal leaders issued an apology on 23
February to all citizens of Misrata for the crimes
committed by members of their community and called
upon on all those who had committed such crimes to
surrender themselves to the justice system. My Deputy
continues to work with the Libyan authorities to

12-24698

address the short- and longer-term needs of the
Tawergha community.
UNSMIL continues to urge the Ministry of
Justice to accelerate the process of asserting control
over the facilities currently run by the brigades, where
we estimate that approximately 5,000 to 6,000
detainees remain. Since my last briefing, two
additional detention centres have been placed under
Government control, bringing the total to eight, with a
total of 2,382 detainees. Progress continues to be
complicated by insufficient numbers of judicial police.
Several partners have expressed a willingness to assist
in the training of judicial police, and the Ministry of
Justice has also requested assistance in the training of
prosecutors.
Libya’s court system is slowly coming back into
operation, with several courts in Tripoli and Benghazi
resuming operations, despite some concerns about the
security of judges and lawyers. On 5 February, the first
criminal proceedings of more than 40 persons accused
of having committed crimes in support of the AlQadhafi regime during the conflict opened before a
military court in Benghazi. On 22 February, the
military court ruled that the trial should move to a
civilian court, which is to be welcomed. As further
trials commence, it will be crucial that the accused be
granted adequate legal representation, full due
processes and assurances that any confessions that may
have been taken under torture are not admitted into
evidence.
The transitional justice law on the establishment
of the foundation of national reconciliation and
transitional justice was made public on 14 February.
The law establishes a fact-finding and reconciliation
commission mandated to investigate crimes and human
rights violations committed since 1969. It will
comprise 11 members to be appointed by the NTC. The
law also establishes a victims’ compensation fund, but
does not prevent victims from seeking justice through
the courts. While the law does not necessarily reflect
best practices elsewhere, it provides an important
opportunity to start a comprehensive truth-seeking
process in Libya.
A vital part of the transitional justice process is
the search for and identification of missing persons.
The Ministry for Assistance to the Families of Martyrs
and Missing Persons has already commenced the
collection of DNA samples from families as well as

5

S/PV.6728

work on the exhumation of mass graves. UNSMIL is
encouraging the Ministry to invite an international
expert assessment that will help to define a clear
strategy according to international standards, so that
quick measures do not harm prospects for the future
identification of remains. UNSMIL has also proposed
the drafting of a new legal framework to better
safeguard the rights of the families of the missing in
Libya.
In all of my meetings, at both the national and
local levels, officials have increasingly been
highlighting their inability to cope with the increasing
numbers of migrants and refugees, and are seeking
sustained assistance to address those challenges
humanely. In the absence of a clear legal or
administrative framework on migration, irregular
migrants and some potential asylum-seekers, including
elderly persons, women and children, continue to be
detained in facilities operated by different authorities
or brigades, often in poor conditions with limited
access to humanitarian assistance. Of the 18 Ministry
of Interior migrant detention facilities in operation
prior to the crisis, only two are under full Ministry
control. The International Organization for Migration
(IOM) continues to assist migrants in distress through
the facilitation of citizenship verification, the issuance
of travel documents and voluntary repatriation
operations; however, access to migrants and the
absence of secure transit facilities in the west and south
of the country remain the greatest challenges to direct
assistance.
In response to the poor conditions at the
Qanfouda detention facility in Benghazi, where
numbers have now swollen as a result of transfers from
Kufra, LibAid and other humanitarian actors have
undertaken refurbishments and provided non-food
items as well as improved the provision of health
services in attempts to address the growing needs.
The deteriorating security situation in Syria has
led to an influx of refugees entering Libya via the
Egyptian border. At the Salloum border crossing, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) has provided stranded Syrians
with more than 4,000 meals, while IOM has been
providing support in the form of medical treatment and
some non-food items. Within Libya, UNHCR is
assisting local support organizations in their efforts to
cope with new arrivals through technical assistance in

6

registration and the provision of non-food items and
support for vulnerable individuals.
As anticipated in my last briefing, Deputy Prime
Minister Mustafa Abu Shagur convened a workshop on
30 and 31 January to discuss the coordination of
international assistance, bringing Libyan ministries,
institutions and civil society organizations together
with international partners. The workshop was an effort
to synchronize coordinated offers of external support
with the Government’s urgent priority planning. It
served to identify needs and opportunities for support
in the five areas of social services delivery: public
administration, transitional justice, civil society, media
and Government strategic communications. The
Government is close to presenting its national plan to
the international community and to putting in place
coordination arrangements to follow up on
international offers of support, involving the Prime
Minister’s Office and the Ministry of Planning,
supported by UNSMIL, the European Union and the
World Bank.
When I have the opportunity to address the
Council again next week, I will, of course, update
members on significant developments in any of those
areas, although I will mainly be presenting the
Secretary-General’s proposals for the role of UNSMIL
for the period ahead. Alongside our major engagements
during this period with the Government in Tripoli and
our work in integrated mission planning, I have, since
my last briefing, visited three more of the cities most
affected during the fighting — Sirte, Brega and
Ajdabiya. I have also held discussions with the local
council and civil society representatives — many of
them young people and women — in Benghazi. Such
visits make clear the extent of the need for
reconstruction, service delivery and the clearance of
mines and remnants of war.
But an equally strong impression is given by the
extraordinary show of civic responsibility and
initiative, which has led local people to set to work
immediately — without waiting for assistance from
central Government or international actors — to
resume as much of the elements of normal life as
possible. Along with that sense of responsibility of
local leaders goes the determination of civil society to
play its own role and to hold any future leadership to
account. Such attributes inspire not just hope but
confidence that Libya will overcome its legacy and its

12-24698

S/PV.6728

current difficulties, and will pursue the path towards
the goals to which it recommitted itself on 17 February.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Martin for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador José Filipe
Moraes Cabral.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): In accordance
with paragraph 24(e) of Security Council resolution
1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011, I have the honour to
report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee established by the same resolution. The
report covers the period from 23 December 2011 to
29 February 2012.
I would like to begin by noting that two important
documents are before the Committee. The first is a
working document put together by the Panel of Experts
and reflecting the contributions of the Panel, the
Counter-Terrorism
Executive
Directorate,
the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, on the threats and challenges
of arms proliferation from Libya to the region. The
second is a final report by the Panel on its monitoring
of the implementation of the relevant measures,
including the arms embargo, the travel ban and the
asset freeze.
The working document is currently under the
consideration and review of the Committee and will
form the basis for the Committee’s report to the
Council pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 2017
(2011). The Panel’s final report, which was submitted to
the Council on 18 February pursuant to paragraph 24 (d)
of resolution 1973 (2011), will be discussed during the
Committee’s next informal consultations on 5 March.
During the reporting period the Committee met
once in informal consultations, on 9 February.
Members of the Committee received from the Chair an
unofficial compilation of the arms embargo and asset
freeze notifications and exemption requests that had by
that time been processed in the Committee. As of 9
February, the Committee had processed a total of 31
notifications or exemption requests concerning the
arms embargo and a total of 151 notifications or
exemption requests concerning the asset freeze.

12-24698

Since my last periodic report (see S/PV.6698), in
connection with the arms embargo, the Committee has
approved one request for an exception to that measure
under paragraph 9 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011). The
Committee has also expressed no objection to a second
request that invoked paragraph 9 (c) of the resolution.
Furthermore, no negative decision was taken by the
Committee in relation to 10 notifications under
paragraph 13 of resolution 2009 (2011), which allows a
supply of arms and related materiel of all types
intended solely for security or disarmament assistance
to the Libyan authorities.
With respect to the asset freeze, no negative
decision was taken by the Committee in relation to one
notification under the basic expenses provision set out
in paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011) and two
notifications under paragraph 16 of resolution 2009
(2011). Members of the Council will recall that the
latter paragraph provides for the unfreezing of funds
for various additional purposes. Moreover, in four
cases, the relevant Member State was informed that the
entity to which the funds belonged had already been
de-listed by the Committee. Therefore, the submission
of notifications or exemption requests did not apply in
relation to that entity.
Also on 9 February, members of the Committee
discussed several requests for guidance or assistance
received from Member States that related to the status
of the subsidiaries of the two remaining listed
entities — the Libyan Investment Authority and the
Libyan Africa Investment Portfolio. They noted that
entities owned or controlled, either wholly or partially,
by the Investment Authority or the Investment
Portfolio are not subject to the asset freeze measure. At
present, in response to the requests for guidance, the
Committee is preparing a general notice, to be
disseminated to all Member States and posted on the
Committee’s website, on the proper application of the
asset freeze measure.
Furthermore, members of the Committee received
an update from the Panel of Experts, via
videoconference, on the preparation of the working
document that I referred to earlier, that is, concerning
threats and challenges of arms proliferation. As I also
stated earlier, that document is now under the
consideration of the Committee and will be submitted
to the Council shortly. The Committee also looks
forward to discussing the Panel’s final report under
resolution 1973 (2011), and is pleased to note that all

7

S/PV.6728

countries that the Panel approached for a possible visit
have responded positively.

a State of peace and development for the well-being of
Libyans.

Finally, at the request of the relevant Libyan
authorities, the Committee amended an entry to its list
of individuals and entities designated as subject to the
travel ban and/or asset freeze.

On 21 February 2011, Muammar Al-Qadhafi said
that we would hand out weapons and set Libya ablaze.
That happened. The vehicles of the Al-Qadhafi regime
were in the street, distributing weapons for people to
kill each other. Millions and millions of dollars and
dinars were handed out and people were turned against
each other. However, the awareness, enthusiasm and
solidarity of the Libyan people enabled us to overcome
very many problems.

I would like to conclude by noting that, to date,
the Committee has received reports from 55 Member
States on their implementation of the relevant measures.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Shalgham (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere thanks to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting
as a follow-up to developments in Libya. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Moraes Cabral for his work
and his response to Libya’s concerns with regard to
many issues under the consideration of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), which he chairs. Allow me also to thank
Mr. Ian Martin for his ongoing continuing efforts to
cooperate with us in all fields and for his
comprehensive and clear report from Tripoli.
In this very Chamber, last February, the Council
adopted, first, resolution 1970 (2011) and then
resolution 1973 (2011) in order to protect unarmed and
innocent Libyan civilians. That effort was crowned
with Libya’s freedom in expression of the desire of our
people to regain their sovereignty, as well as that of
other Arab peoples, from Tunisia and Egypt to Libya
and Yemen, where we have seen a transfer of authority,
and now to Syria, which is paying with blood in the
face of repression. In that country, ugly crimes against
humanity and against the Syrian people who, just like
the Tunisians, Egyptians and Yemenis, refuse to bow
until they achieve their freedom, are being perpetrated.
I thank the Council again.
Today, there is a new State in Libya. Elections,
both individual and by lists, as Mr. Martin said, will
take place in June. New elections will take place
despite the problems, the proliferation of arms, the
bloodshed and the issues that we are uncovering every
day. Lists of individuals and a new constitution will be
drawn up. The upcoming elections do not seek to
establish a Government or a parliament. The elections
will lead to the drafting of a constitution for a new and
democratic civil State, where there is the rule of law ─

8

We again thank the United Nations in the person
of Mr. Ian Martin, who is making so many efforts to
help us. However, we need more assistance from the
international community. Tens of thousands are
entering Libya from the southern Sahara every day.
Some leaders of the Al-Qadhafi regime are now in
various other States — Tunisia, Egypt, Algeria, Chad,
Mali and the Niger. We know that some of them are
plotting. In the past few days, a number of armed cells
have been detained. They were plotting to sabotage and
bomb Tripoli. Al-Qadhafi agents are sending funds to
Libya for acts of sabotage. I appeal to those States to
cooperate with us. I sent to the Council, under the
presidency of South Africa, as well as to Mr. MorenoOcampo at the International Criminal Court, a flash
drive containing recordings of telephone calls during
which Mr. Baghdadi Ali Al-Mahmoudi personally gave
instructions for such actions. He is now in Tunisia.
There are also other people wanted by INTERPOL
residing in other States. Those persons must be brought
to justice. They are a danger to my country.
We are working to convene a meeting among the
countries of the Sahel and North Africa to agree a
unified strategy to combat terrorism in the Sahara.
Libya is the first victim of the absence of the State, and
we appeal to the Council to help us with funds. We
need our frozen assets to be released.
With regard to those funds, we are working
towards transparency. We now have a committee for
transparency in Libya. We have dozens of free
newspapers that are speaking out every day. There are
television stations working transparently every day.
Transitional justice measures are being adopted,
and those bodies have begun working. There has been
much talk about detention centres and torture.
However, the transitional Government has detained a
number of former ministers and senior officials. They

12-24698

S/PV.6728

have been given every possible provision — health
care, visits, et cetera — Al-Qadhafi’s second is among
them, and he is able to be in contact with the outside. I
have personally met with a number of detainees. They
are being cared for. Mr. Abdul-Ati Al-Obeidi, the
former Minister for Foreign Affairs, like others, is
being visited by his family and others.
However, let me say that there are areas where
the State has not been able to gain control. There are
no police or courts in those areas. We cannot be
responsible for all excesses everywhere. We are against
such acts and we hold their perpetrators responsible.
We need the United Nations to help us to ensure
the success of the elections in June, which will serve as
the foundation for a democratic and modern Libya based
on equality and where the rights of women are

12-24698

protected. The role of women is a major component of
proportional representation. We need a “zebra” list of
candidates — a list of six alternating male-female
candidates — so that we can ensure proper
representation for women in Libya, who make up more
than 50 per cent of our population.
Let me reassure the Council that we are working
seriously and actively for a State of democracy and
freedom to replace the regime that the Libyan people
uprooted at the price of their blood.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

9
