ments under those accords before the electoral campaign gets under
way. It expects ONUSAL to be allowed fully to carry out its
verification mandate unimpeded. The Council will continue to follow
developments in El Salvador with close attention."

March 1994 elections, which should take place in a peaceful environment,

At its 3321 st meeting, on 30 November 1993, the Council decided
to invite the representative of El Salvador to participate, without vote,
in the discussion of the item entitled "Central America: efforts towards
peace - further report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Observer Mission in El Salvador (S/26790)". 23

Noting recent progress in voter registration, and stressi~g the
importance of all registered voters being issued relevant credenbals so
as to enable broad participation in the elections,

Stressing the importance of free and fair elections as an essential
element of the entire peace process in El Salvador,

Welcoming the commitment of the presidential candidates t o ~
and stability in El Salvador, of 5 November 1993, as referred tom
paragraph 92 of the further report of the Secretary-General,

Resolution 888 (1993)
or JO November 1993

Welcoming also the recent announcement by the Government of El
Salvador to expedite the implementation of the land transfer programme,

The Security Council,

Welcomingfurther the work of the United Nations Observer Mission
in El Salvador and noting its vital importance to the entire peace and
reconciliation process in El Salvador,

Recalling its resolution 637 1989 of27 July I 989,
Recalling also its resolutions 693 (1991) of20 May 1991, 714
(1991) of30 September 1991, 729 (1992) of 14 January 1992, 784
(1992)of30 October 1992, 791 (1992) of30 November 1992 and 832
(1993) of27 May 1993,

Reiterating the need, in this as in all peace-keeping operations, to
continue to monitor expenditures carefully during this period of
increasing demands on peace-keeping resources,

Recal/i,ig further the statements by the President of the Security
Council ofl8 March,8 11 June 13 and 5 November 1993,24

I. Welcomes the further report of the Secretary-General of 23
November 1993;

Having studied the further report of the Secretary-General of 23
November 1993,29

2. Condemns recent acts of violence in El Salvador,
3. Expresses concer,i that important elements of the peace accords
remain only partially implemented;

Noti,ig wid1 appreciatio,i the continuing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to support the full and timely implementation of the agreements signed by the Government of El Salvador and the Frente
Farabundo Marti para la Liberaci6n Nacional to maintain and consolidate peace and promote reconciliation in El Salvador,

4. Urges the Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo
Marti para la Liberaci6n Nacional to make determined efforts to prevent
political violence and accelerate compliance with their commitments
under the peace accords;

Welcomi,ig the Secretary-General's observation . that the peace
process in El Salvador has advanced and that significant progress has
been made towards other objectives of the peace accords,

5. Reaffirms its support for the Secretary-General's use of his good
offices in the El Salvador peace process;

Concer,ied at the continuing problems and delays in implementing
several important components of the peace accords, including, inter
alia, those related to the transfer oflands, the reintegration into civilian
society of ex-combatants and war disabled, the deployment of the
National Civil Police and the phasing out of the National Police, and the
recommendations of the Commission on the Truth,

6. Also reaffirms its support, in this context, for the efforts of the
Secretary-Oeneral, in cooperation with the Government of El Salvador,
aimed at the immediate launching of an impartial, independent and
credible investigation into illegal armed groups, and urges all sectors of
society in El Salvador to cooperate in such an investigation;

Noting with co,icern the recent acts of violence in El Salva~or,
which may indicate renewed activity by illegal armed groups and which
could, if unchecked, negatively affect the peace process in El Salvador,
including the elections scheduled for March 1994,

1. Calls upon all parties concerned to cooperate fully with the
Secretary-General's Special Representative and the United Nations
Observer Mission in El Salvador in their task of verifying the parties'
implementation of their commitments, and urges them to complete
such implementation within the framework of the agreed calendar and
the new timetable proposed by the Observer Mission;

Welcoming in this regard the efforts of the Secretary-General in
cooperation with the Government of El Salvador towards the establishment of a mechanism to investigate illegal armed groups and their
possible connection with renewed political violence,

8. Stresses the need to ensure that the police and public security
provisions of the peace accords are scrupulously observed, with full
Observer Mission verification, and that necessary steps are taken to
complete the recovery of all weapons held by private individuals in
contravention of the peace accords;

Also noti,ig wit/, concern the seemingly politically motivated
murders of members of the different political parties, including the
Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberaci6n Nacional and the Alianza
Republicana Nacionalista,

9. Urges the Government of El Salvador and the Frente F~rabundo
Marti to remove all obstacles facing implementation of the land transfer
programme, and stresses the need to accelerate reintegration p-

Noting that El Salvador has entered a critical phase in the peace
process and that political parties have just begun a campaign for the
29

rogrammes for ex-combatants of both sides in conformity with the
peace accords;

Ibid., document S/26790.
78

10.
Reaffinnsthe need for full and timely implementation of the
recommendations of the Commission on the Truth;

groups had thus been duly conformed and might commence its work
immediately.

11.
Calls upon the relevant authorities in El Salvador to take all
necessary measures to ensure that the elections to be held in March
1994 be free and fair and requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide assistance in this regard;

In a letter dated 10 December 1993,31 the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:
"The members of the Security Council welcome your letter of 7
December 1993 concerning the establishment of a Joint Group for
the investigation of politically motivated illegal armed groups,30
composed of two independent representatives of the Government of
El Salvador nominated by the President of the Republic, the National
Counsel for the Defence of Human Rights and the Director of the
Division of Human Rights of the United Nations Observer Mission
in El Salvador (ONUSAL).

12.
Urges all States, as well as the international institutions
engaged in the fields of development and finance, to contribute
promptly and generously in support of the implementation of all aspects
of the peace accords;
13.
Decides to extend the mandate of the Observer Mission to 31
May 1994;

"The members of the Council support the 'Principles', attached to
your letter, which will give the Group an independent, impartial and
non-political character. The members of the Council also support
your role in ensuring the effectiveness and credibility of the investigation.

14.
Requests-the Secretary-General to keep the Security Council
fully informed of further developments in the El Salvador peace
process;
15.
Requests-the Secretary-General to report by 1 May 1994 on
the operations of the Observer Mission so that the Council may review
the Mission's size and scope for the period after 31 May 1994, taking
into account the Secretary-General's relevant recommendations for the
fulfilment and completion of its mandate
16.

"The members of the Council consider it of the utmost importance that all necessary measures are taken to facilitate the task of the
Joint Group so that the recommendation of the Commission on the
Truth regarding the full investigation of the illegal armed groups is
promptly implemented. They call upon all parties in El Salvador to
cooperate fully in this respect.

Decides to remain seized of the matter
Adopted unanimously at the 33 21 st meeting.

"The members of the Council will continue to follow closely the
situation in El Salvador and request you to keep them informed on
developments in this matter."

Decision

In a letter dated 7 December 1993,30 addressed to the President of the
Security Council, the Secretary-General referred to his letter dated 3
November 1993,27 in which he had expressed concern over, recent cases
of arbitrary execution in El Salvador and expressed the need for the
immediate implementation of the recommendation of the Commission
on the Truth regarding the investigation of illegal groups, as well as to
his decision to instruct the Director of the Division of Human Rights of
the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) to
work, with supplementary expert assistance as needed, with those
concerned in order to assist the Government in implementing that
recommendation. The Secretary-General recalled that the Security
Council had approved his ideas about how the United Nations should
help in such an investigation in the statement of its President of 5
November 1993. 24 From 8 to 15 November 1993 he had dispatched a
mission to El Salvador led by Under-Secretary-General Marrack
Goulding. Extensive consultations had been held with all concerned
and considerable progress had been made towards an agreement on the
principles for the establishment of a Joint Group for the investigation
of politically motivated illegal armed groups. The Secretary-General
further recalled that it had been agreed that the members of the Joint
Group would be two independent representatives of the Government
ofEI Salvador nominated by the President of the Republic, the National
Counsel for the Defence of Human Rights and the Director of the
Division of Human Rights ofONUSAL. The Secretary-General had
been informed by his Special Representative in El Salvador, Mr.
Augusto Ramirez Ocampo, that President Cristiani had nominated the
two independent Government representatives to the Joint Group. The
Secretary-General was satisfied that they were well qualified for the
task at hand. In addition, the nominations had the approval of the
National Counsel for the Defence of Human Rights. The SecretaryGeneral stated that the mechanism for the investigation of illegal armed
30

THE SITUATION IN SOMALIA 1
Decisions

In a letter dated 10 February 1993,2 addressed to the President of the
Security Council for the attention of the members of the Council, the
Secretary-General referred to his progress report of26 January 1993 to
the Council on the situation in Somalia,3 in paragraphs 16 and 17 of
which he discussed the transition from the operations of the Unified
Task Force (UNITAF) to the United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM II). The Secretary-General stated in this connection that a
new Force Commander would be appointed shortly so that he could
participate effectively in the planning for the transition as well as the
transferoftheoperation from UNITAF to UNOSOM II. The SecretaryJI

S/26866.

1
Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted
by the Council in 1992.

S/25295.
3
Official Records qf die Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year, Suppleme,it for January, February and March 1993, document
S/25168.

S/26865.

79
