A/RES/68/6

United Nations

Distr.: General
28 January 2014

General Assembly
Sixty-eighth session
Agenda items 14 and 118

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 October 2013
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/68/L.4)]

68/6. Outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts
made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals
The General Assembly
Adopts the following outcome document:

Outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts made
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals
1.
We, Heads of State and Government and heads of delegation, have gathered at
United Nations Headquarters in New York at the special event convened by the
President of the General Assembly to review progress made towards the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and to chart the way forward.
Our deliberations have taken account of the voices of people worldwide and of the
concerns and priorities that they have conveyed.
2.
We gather with a sense of urgency and determination, with less than 850 days
remaining for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. We renew our
commitment to the Goals and resolve to intensify all efforts for their achievement
by 2015.
3.
We welcome what has been achieved so far. The Millennium Development
Goals have provided a common vision and have contributed to remarkable progress.
Significant and substantial advances have been made in meeting several of the
targets.
4.
However, we are concerned about unevenness and gaps in achievement and
about the immense challenges that remain. The Millennium Development Goals are
critical for meeting the basic needs of people in developing countries; as we
approach the 2015 deadline, unrelenting efforts are required to accelerate progress
across all the Goals.
5.
Among and within developing countries, those who have been left furthest
behind require our most urgent attention and support. We are conscious of the
special challenges and needs of the least developed countries; of the fact that,
13-43981

*1343981*

Please recycle

Outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts
made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals

A/RES/68/6

despite some impressive progress, most African countries remain off track in
meeting the Millennium Development Goals; and of the fact that conflict and postconflict countries face the most challenges in achieving any of the Goals by 2015.
6.
We recognize the special challenges and needs of small island developing
States and landlocked developing countries, many of which are not on track to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015. We also recognize the special
challenges in meeting the Goals faced by people living under foreign occupation.
We acknowledge the challenges in meeting the Goals for people living in areas
affected by complex humanitarian emergencies and in areas affected by terrorism.
We also recognize the specific challenges that many middle-income countries face.
Accelerating progress
7.
We reaffirm our commitment to the outcome document of the high-level
plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals,
held in 2010. 1 The annual reports on the Goals provide updated assessments of
where our efforts are most needed and will assist us in framing our approach and
priorities.
8.
We resolve to target in particular the most off-track Millennium Development
Goals and those where progress has stalled, including the Goals relating to poverty
and hunger, universal access to primary education, child mortality, universal access
to reproductive health, including maternal health, environmental sustainability and
access to water and sanitation. In each of these areas, we are determined to take the
purposeful and coordinated action required. We will scale up proven interventions,
fulfil the pledges that we have made and strengthen our support for the range of
valuable initiatives under way, including international support for the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development. 2
9.
Across all our acceleration efforts, we will emphasize inclusivity and
accessibility for all and will place a particular focus on those who are most
vulnerable and disadvantaged. We will, for example, seek to build the resilience of
the poorest in combating hunger, to improve support for women giving birth in areas
of greatest deprivation and to improve educational opportunities and learning
outcomes for the most vulnerable children.
10. Where efforts are broadly on track and momentum exists, we will do
everything possible to sustain and reinforce it. For example, in combating
HIV/AIDS, we will step up efforts to meet the goal of universal access to HIV
prevention, treatment, care and support services by 2015. We will sustain and build
on the remarkable gains in the fight against malaria and tuberculosis.
11. We will place a strong emphasis on all approaches that have a cross-cutting
and multiplier effect. In particular, we recognize that promoting gender equality and
empowering women and girls underpins and advances progress across all the
Millennium Development Goals. We will resolutely promote gender equality and
eliminate the range of barriers to the empowerment of women and girls in our
societies.

_______________
1
2

2/4

Resolution 65/1.
A/57/304, annex.

Outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts
made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals

A/RES/68/6

Global partnership for development
12. We underline the central role of a strengthened global partnership for
development. We recognize the importance of national ownership and emphasize
that, if the Millennium Development Goals are to be achieved by 2015, national
efforts need to be assisted by international support and an enabling international
environment. The mobilization and effective use of all resources, public and private,
domestic and international, will be vital.
13. We reaffirm the importance of promoting human rights, good governance, the
rule of law, transparency and accountability at all levels.
14. We call for the urgent implementation of all commitments under the global
partnership for development so as to overcome the gaps identified in the reports of
the Millennium Development Goals Gap Task Force. We emphasize the need to
accelerate progress towards the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income as
official development assistance by 2015, including 0.15 per cent to 0.20 per cent for
the least developed countries. We call upon developed countries to urgently fulfil
the official development assistance commitments that they have made, individually
and collectively.
15. We underline the need for the business sector to engage in responsible
business practices.
Post-2015 development agenda
16. In parallel with the intensification of efforts to accelerate the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals, we are determined to craft a strong post-2015
development agenda that will build on the foundations laid by the Goals, complete
the unfinished business and respond to new challenges.
17. As we take the work forward, we reaffirm our commitment to the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, 3 the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, 4 the Monterrey Consensus of the
International Conference on Financing for Development, 5 the Doha Declaration on
Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International
Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus 6 and the outcomes of all the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and environmental fields. We will
continue to be guided by the values and principles enshrined in those texts.
18. We reaffirm all the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development, 7 including, inter alia, the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities, as set out in principle 7 thereof.
19. We are resolved that the post-2015 development agenda should reinforce the
commitment of the international community to poverty eradication and sustainable
development. We underline the central imperative of poverty eradication and are
_______________
3

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 66/288, annex.
5
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
6
Resolution 63/239, annex.
7
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
4

3/4

Outcome document of the special event to follow up efforts
made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals

A/RES/68/6

committed to freeing humanity from poverty and hunger as a matter of urgency.
Recognizing the intrinsic interlinkage between poverty eradication and the
promotion of sustainable development, we underline the need for a coherent
approach that integrates in a balanced manner the three dimensions of sustainable
development. This coherent approach involves working towards a single framework
and set of goals, universal in nature and applicable to all countries, while taking
account of differing national circumstances and respecting national policies and
priorities. It should also promote peace and security, democratic governance, the
rule of law, gender equality and human rights for all.
20. We decide today to launch a process of intergovernmental negotiations at the
beginning of the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, which will lead to the
adoption of the post-2015 development agenda.
21. We acknowledge with appreciation the processes mandated in the outcome
document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development that are
now under way, in particular the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals and the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing, as well as the process to develop options for a technology facilitation
mechanism. We urge that these processes complete their work in a comprehensive,
balanced and expeditious manner by September 2014.
22. The report submitted by the Secretary-General in advance of the present
meeting, 8 which draws on inputs from the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on
the Post-2015 Development Agenda, United Nations Development Group
consultations, the Global Compact and the Sustainable Development Solutions
Network, is a useful input to our deliberations.
23. Over the coming year, the preparation of the post-2015 development agenda
will benefit from the General Assembly events to be convened by the President of
the Assembly under the theme “The post-2015 development agenda: setting the
stage”.
24. In arriving at an inclusive and people-centred post-2015 development agenda,
we look forward to a transparent intergovernmental process that will include inputs
from all stakeholders, including civil society, scientific and knowledge institutions,
parliaments, local authorities and the private sector.
25. We count on the strong support of the United Nations system throughout all
our work. As an input to the intergovernmental negotiations to be launched at the
beginning of the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, we call upon the
Secretary-General to synthesize the full range of inputs then available and to present
a synthesis report before the end of 2014.
26. The final phase of the intergovernmental work will culminate in a summit at
the level of Heads of State and Government in September 2015 for the adoption of
the post-2015 development agenda. We request the President of the General
Assembly to convene, in a timely manner, intergovernmental consultations to
achieve agreement on organizational modalities for the summit.
32nd plenary meeting
9 October 2013

_______________
8

4/4

A/68/202 and Corr.1.
