304

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

(c) Assistance in the form ofa travel grant for one participant from each developing country who will be invited
to the regional courses to be organized in 1986 and 1987;
and to finance the above activities from provisions in the
regular budget and also from voluntary financial contributions which would be received as a result of the requests
set out in paragraphs 9, 10 and II below;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his constructive efforts to promote training and assistance in international law within the framework of the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law in 1984 and 1985, in particular for the organization of the twentieth 15 and twenty-first 16 sessions of the
International Law Seminar, held at Geneva from 4 to 22
May 1984 and from 3 to 21 June 1985, respectively, and
the participation of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and its Codification Division in the activities related
to the conduct of the fellowship programme in international law sponsored jointly by the United Nations and the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its participation in
the Programme, particularly in the organization of
regional courses and in the conduct of the fellowship programme in international law sponsored jointly by the
United Nations and the Institute;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the Programme, in particular for the
efforts it has made to support the teaching of international
law;
5. Also expresses its appreciation to the Government of
the Republic of Cameroon and to the International Relations Institute of Cameroon for providing host facilities for
the regional training and refresher course for African
countries held at Yaounde from 12 to 24 November 1984;
6. Further expresses its appreciation to the Hague
Academy of International Law for the valuable contributions it has made to the Programme by enabling international law fellows under the sponsorship of the United
Nations and the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research to attend its annual international law courses and
by providing facilities for seminars organized under the
fellowship programme in international law in conjunction
with the Academy courses and for its constructive efforts
in organizing the regional training and refresher courses
held at Brasilia in 1983, at Cairo in 1984 and at Rabat in
1985;
7. Notes with appreciation the contributions made by
the Hague Academy of International Law to the teaching,
study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, and calls upon Member States and interested
organizations to give favourable consideration to the
appeal of the Academy for a continuation of and, if possible, an increase in their financial contributions in order
to enable the Academy to carry on with the above-mentioned activities;
8. Urges all Governments to encourage the inclusion of
courses on international law in the programmes of legal
studies offered at institutions of higher learning;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to publicize the Programme and periodically to invite Member
States, universities, philanthropic foundations and other
interested national and international institutions and
organizations, as well as individuals, to make voluntary
contributions towards the financing of the Programme or

otherwise to assist in its implementation and possible
expansion;
IO. Reiterates its request to Member States and to
interested organizations and individuals to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the Programme, in particular for the International Law Seminar
and the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Fellowship on the
Law of the Sea, and expresses its appreciation to those
Member States, institutions and individuals that have
made voluntary contributions for this purpose;
11. Urges in particular all Governments to make voluntary contributions with a view to covering the amount
of $30,000 needed for the financing of the daily subsistence allowance for up to twenty-five participants in each
regional course organized by the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research, thus alleviating the burden on
prospective host countries and making it possible for the
Institute to continue organizing one regional course per
year;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session on the implementation of the Programme during 1986 and 1987 and,
following consultations with the Advisory Committee on
the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation
of International Law, to submit recommendations regarding the execution of the Programme in subsequent years;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law".
112th plenary meeting
1 I December 1985

15 See Official Records of the General Asseml>lv. Thinv-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (N39/IO), paras. 411-421
•

16 Ibid.. Fonieth SPssion, Supplemeni No. 10 (N40/1()). paras. 326-334.

40/67.

Progressive development oftbe principles and
norms of internadonal law reladng to the new
intemadonal economic order

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, the General Assembly is called upon
to initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
l May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation
and 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to which contains the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling also its resolutions 34/ 150 of 17 December
1979 and 35/ l 66 of 15 December 1980, entitled "Consolidation and progressive development of the principles and
norms of international economic law relating in particular
to the legal aspects of the new international economic
order", and its resolutions 36/ 107 of 10 December 1981,
37/103 of 16 December 1982, 38/128 of 19 December
1983, and 39/75 of 13 December 1984, entitled "Progressive development of the principles and norms of international law relating to the new international economic
order".
Bearing in mind the urgent need to adopt measures to
reactivate the process of international economic co-operation and the negotiations undertaken for that purpose, par-

IX. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

ticularly in view of the economic difficulties encountered
by the developing countries,
Considering the close link between the establishment of
a just and equitable international economic order and the
existence of an appropriate legal framework,
Recognizing the need for a systematic and progressive
development of the principles and norms of international
law relating to the new international economic order,
Aware, however, that the period of time available for
consideration of the analytical study submitted to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session by the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, 17 has been
relatively short and that so far only a limited number of
Member States have been able to submit their views and
comments thereon 18 pursuant to paragraph 2 of resolution
39/75,
Convinced that a sufficient number of views and comments from Member States would be necessary for a
proper consideration of the manner by which further work
on the subject may be carried out,
I. Urges Member States that have not done so to submit, not later than 30 June 1986, their views and comments with respect to the study, including proposals concerning further action and procedures to be adopted within
the framework of the Sixth Committee with regard to the
consideration of the analytical study;
2. Recommends that the consideration of the most
appropriate procedure for completing the elaboration of
the process of progressive development of the relevant
principles and norms of international law, and of the
forum which would be entrusted with the task, be undertaken by the General Assembly at its forty-first session,
with a view to making a final decision after taking into
account all the proposals and suggestions made by Member States on the matter;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Progressive development of the principles and norms of international law
relating to the new international economic order".
112th plenary meeting
11 December 1985

40/68.

Peaceful settlement of disputes between
States

The General Assembly,
Having examined the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States",
Recalling its resolution 37/10 of 15 November 1982, by
which it approved the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, annexed thereto,
Recalling also its resolutions 38/131 of 19 December
1983 and 39/79 of 13 December 1984,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of conflict situations and the emergence of new sources of disputes and
tension in international life, and especially at the growing
tendency to resort to force or the threat of force and to
intervention in internal affairs, and at the escalation of the
arms race, which gravely endanger the independence and
security of States as well as international peace and security,
Taking into account the need to exert the utmost effort
in order to settle any situations and disputes between
17 A/39/504/Add.l, annex III.
18 See A/40/446 and Add. I and Add. I/Corr. I
19 A/381343, annex; A/C.6/39/L.2.
20 See Official Records of the General Assembl_v. Thmv-mnth Session. Supplement No. 33 (A/39/33), sect. 111.B.

305

States exclusively by peaceful means and to avoid any
military actions and hostilities against other States, which
can only make more difficult the solution of existing problems,
Considering that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes should represent one of the central concerns for
States and for the United Nations, and that efforts for
strengthening the process of peaceful settlement of disputes should be continued,
Taking note of the working papers on the establishment
of a commission on good offices, mediation and conciliation for the settlement of disputes and the prevention of
conflicts among States, submitted by Nigeria, the Philippines and Romania, 19
Taking into account the elaboration by the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization of the outline for the handbook on the peaceful settlement of disputes between States and the conclusions thereon, 20
I. Again urges all States to observe and promote in
good faith the provisions of the Manila Declaration on the
Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes in the settlement of their international disputes;
2. Stresses the need to continue efforts to strengthen
the process of the peaceful settlement of disputes through
progressive development and codification of international
law and through enhancing the effectiveness of the United
Nations in this field;
3. Requests the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role
of the Organization, during its session in 1986, to continue
its work on the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes between States and, in this context:
(a) To continue the consideration of the proposal contained in working papers submitted by Nigeria, the Philippines and Romania;
(b) To examine the report of the Secretary-General on
the progress of work on the draft handbook on the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
preparation of a draft handbook on the peaceful settlement
of disputes between States, on the basis of the outline elaborated by the Special Committee and in the light of the
views expressed in the course of the discussions in the
Sixth Committee21 and in the Special Committee, 22 and to
report to the Special Committee at its session in 1986 on
the progress of work, before submitting to it the draft
handbook in its final form, with a view to its approval at a
later stage;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Peaceful settlement of
disputes between States"
112th plenary meeting
l1 December 1985

40/69. Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and
Security of Mankind
The General Assembly,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph l a, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides that the General
Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommenda2I Ibid .. Fortieth Sesswn. Six1,·1 Comm1//ee. 37th to 43rd, 48th and 50th
meetings
22 Ibid .. Fortieth Sesswn. Supp/em,•m No. 33 (A/40133 and Corr. I),
sect. 11
