UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
‘OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS
YEAR

2127th
MEETING:
15
MARCH
1979
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2127) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~.....................
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/131 15) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1

1

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the.Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it ‘is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2127th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 15 March 1979, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

2. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received’letters from the representatives
of Qatar and the German Democratic Republic in which
they ask to be invited to participate in the discussion. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The renresentatives of the followina States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,-France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisiokl

agenda (S/Agenda/2127)
At the imitation of the President, Mr. Jamal (Qatar) and
Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

The situation in the occunied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 Februiry 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/131 15)

3. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Qatar, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
4. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar): Sir, allow me at the outset to
extend to you my most sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the important post of President of the Security Council for this month. Your personal record as a
concerned and devoted militant against racism and racial
discrimination, as well as Nigeria’s leading role in upholding the principles of self-determination and freedom in
southern Africa and the rest of the world, make you the
ideal person to lead the present debate on the rights of
Palestinians to life. and freedom in the light of Israel’s
creeping annexation of their homeland and attempts at
their physical elimination.

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent Reprosentative of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13115)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings, I invite the representatives of
Egypt, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Mauritania, Pakistan, Senegal, Somalia, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Viet
Nam, as well as the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to participate in the debate without the
right to-vote.

5. I also wish to extend my respects to Ambassador
Abdalla Bishara of Kuwait, President of the Council
throughout the turbulent month of February, whose dedication and experienced leadership were instrumental in
resolving successfully the items presented to the Council.
6. We find ouselves today discussing a problem to which
we have already devoted much time and attention, and over
which we have always found basic agreement among the
members of the Council, permanent and non-permanent
alike, but which even now is still in dire need of resolution:
namely, the threat to international peace and security arising from the serious situation in the occupied Arab territories, and the desecration by Israel of the holy shrines in
Jerusalem.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan),
Mr. Blum (Israel) andMr. Terzi (Paiestine Liberation Organization) took places at the Council table andMr. AbdelMeguid
(Egypt), Mr. Hollai (Hungary), Mr. Jaipai (India), Mr.
Suwondo (Indonesia), Mr. Shemirani (Iran), Mr. Ba$ (Iraq),
Mr. Tut!ni (Lebanon), Mr. Kane (Mauritania), Mr. Naik
(Pakistan), Mr. Fall (Senegal), Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr.
Sahioul (Sudan), Mr. El-Choufl (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr.
Eralp (Turkey), Mr. Martynenko (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic), Mr. Ha Van Lau (Wet Nam), Mr. Al-Haddad
(Yemen) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. Eleven years ago, when the Israeli authorities decided
to annex the city of Jerusalem and embark on a deliberate
plan aimed at erasing the Islamic and Arab status of the
city, the Security Council responded with a unanimous and
resounding rejection of any Israeli claim to the Holy City.
1

Ever since that time, the Israeli occupation authorities have
been actively following a .process of emasculation and
colonization in the Holy City in‘outright contempt of the
principles and precepts of. international law and the decisions and resolutions of the United Nations, and in clear
violation of the Geneva Convention’relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.’
Israel has been helped and encouraged to do so by the
solidarity shown to it by one of the permanent members of
the Security Council which, while calling the occupation
illegal and an obstacle to peace, provides Israel with the
financial and military assistance necessary to maintain an
army of occupation over territories conquered by aggression.
8. The misdeeds of the Zionist State at Jerusalem, though
appalling in and of themselves, have to be seen in conjunction with the barbaric record Israel has forged for itself in
the totality of the Palestinian homeland, as well as in the
Syrian and Egyptian occupied territories. In the West Bank
alone, Israel has implanted so far 76 settlements, where over
90,000 Israeli settlers live. Those settlements have been
established on some 350,000 dunums of land confiicated
from their rightful owners. To make room for those settlements, whole Arab townships had to be destroyed, their
Arab owners evicted.
9. The barbarism of Israeli actions such as the use of mass
reprisals and collective punishment against innocent civilians upon each sign of opposition, has been unprecedented
in modem history. The inhabitants of the occupied territories have been subjected to all forms of brutalities and
atrocities, which have recently given rise to waves of shock
and dismay even among some of its closest friends. Recent
reports based on official United States Department of State
documents confum numerous casesof sadistic torture and
inhuman treatment in a pattern that clearly refutes the
claims of the Government of Israel that such practices are
only isolated incidents.
10. There is a limit to the patience of the Palestinian
people living under brutal Israeli occupation, and to the
tolerance of the Islamic States whose 800 million adherents
to the Islamic faith are determined to exert their utmost to
restore the Islamic and Arab status of Jerusalem. Time for
discussion and negotiation may be running out, as new faits
accomplis are being created every day. Every new Israeli
budget and government decision opens new avenues for
building more colonies and enlarging existing ones, which
are not only incompatible with the concept of a comprehensive peace but rule out any possibility for even limited
settlements, exposing the arrogant nature of Israel, whose
quest for peace is only a ploy to gain time for its evergrowing encroachment on Arab lands.
11. The acceleration of the systematic practices of the
Israeli authorities designed to alter and eventually erase the
religious, historical and national character of the Holy City
of Jerusalem and the occupied Arab territories has reached
alarming proportions and has compelled my Government
to address this meeting of the Council, in the hope of its
taking prompt and effective action for the complete withdrawal of Israel from all of the occupied Arab lands, espe’ United Nations, Treury SMes, vol. 75, p. 287.

cially Jersualem, and the restoration of the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people, in accordance with all relevant
United Nations resolutions.
I
” 12: In this connexion, and in view ofIsrael’s attempts to
‘move ‘all foreign embassies to the,Hdly City of Jerusalem
and.,.make it its capital, we shouid like to state that the
positron of the State of Qatar is that compliance with
Israel’s request is considered as an’act of aggression against
. our belief in the Arab character ofthe city of Jerusalem, and
a desecration of its Islamic holy shrines, which shall not be
,allowed to pass unredeemed.
13. Finally, I should like to call pn the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibility, strongly condemn Israel for its
aggression, and make use of all the instruments provided by
the Charter;including Chapter VII,.to secure Israel’s compliance with its resolutions. The proposals presented so far
by representatives who have preceded me have been neither
unreasonable nor unrealistic. They include a moratorium
on further Israeli colonization and expropriation of Arab
lands and a commission to investigate the situation on the
spot.
.. I ,,
,__.
14. We trust that the Council will keep its credibility as an
instrument for world peace and security and will adopt a
resolution embodying the spirit of .ithe above-mentioned
proposals.
1I
15. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Mr. President, may I reiterate once again our appreciation of your determined
efforts to steer the course of this’Couiici1 during this crucial
period of converging crises. You have conducted our affairs
capably, coolly, with infinite tact, patience and skill, and
deserve our unstinted admiration. We are grateful to you
and we pledge you our fullest co-operation.
I..
16. For the last two months, the Council has been seized
of issues that challenge the very viability and rationale of the
United Nations. At stake are fundamental principles of
international law that bind our .&&al society, principles
that enjoin respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of all States, the non-use of force
or threat of its use, the non-interference or non-intervention
in the affairs of States, the .cardinal injunction against the
acquistion of territory by force and,the call to settle intemational disputes peacefully. Those principles are the quintessence of the norms and rules that
,.. govern any civilized
society. They are reflected in one way or another in every
constitution in the world, written dr unwritten, national or
international. Bangladesh has consistently supported the
convening of the Council in order to deal with situations in
which such violations are manifest, to expose them and to
pursue remedial action notwithstanding the diktat of socalled harsh political realities.
17. While the Council strives to’grapple with challenges
immediately at hand, it cannot ignore with equanimity an
issue of which it has been seized for over 11 years and in
which its credibility to fulfil its responsibility as the primary
organ entrusted with the maintenance of peace and security
has been all but eroded.
18. It is in this context that Bangladesh has welcomed
Jordan’s request to consider the situation in the occupied

.

Arab territories, for this item embodies in all its integral
components the denial,, rejection and violation of every
principle embodied in the Charter of the United Nations
and the flagrant disregard and indiscriminate flouting of the
wishes of its .Members. It stands as a testimony to the
ineffectiveness of the will of the international community
/ ,,
and particularly the will of the Council.

a larger, premeditated design within a defined perspective,
specifically, a deliberate policy of expansionism, a uolicy
that is now evident and which was manifest from the.very
moment of Israel’s occupation. The execution of this intent
is tantamount to nothing less than a latter-day colonialism
with all the ills that characterize that abhorrent manifestation.
25. The issues at stake, therefore, no longer conform to
the simple factor of denial of human rights, though this is
obviously manifest and escalating daily, but impinge directly
on the political plane. As has been repeatedly stressed by the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, the fundamental violation of human
rights lies in the very fact of occupation.

19. Two years have elapsed since the Council specifically
considered this item .and decided through its consensus
statement on 11 November 1976, “to keep the situation
under constant attention with a view to meeting again
should circumstances require” [1969th meezing3. Jordan’s
request, therefore, is a timely reminder to remove the bushel
so that the light on this issue can shine forth. The 42 States
members of the Islamic Conference, including Bangladesh,
have unreservedly endorsed this request. Their unanimous
declaration on the subject is now before the Council
w/13245].

26. Proof positive of Israel’s policy of deliberate annexation is the encouragement, sanction and urgency given to
the establishment of agricultural, industrial and residential
settlements as part of a long-term blueprint for a network of
such settlements. The ultimate aim is the permanent establishment of some 2 million Israeli immigrants, the encirclement and containment of the existing Palestinian residents
and division and annexation in perpetuity of substantial
areas of the occupied Arab territories and, particularly, its
most viable natural resources.

s

20. The fundamental basis of Bangladesh’s concern and
anxiety is rooted in the obvious fact!! that, in law, occupation can at most be a limited and provisional situation, a
temporary phenomenon. Israel has remained in these lands
for a full 11 years. It has been systematically taking measures of a permanent nature in pursuit of a policy totally
incompatible withits obligations under the Charter and as
an occupying Power.

27. The representative of Jordan has unambiguously
demonstrated the dimension of these designs in his statement and through the presentation of elaborate documentary evidence and maps. The representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization has also demonstrated with visual ’
aids the extent of Israeli aims. The reports of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of
the Occupied Territories have supplemented this information in graphic detail. It is not surprising that these have
been corroborated not only by objective and impeccable
sources outside the region but also by official records and
statements of the highest government authorities in Israel
itself. They constitute a telling indictment of Israel. The
statements of every single speaker who preceded us are
singular in their unanimity of views on Israel’s illegal presence and actions.

21. The maintenance of the uresent status au0 is untenable. It is illegal, being based onthe unacceptable premise of
‘occupation by conquest. Even more than that, it is immoral,
inhuman and unjust and is an open invitation to confrontation and continuing conflict.
Ex post facto iationalization
predicated on security
interests or claims of legitimacy derived from some ancient
biblical link to a so-called homeland can have dangerous
and unpredictable consequences. Attempts to legalize such
conquest through transactions for purchase of land, through
payment of compensation or through acquisition by other
apparently normal means, cannot be recognized with even a
minimum degree of.validity, in a situation of occupation by
armed might. Any recognition of any one of these premises
would inevitably and radically change the map of the world.
Such claims constitute a dangerously volatile precedent. It
would nullify the fundamental Charter injunction prohibiting the aggressor from enjoying the fruits of aggression and
would inevitably open the door to international anarchy.

22.

28. The deteriorating situation in these territories cannot
be wished away by the sympathizers with Israel. The drive
to encourage Zionist settler-immigrants, the refusal to allow
a graduated and phased return of persons driven out by the
1967 hostilities, and the expulsion, evacuation, deportation,
displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants thereafter
are real. The conffication and expropriation of Arab property and other more covert property transactions continue
unabated. They are too well documented to be shrouded
under the blanket rationalization
of spurious security
requirements. They cannot conceal Israel’s appetite for
expansionism and they constitute ample testimony of its
plan to establish permanent domination. It is also evident
that the policies pursued by Israel against the indigenous
inhabitants are complementary and supportive of this aim;
the main purpose of this policy is to demoralize the civilian
population by facing it constantly with the reality of being a
people under military subjugation. Thus mass arrests, administrative detentions, ill-treatment, harassment, intimida-

23. Israel’s continued justification of its occupation on
security grounds has arbitrarily converted an exception into
a rule of conduct-it negates the letter and spirit of The
Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 respecting the Laws
and Customs of Land Warfare, and the Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, not to mention numerous resolutions adopted
by the Security Council and the General Assembly, which
have repeatedly reaffirmed their applicability to the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967.
24.’ The measures now being taken by the occupying
Power no longer.appear to be even remotely relevant to
security considerations. They are pointedly directed towards
3

tion, reprisals and torture are common occurrences that
continue to escalate openly or in subtly covert ways. Meanwhile, long-term plans to exploit the natural resources,
particularly the water-table of the northern West Bank and
other scarce resources-plans already well under wayconstitute an even mom dangerous element of deprivation.

the world’s people. One paragraph in particular deserves
repetition:
“The continuity of the tradition which the Palestinians
have kept as a cherished trust is an imperative call-a call
for a Jerusalem delivered, which will be again the home
of its people. For to us the preservation of stones, be they
sacred shrines, cannot be more important than the living
presence of people.”

29. Perhaps the most heinous aspect of Israel’s policy,
which compounds the totality of its illegal political and
unhumanitarian acts in the occupied territories, is its
attempts to alter the status of Jerusalem, to Judaize and
annex it. As the representative of Egypt so aptly characterized it:
“ . . . what the Council is considering today transcends
all man-made geographical and political boundaries.
The Council’s actions, deliberations or inactions will
affect profoundly not only the fate or a whole people, but
also the deep religious feelings and the spiritual heritage
of hundreds of millions of Moslems and Christians
across all continents.” [2123rd meeting, puru. 140.1

33. The Council cannot but be aware of the explosive
dangers implicit in this situation. For more than a decade it
has been adopting resolutions on the question, in the wake
of the consistent pressure of the world community embodied in numerous resolutions of the General Assembly.
These resolutions have repeatedly expressed the Council’s
grave anxiety over the serious deterioration in the occupied
territories, called upon Israel to ensure the safety, welfare
and security of the indigenous inhabitants and to facilitate
the safe return of those who fled in 1967, affirmed the
validity and applicability of international conventions and
called for the strict compliance by Israel with their provisions, particularly to rescind measures taken which had
altered their demographic composition, legal and cultural
status and geographic character, strongly deplored the
establishment of settlements, declaring that such measures,
which had no legal validity and could not prejudge the
outcome of efforts to achieve peace, constituted an obstacle
to peace.

30. These Israeli attempts have aroused moral indignation and deep resentment throughout the globe. Jerusalem
symbolizes the birthplace of three of the world’s greatest
religions, embracing the spiritual and intellectual contributions of more than two thirds of mankind. It remains a
permanent monument to the coexistence, unity and tolerance of timeless generations. The retention of the historic
and religious legacy of the holy places, their preservation
from despoilment and desecration, their accessibility to
pilgrims from all over the globe, were a charge that was
fulfilled over the ages by the indigenous Palestinian citizens
of Jerusalem both Moslem and Christian. They constituted
the universally recognized sentinels of these historic sites.
Israel is now attempting to displace them and squeeze them
out of their timeless role. Not satisfied with that, Israel also
seeks indiscriminately to interfere with religious freedoms
and practices, desecrating and despoiling holy books, relics
and places of worship, converting ancient and holy mosques
into synagogues, pillaging archaeological and cultural prop
erty of infinite spiritual and material value. Those are not
isolated instances; they fall within a well-established pattern
of persistent violations.

34. Concerning Jerusalem, which was an integral component of any peace settlement, the Council has also repeatedly laid down that all legislative and administrative
measures taken by Israel, including expropriation of land
and properties thereon and transfer of population which
tend to change the legal status of the city, were invalid and
could not change that status. It has again and again urgently
called on Israel to rescind all such measures and to desist
forthwith from taking any further action which tended to
change the status of Jerusalem. The Council further recognized that any act of profanation of the holy places, religious buildings and sites or any encouragement of or
connivance in such acts might endanger peace and security.
35. The Council’s call has been clear-cut and unequivocal.
Israel’s response has been noncompliance, rejection and
defiance. It has sought to skirt its obvious illegality by
levelling irrelevant countercharges against individual Member States, while at the same time accusing the United
Nations as a whole of a “hypnotic and totally irrational
futation with Israel”. The end result has been impasse and
circumvention. The United Nations has churned out paper
resolutions while Israel has systematically accomplished a
virtual fait accompli-a defacto annexation of the fruits of
its aggression.

31. Politically, Israel-as has been elaborated beforeseeks to cordon off and dissect Jerusalem through a concentric circle of settlements nothing short of battlements. Its
planned encroachment directed at outright annexation is
well documented and scarcely concealed by the Israelis
themselves in their systematic pursuit of Judaizationculturally and politically. It is further incontrovertibly evidenced by media reports that the Knesset early this year has
approved special draft legislation that will commit all foreign diplomats to transfer their main offices to the capital of
Jerusalem. That would constitute the final seal on the legitimization of conquest.

36. Bangladesh condemns the continuation of Israel’s military occupation and systematic deprivation of the national
rights of the Arab population. We reject Israeli measures to
Judaize and absorb those Arab territories by insidious
accretion. Its semantic duplicity has been exposed. Coexistence with the Arabs has become a euphemism for Jewish
domination. Armed subjugation cannot assume the mantle
of a war of liberation, nor can so-called defence requirements be converted arbitrarily into historic justification for

32. Bangladesh whole-heartedly endorses the impassioned address made by the Patriarch of the Antioch
Orthodox Church at the Lahore Islamic summit, which was
quoted in exzenso by the representatives of both Lebanon
[ibid., paras. 161 and 16z] and Jordan [2124th meeting,
pura. Z4aJ. It aptly sums up the emotions of the majority of
4

annexation. Economic betterment is no excuse for permanent deprivation of the inalienable rights of ownership. The
current of humanitarianism that has sympathized with the
plight of world Jewry throughout history is being eroded in
the face of Israeli arrogance. Today Israel seeks retribution
for the injustices perpetrated on the Jewish people from
time immemorial by others at the expense of the Palestinian
and Arab peoples, which are least responsible for their
perpetration. Justice, law and humanity demand the reversal of Israel’s actions and attitudes. Hopes for peace will
remain ephemeral in the absence of such a reversal.

fiuncil for the opportunity afforded the German Democratic Republic to address the Council. My delegation has
the honour of congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month, and we
should like to express the hope that the Council, under your
skilful leadership, will take decisions on the questions on its
agenda that will promote the halting of the aggression in the
Middle East.
42. It is a particular pleasure for me to remark that you
recently visited the capital of the German Democratic
Republic and had some useful meetings there with leading
representatives of the German Democratic Republic. You
were able to witness on the spot the aspiration of my people
to do everything in their power to promote the elimination
of colonialism and racism.

37. Bangladesh’s stand on this question is unequivocal. It
is based not on political expediency or solidarity but in our
conviction of the rightness of the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. It is embedded in our enduring commitment to the cause of oppressed peoples struggling to free themselves from bondage and colonialism in all
its forms and to express their inalienable right to seifdetermination, freedom, political independence and national sovereignty. It is rooted in the ideals of tolerance, the
right of all peoples to determine their own destiny without
coercion or restraint, and the conviction that men and
women of all races, irrespective of political, ideological or
religious beliefs, can live together in friendship and harmony.

43. As a member of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, the delegation
of the German Democratic Republic has acquainted itself
in detail with the situation in the Middle East. We have been
following with great concern the constantly expanding
Israeli aggression and colonization of Arab territories. We
have heard and read of Israeli practices in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and we have read and heard
how most flagrantly they have been flouting the norms of
international law, in particular the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War.

38. Bangladesh is committed to strive for a comprehensive, lasting and durable peace in the Middle East. We
believe, however, that for peace to endure, it must be based
on justice, and justice demands the undoing of acts contrary
to international law, to the norms and principles enshrined
in the Charter and to the exercise of fundamental human
rights in full freedom. To that end Bangladesh has consistently supported a lasting settlement that would ensure:
first, vacation of all territories occupied by Israel; secondly,
restoration of the status of holy Jerusalem under Arab
sovereignty; and, thirdly, restoration of the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people, including their
right to self-determination and a State of their own.

44. Reports and documentary evidence submitted to the
Security Council have confirmed our misgivings in connexion with the fact that what is happening in the Middle East is
entirely contradictory to what, a few days ago, a speaker
here called “the peace process”. In spite of more than 200
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Council
regarding the settlement of the Middle East problem, in
spite of world public opinion, which calls for the exercise of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, Israel is
pursuing a policy of deliberately depriving the Arab people
of Palestine of their rights and seeking the systematic elimination of these people.

39. We believe that strictures and criticisms should not be
directed at the United Nations to mute its voice in the search
for peace, justice and a lasting settlement. It would be a
grate derelictjon of duty on the part of the Security Council
were it to ignore its obligations under the Charter and its
responsibility to ensure the rights and aspirations of the
peoples of the occupied territories. The Council must take
action beyond mere reaffirmation of its past resolutions. It
must move forward to the realization of the basic elements
of a just and lasting peace. Bangladesh supports the Jordanian proposal for the establishment of a Council commission
to investigate the situation in the Arab territories as a useful
step in that direction. We remain committed to peace in this
most beleaguered of the world’s regions-but a peace that is
just and enduring in the interests of the peoples of that
region and the world as a whole.

45. It has been proved beyond any doubt that since the
Camp David meeting Israel’s aggression and colonial policy have assumed such proportions that the very existence
of the Palestinian people is threatened. Through the use of
the crudest possible means, means proper to the capitalist
market economy, by the occupation Power, the Palestinian
peasants have lost their land and their water. The use of that
land and that water has been made impossible for them.
46. The representative of Jordan and the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization have proved in their
statements here that the Israeli Government has embarked
on a course of eliminating the last remaining living space of
the Palestinian people in the occupied territories. The representative of Egypt has confirmed that the situation is
intolerable-not
only on the West Bank of the Jordan, but
also on the Golan Heights, in the Gaza Strip and in occupied Jerusalem. What is happening there is that a deliberate
change is being made in the geographic, demographic, economic and cultural identity of these areas and the people in
them; they are being kept in a state of war.

40. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
4 1. Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic Republic) (inter-

preration from Russian): Mr. President, permit me to express

my gratitude to you and all the other members of the
5

question, a question viewed by the Arab peoples as of vital
concern to them.

47. The Organixation cannot stand idly by while tnese
outrages arc committed. The delegation of the German
Democratic Republic believes that the demands put forward by the representative of Jordan are just. The very least
that the Security Council should do is categorically to condemn the Israeli aggressor, to demand the cessation of
practices that are in contradiction with international law. If
there is not compliance with these demands, then a decision
should be taken to apply the measures provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter and to work towards a speedy
decision of principle on the Middle East problem.

52. The Palestinian people, like any other people, has the
right to its own sovereign State. Anyone who does not
recognize that right cannot promote the cause of peace in
the Middle East. It is easy to understand, therefore, why the
Arab States, with one exception, have rejected the settlement of individual questions that has been organized and
imposed by United States imperialism. If a separate agreement is concluded which in practice does not impede the
further occupation of Arab territory by Israel, if the aggressor is promised something along the lines of a military
alliance-and the intention is to station in the Arab Sinai
peninsula troops of the State which has constantly afforded
support and assistance to Israel-then we cannot expect
peace. Three Governments do not by themselves determine
the fate of the Middle East. That is a lesson we have learned
from history.

48. The elimination of the Middle East conflict requires
the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the Arab territories
occupied in 1967. Since the question of the implementation
of the inalienable rights of the Arab people of Palestine is
one of the fundamental issues of the Middle East problem,
that question must. bc resolved. There is a view, which is
gaining considerable ground, that peace in the Middle East
requires the implementation of a comprehensive programme.
Such a programme has been repeatedly formulated in resolutions of the General Assembly. If, however, the Security
Council now has to deal with the question of the outrageous
practices of Israel in the occupied Arab territories, responsibility for that belongs primarily to the ruling circles of
Israel, but not to them alone.

53. Israel’s aggression is doomed to failure. The Arab
peoples have trustworthy friends who are not pursuing their
selfiih interests but are working for peace, security and
justice.
54. So far as the German Democratic Republic is concerned, I should like to quote from the joint communique
signed by the General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany and President of
the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic,
Erich Honecker, and the Chairman of FRELIMO and the
President of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, Samora
Moisb Machel, on 24 February this year at Maputo. The
communique states:

49. In this regard I should like to recall once again an
event which could have constituted the beginning of a
genuine peace process in the Middle East. I have in mind the
joint United States-Soviet Union communique of 1 October
1977. All peace-loving peoples, particularly the Arab peoples, welcomed the possibility which became obvious at that
time, the possibility of achieving mutual understanding on
the question of the attainment of peace in the Middle East.
It also became clear to the aggressor when this document
appeared that the knell was tolling for him.

“Comrade Erich Honecker and Samora MO& Machel
expressed profound concern about the situation in the
Middle East and categorically condemned Israel’s
aggressive policy, which is the principal reason for tension in that area. They are convinced that the separate
negotiations, which sacrifice the legitimate interests of
the Arab peoples, and particularly the Arab people of
Palestine, serve only to complicate the situation and
make even more difficult a final and lasting solution to
the Middle East problem.

50. However, making use of the Zionist lobby and the
military-industrial
complex, the United States exploited
new possibilities for engaging in interference, and chose a
course that led to Camp David-that is, to deadlock. As a
result, the Security Council is holding this series of meetings. It is a fact that the economic, military and political
support given Israel by the United States has been encouraging the aggressor to continue his aggressive and colonial
policy.

“Both leaders welcomed the results of the summit
conference at Baghdad and stressed the need for a
resumption of the Geneva Conference, with, necessarily,
the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization. A just and final solution to the conflict can be
achieved only through the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from the territories occupied in 1967 and the implementation of the inalienable rights of the Arab people of
Palestine, including its right to establish its own independent State.
“Both sides also confirmed that the right of all the
peoples and States in the area to exist and develop independently should be guaranteed.”

5 1. We have been hearing and reading a great deal about
peace, about the peace process, about fullilling the hopes of
the Palestinian people. But the actual situation is quite
different. Although, for example, there are resolutions of
the General Assembly adopted by overwhelming majorities, that recognize the Palestine Liberation Organization as
the only lawful representative of the Palestinian people, the
United States voted against the very appropriate participation of the Palestine Liberation Organizationin the discussion in the Council, and other States members of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization abstained in the vote. But it is
clear that anyone who wants to keep the Palestine Liberation Organization outside the decision-making process with
regard to a solution of the Middle East conflict is attempting
to keep a whole people apart from participation in the
solution of an issue which is for that very people a vital

55. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): Mr. President, the continuous
activity of the Council since your assumption of the presidency for the month of March would appear to be heading
us towards the establishment of some kind of record which
has placed heavy demands on you and your delegation.
6

:

Your performance confirms our highest expectations of
effective leadership, and we can continue to feel confident”
that the work of the Council will benefit from your vigour
and resourcefulness for the remainder of this month.
I
56. The issue before the Council, .which concerns the
situation in the occupied Arab territories, is not a new one.
The Council has in the past adopted a number of resolutions on the principles and objectives which provide the
basis for an acceptable solution to that question. But with
the passage of time, and with the failure to implement those
decisions, there has been a continuing deterioration in the
situation. There have been more debates and more resolutions adoptedin the Council on the situation in the Middle
East than on any other issue. Since 1967 the situation in the
occupied Arab territories has been a matter of continuing
and serious concern botn to tne Council and to tne General
Assembly, as a specific issue and as-a vital aspect of the
broader question on the Middle East.

12’August 1949. In article 49 of that Convention, it is stated
that “the occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts
of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies’*.
My Government cannot accept any right of the occupying
Power based on the concept of “liberated territories”. Nor
are we swayed by claims as to the beneficial results of
occupation and the need for modemization. We are guided
by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the accepted tenets of international law.
61. Special concern has been expressed in the Council
regarding the erosion of the status of Jerusalem. The Holy
City is revered by three religions-Christianity,
Islam and
Judaism-and holds a special place in the hearts of people
all over the world. The need for satisfactory arrangements
for the protection of the holy places and for accessto them
by adherents of three religions has always been recognized.
The annexation of East Jerusalem and other actions by
Israel affecting its legal status and altering its national character obviously generate intense emotions and aggravate
the over-all situation in the Middle East. We cannot accept
that these actions are legitimate or valid.

.57. Israel’ has continued to occupy Arab territories cap
tured in the war of 1967 and to adopt measures which have
the effect of changing the legal status, the geographical
nature and the demographic composition of these territories. It has persistently disregarded the resolutions of the
United Nations on these matters. Consequently a situation
has been created which is fraught with danger for intemational peace and security.

62. While we concentrate on the single issue of the situation in the occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem, it
is necessary to see the issue within the wider context of the
requirements for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
My Government continues to believe that despite its studied
ambiguity and inadequate treatment of the Palestinian
question, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) contain the basic elements for the establishment of a
durable and just peace.

58. Jamaica has followed developments in the area with
utmost concern, and we are particularly disturbed about the.
persistent reports of Israeli activities which violate the
human rights of the residents of the occupied territories.
Such tendencies aggravate a situation already compounded
by the tragic heritage of the past and most particularly by
the failure to achieve a just solution to the PaIestinian
question, which lies at the heart of the whole problem.

63. We believe that three basic elements have to be
emphasized. First, Israel must withdraw from the Arab
territories occupied since the 1967 war. This is an essential
condition for a peaeefui settlement of the problem. Secondly,
the Palestinian people must be able to enjoy their inalienable rights, including their national right to a homeland.
Thirdly, there must be an effort to establish conditions
under which all States in the area can exist in security and
enjoy respect for their territorial integrity and political
independence. In our view achievement of these three basic
objectives within a comprehensive framework represents
the only hope for a permanent and just peace in the area.

59. The withdrawal of Israel from the Arab territories
occupied since the 1967 war is an essential step which must
be taken if peace is to prevail in the area. Jamaica is firmly
opposed to the acquisition of territory by force as a matter
of principle, and we deplore all measures taken by Israel
towards the annexation of the Arab territories it now occupies. We believe that real security cannot be advanced by
holding on to the fruits of military conquest. No Arab State
in the area can be expected to become reconciled to the
permanent alienation of its territory, nor can the Palestinian
people be permanently relegated to the status of refugees
and denied their legitimate and inalienable rights. Continued occupation and the adoption of legislative and administrative measures which lay the basis of a permanent
presence by Israel in theoccupied territories will continue to
be a source of tension in the area. There can be no peace as
long as this situation persists.

.\

64. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretationJ?omRussian):The Soviet delegation entirely shares the views of the representatives of Jordan, the Palestine Liberation Organization and the many
States that have spoken in favour of an immediate consideration of the question of the situation in the Arab territories
occupied by Israel and the adoption of urgent measures in
this regard. The policy being pursued by the Israeli authorities and the exploitation of occupied Arab territories represents a direct and serious threat to international peace and
security, and that is demonstrated, inter a&, by the concern
of a large number of delegations which have taken part in
the Security Council discussion on this matter.

60. In thii regard, the expropriation of Arab land and the
policy of establishing Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories, which have escalated in recent times, contain
elements of grave danger and are inimical to the creation of
conditions of peace. These settlements are illegal. Their
establishment is a direct contravention of international law,
in particular the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of

65. The particularly relevant and urgent nature of the
problem of the activities of Israel in the occupied territories
is due, in our view, to the following factors. First, the illegal
actions of the Israeli authorities in terms of the seizure of
7

Arab lands and the expulsions of the indigenous Arab
population over the last few months have been sharply on
the increase.and are clearly aimed at ensuring that as early
as possible the Arab peoples and the whole world are faced
with a fait accompli: the inclusion of those territories within
Israel. Secondly, it is precisely over the last fewdays that we,
have witnessed the conversion of the Camp David plot into
a separate agreement which-and we are firmly convinced
of this-can only have as its result the ever firmer entrenchment of Israel in the gains of its aggression against the Arab
States and the creation of new difficulties in the struggle of
the Arab peoples for the recovery of their ancestral lands,

71. A particularly difficult situation has arisen in East
Jerusalem: there a planned process is going on of destroying
historical, religious and national features which are of particular value to the population of many countries.
72. All the activities of the Israeli authorities in the occupied Arab territories are in flagrant violation of the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War of 1949. The United
Nations, in a number of its decisions, has condemned these
activities of Israel and demanded that the Government of
Israel, in accordance with that Convention, ceaseforthwith
the carrying out of any measures leading to changes in the
legal status, geographical character ordemographic composition of the Arab territories it occupied in 1967.

66. From the statements of representatives of many countries here, from documents in the possession ofthe Council,
a very clear-cut picture emerges of how the Government of
Israel is pursuing a deliberately planned course of action for
the expropriation of Arab lands occupied in 1967 and the
expulsion from them of the indigenous Arab population,
and of its use for that purpose of the most sophisticated and
brutal methods.

73. The stubborn refusal of the Israeli authorities to
comply with the obligations they have assumed under international agreements for the protection of the victims of war
demonstrates that they are deliberately adopting a course of
flagrant violation of international law and are embarking
upon the dangerous course of war crimes. ‘In practice,
Israel’s policy represents an attempt to deprive the Arab
people of Palestine of its territory, its identity and its sovereign rights, as well as to eliminate it as a nation.

67. The Israeli authorities are stepping up their expropriation of Arab lands. So far, 29 per cent-or almost one
third-of the whole territory of the West Bank of the River
Jordan has been confiscated. The Israeli authorities have
been confiscating State and community property and also
private property belonging both to the refugees they drove
out before and to the remaining inhabitants, forcing them
to seek ways of existing in other places. In order to cover up
this robbery, various tricks or devices are sometimes used;
but, more often than anything, what is used is direct force,
on the pretext of military necessity, accompanied by the use
of bulldozers for the destruction of houses and the physical
expulsion of the Arab population.

74. The most recent events eloquently testify to the fact
that Israel, by no accident, is attempting at an increased rate
to entrench itself in the occupied Arab territories of the
West Bank of the Jordan and the Golan Heights. The
Egyptian-Israeli agreement which has been arrived at, in
actual fact, pursues the goal of preserving the present situation in these Arab territories, and those who are attempting
to camouflage the essenceof this deal are undertaking a task
which is beyond them. There is no way of covering up the
fact that what we have here is an attempt to deprive the
Arab people of Palestine of their inalienable national rights,
including that of the creation of their own national hometheir own State.

68. The lands which have been seized in this way are used
by the Israeli authorities for the creation of new Israeli
settlements and the expansion of those already existing. The
number of Israeli settlements is growing fast; by the end of
1978-that is, after 12 years of Israeli occupation-there
were 68 such settlements on the West Bank of the Jordan,
while in the first two months of this year the number of such
settlements rose to .79. And in the early future, 27 new
settlements are planned. In Gaza, 25 Israeli settlements
have been set up, and on the Golan Heights, 27.
69. Israeli settlements are being created not only as strong
points for Israel’s military presence in the occupied areas:
the land which has been taken from the Arabs is being used
for the creation of industrial complexes and infrastructure,
with the clear purpose of the-total colonization of the area
seized, and of depriving the Indigenous Arab population of
the means of subsistence, converting the Arabs into personnel for servicing the Israeli occupiers.

75. A great fuss has been made about the question of how
close a link there should be between the separate agreement
and the process of granting so-called autonomy to the
people of Gaza and the West Bank. Thus an attempt was
made to divert attention from the essenceof this notorious
“autonomy”. Such attempts, however, cannot possibly mislead anyone. As we know, the Prime Minister of Israel, Mr.
Begin, said frankly that Gaza and the West Bank are historically Israeli lands and that the right of the Jewish people to
settle in all parts of Israel was inalienable; that right had
been exercised in the past, and it would continue to be
exercised in the future. The other day, the representative of
Israel confirmed in the Council this official position of his
Government.

70. In order to make this goal easier to attain, the Israeli
authorities have established in the occupied territories a
regime of repression and terror; large-scale use is being
made of punitiveoperations: special commandos break into
the homes of peaceful inhabitants during the night, drive
them out onto the street and blow up the houses. Many
young Palestinians have been subjected to arbitrary arrest
and torture on charges of belonging to organizations fighting for the liberation of the occupied territories.

76. The present discussion is most timely and useful, inasmuch as it clearly demonstrates to everyone what is meant
by so-called “autonomy” for the West Bank of the Jordan
and for Gaza. “Autonomy”
means the maintenance of
Israeli troops throughout the territory they have occupied.
“Autonomy”
means the further expropriation of Arab
lands until all land fit for habitation orcultivation reverts to
Israel. “Autonomy”
means new Israeli settlements, the
creation of which is planned for scores of years ahead.
8

eral Assembly-the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from all
Arab territories occupied in 1967, the implementation of the
inalienable, lawful national rights of the Arab people of
Palestine-and
that includes the right to the creation of
their own State and the ensuring of an independent existence and security for all States in the area. Such a settlement
can be achieved only with the participation of all interested
parties including, of course, the Palestine Liberation Organization.

“Autonomy”
is the policy of expelling the Arab population
from their ancestral lands, subjecting them to intolerable
conditions, and depriving them of water and other resources. To sum up, we have every justification in saying that
“autonomy”,
in the final analysis, means annexation.
77. As we know, the population of the occupied Arab
territories is so decisively and unanimously against the
Camp David agreements and the so-called autonomy they
provide for the West Bank and the Gaza Strip that even the
Prime Minister of Israel was forced publicly to acknowledge
that the inhabitants of these regions have no interest in such
“administrative autonomy”.

83. This position of the USSR is well known and remains
unchanged to this very day. As was recently stressed by the
President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet and General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev:

78. This forced acknowledgement,
this confession, was
the direct consequence of the continuing upsurge of the
struggle being waged by the Arab population against the
policy of the Israeli occupying authorities and against the
policy of separate deals. Sharp clashes between the inhabitants of Ramallah and the occupying troops, strikes in the
municipality of Nazareth, the demands of the national committee of Nablus for the release of Palestinian students who
had been arrested and expressions of solidarity with the
Palestine Liberation Organization by mayors of towns of
the West Bank are just a few actions by the Arab population
against the Israeli occupiers, carried out in defiance of the
situation of terror.

“In the Middle East, as in other parts of the world, we
are not seeking any selfish advantages, nor are we laying
any claim to the natural resources of other countries. We
are in favour of a lasting peace and we are firmly on the
side of the lawful rights of the Arab peoples and their
struggle for the elimination of the consequences of Israeli
aggression and against imperialist diktat, capitulationist
deals and bargaining away the vital interests of the
Arabs.”
84. Guided as we are by this policy, the Soviet delegation
whole-heartedly supports the just proposals put forward in
the Security Council by Arab and other States, to the effect
that the Security Council should condemn the policy of
Israel in the occupied Arab territories and demand a cessation and rescinding of the illegal actions which have been
carried out previously in these territories. In order to verify
compliance with that decision, it would be useful to create a
special organ of the Council. The Soviet delegation is ready
to support the application of sanctions against Israel under
Chapter VII of the Charter if there is further noncompliance by Israel with decisions of the Council. The
adoption of such a decision by the Council would undoubtedly play a useful role among other efforts which are aimed
at preventing the annexation by Israel of Arab lands and
promoting the attainment of a just and comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East.

79. It is clear that the course of seuarate deals in no way
leads to universal peace, as the participants in the tripartitk
talks have been trying vainly to have us believe. This is a
course which diverts us from the task of a comprehensive,
just settlement in the Middle East, and is designed to supplant it by partial decisions which are beneficial and
advantageous only to the aggressor and the forces which
support it.
80. But everyone acknowledges
that the Palestinian
problem constitutes the very core of the whole complicated
complex of questions involved in the Middle East settlement and without a solution to this problem, we cannot
achieve a just and lasting peace in this part of the world.
Therefore, any attempts to bring about a settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict in defiance and in spite of the legitimate interests of the people of Palestine are doomed to
failure. Furthermore, what kind of juridical validity can an
agreement and understanding have which affects the Arab
people of Palestine, if it is achieved behind the backs of that
people without the full participation of its lawful rep
resentatives.

85. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
86. Mr. EL-CHOUFI
(Syrian Arab Republic): I pondered for some time whether to ask for the floor again to
make another statement before the Council or to exercise
the right of reply. I found that both options were really the
same. Any human being with a minimal sense of justice
when addressing himself to the conflict in the Middle East
would find himself replying to the Israeli aggression. In fact,
all the events in the Middle East for the last three decades,
tragic as they were, were in some way exercising a right of
reply in the face of persistent Israeli aggression.

81. The participants in the tripartite talks have asserted
that anyone who opposes the separate understanding is, in
their words, opposing peace. However, in actual fact, a
separate agreement encourages the expansionist ambitions
of Israel, makes the attainment of a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East more difficult and greatly exacerbates the
international situation.

87. Nevertheless, I must thank the representative of the
Zionist entity of Israel for personally bolstering one of the
main points which I made in my statement a few days ago
[2124th meeting], namely, that as Zionism nears its inevitable demise, it becomes more desperate, more violent and
more bellicose. The representative of Israel was desperation

82. The Soviet delegation once again wishes to state that
the path to genuine peace in the Middle East is the path ofa
comprehensive and just settlement. It is the path of a collective search for a solution which would include-as has been
provided in decisions of the Security Council and the Gen9

personified. In his frenetic effort to defend the bankrupt
logic of zionism, he had to resort to the most impudent
forms of conduct and tricks of deception by indulging in
cheap slander or outright and gross distortion of facts. In a
blind fury, but still with calculated determination, he lashed
out at every representative who voiced support for the very
principles upon which the Organization is founded.
88. Allow me to draw the Council’s attention to two main
issues with which, by means of a heap of lies and insults, the
Israeli representative has attempted to obscure in this
debate. These issues are: first, Zionist aggression is the root
of the problem in the Middle East; it was the Zionists’ racist
chauvinistic pursuit of a Jewish “homeland” which uprooted the Palestinian people from their land, and it is the
Zionists* expansionist ambitions which constitute the main
obstacle in the search for a just peace in the Middle East;
secondly, Israel’s belligerent refusal to give up the areas
which they have occupied is tied to their aims of exploiting
the natural and human resources of the occupied Arab
territories.
89. In his efforts to obscure the roots of the conflict in the
Middle East, the Zionist representative attempted to fragment the problem and to place all subsequent historical
developments in the region completely out of historical
context. For example, he attacked Syria for its presence in
Lebanon, forgetting that there would be no strife in Lebanon, no Arab deterrent force in Lebanon, of which Syria is
but a part, if it were not for the persistent Israeli aggression
which was principally responsible for the expulsion of the
Palestinian people from their home.
90. For the record, I should like to.reiterate here that the
Syrian presence in Lebanon is part of the Arab deterrent
force which is acting on the clear-cut approval of the legal
Lebanese Government, and Syria would not extend its
presence there by a single day were it not necessary and
approved by the Lebanese Government.
9 1. With the same obscurantist aim, the Zionist representative also devoted many of his vulgar comments to the
Arab Summit meeting at Baghdad, which was held from 2
to 5 November 1978, allegingthat the summit had bellicose
declarations and designs. At one point he described the
participants as the enemies of peace. Well, let me read out
relevant paragraphs of the declaration of the Arab summit
meeting:
“It affirmed commitment of the Arab nation to just
peace based on withdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories occupied in 1967, including Arab Jerusalem, and
guaranteeing the inalienable rights of the Arab Palestinian people and the setting up of their independent
State on their national soil.
“The Conference resolved to launch a large-scale
international offensive to expound the rights of the Palestinian people and the Arab nation. It expressed sincere
thanks and appreciation to all States which stood on the
side of the Arab right.“*
92. Now, who are the enemies of peace? The victims of
aggression who are striving to liberate their occupied land,
1 A/33/400, annex, paras. 11 and 12.

to regain their liberty and fundamental human rights or the
aggressors? We oppose me Camp David approach; we shall
always oppose any separate settlement, because if any
peaceful settlement is to be achieved, it must be just and
comprehensive and, above all, address itself to the Palestinian cause, which is the core and essence of the Middle
East conflict, and must include the total withdrawal of
Israel from all occupied Arab territories.
93. I turn to the second point which the Israeli representative also deliberately ignored, that is, the fact that their
parasitic economic desires for the natural and human
resources of the occupied Arab lands account for their
obstinate refusal to give up these areas to their rightful
owners. He enumerated the many glowing “achievements?roads, schools and so on-of Israeli occupation, But all
these “forms of development” are meaningless iftheyexist
within the context of occupation. And -this is borne out by
the present situation. The so-called forms of Israeli develop
ment in the occupied Arab territories only serve tofacilitate
and consolidate its principal aim of oppression and exploitation. Yes, there are indeed forms of development, but the
question is: development for whom?
94. Their policies in agricultural “development’* in the
West Bank expose this fact. West Bank economist Mr. A. R:
Husseini writes that Israel’s Department of Agriculture is
“anxious to promote certain crops for the benefit of Israeli
exporters”, thereby creating “production patterns along
lines which are not compatible with the long-term interests
of West Bank agriculture”.
95. The most conspicuous manifestation of his deliberate
attempt to obscure the real issues is the fact thatthe Israeli
representative ignored the Golan Heights altogether-as if
there is no Israeli occupation there, no settlements, na
destruction and no exploitation in contravention of all international laws and practices.
96. The Israeli representative’s many insults to the Organization are all set out in the records of the United Nations,
and it is pointless to refute them, precisely because they are
mere insults with no basis or substance. After having listened to all these abuses directed against the international
community, one wonders to what extent Israel might go in
defying international law and order, to what extent might
this Zionist madness go and how long we in the Middle East
might remain threatened by its aggressive actions. The
Israeli representative, by affirming his Government’s defiance and disrespect of this international Organization, is
once again proving the point which many representatives
here have reiterated, that is, that zionism can be equated to
nazism. And if zionism persists, I am sure that it will only
lead to the same grave consequences that nazism brought to
the world. In trying to save our region and the.world from a
repetition of such a tragic period, we reiterate ourcall to the
Council to act and to take the necessary measures in order
to carry out its responsibilities according to the Charter, in
the service of international peace and justice. In this context
my delegation completely supports the requests of the representative of Jordan.
97. And, last but not least, what about Jerusalem? Ever
since 1967, the Security Council has repeatedly rejected the

annexation of Jerusalem and condemned Israel in its rcsolution 252 (1968) and many other subsequent resolutions. The
Council has deplored the,failure of Israel to comply with
General Assembly resolutions concerning Jerusalem and
considered that all legislative and administrative measures
and actions taken by Israel, including expropriation of land
and properties which tended to change the legal status of
Jerusalem, were invalid and could not change that status.
The Israeli representative’s only reply to that was:
“As the representative of Israel, let me therefore repeat
here again that Jerusalem, one, undivided and indivisible, shall remain for ever the capital of Israel and of the
Jewish people.” [2Z2.5th meeting, para. 88.1

hide the real intentions of those States, which hope to
control the oil resources and the strategic positions of the
Middle East. It is needless to reaffirm that they have nothing
in common with the true interests of the peoples of the Arab
countries.
104. New and fresh allies in the Middle East support and
rely on those forces, but it can be safely assumed that the
peoples of the Arab countries will neutralize the plans hostile to the cause of Arab independence. To achieve a settlement in the Middle East is a very difficult task but, in our
view, an attainable one. The basis for a real settlement
should, in our opinion, include three important elements:
first, withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories
occupied in 1967; secondly, satisfaction of the legitimate
rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including their inalienable right to set up their own State; thirdly, ensuring the
security and inviolability of the frontiers of all States in the
Middle East and their right to independent existence and
development under international guarantees.

98. Is that a passionate sentiment for peace, or a call for
war and more suffering in the Middle East? Will such
intransigence serve the cause of international peace and
security, or will it leave us the victims, the Arab peoples, the
Palestinians, no option but armed resistance to recover our
national rights?

105. Such a settlement would ensure the return of the
occupied Arab territories, and, by removing the territorial
aspects of the conflict in the Middle East, would finally
make the Arab-Israeli issue a matter of the past. At the same
time it would allow the peoples of the Arab States to
concentrate their efforts and resources on economic and
social tasks, surmounting the heritage of colonial and neocolonial domination. It would enable the Arab people of
Palestine to exercise their right to build their own independent State and occupy their rightful place among the peoples of the region. That settlement would also ensure the
existence of Israel in conditions of peace and security,
within recognized borders, and enable it to normalize rclations with the countries in the Middle East and other States
of the world.

99. With all due respect to this august body, I sincerely
call upon the members of the Council, individually and
collectively, to save the Middle East from more suffering at
the hands of zionist-racist Israel. I appeal to all mankind to
check the madness of Nazist Israel. In short, I call upon this
Council to stand up to its obligations so eloquently stated in
the Charter to which we all claim to adhere.
100. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Hungary. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
101. Mr. HOLLAI (Hungary): Mr. President, I wish to
congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of March.
I am pleased to see you, an eminent representative of a
friendly country with which my country has excellent relations, in the highly important office of President of the
Council: I am confident that, with your extraordinary qualities and diplomatic experience, you will most effectively
conduct the deliberations, on this difficult matter on our
agenda. I thank you and the other members of the Council
for giving me the opportunity to participate in this debate.

106. There is an international mechanism for achieving
such a real settlement set up especially for this purpose: it is
the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. Taking
into account the recent developments and events in and
around the area of the Middle East, I think it is useful to
recall that the Soviet Union and the United States of America, in a joint statement issued on’ 1 October 1977 in their
capacity as co-chairmen of that Conference, stated that a
solution encompassing all issues of the Middle East and all
parties to the crisis should be reached within the framework
of a comprehensive settlement. It was explicitly noted in
that statement that negotiations within the framework of
the Geneva Conference set up for this purpose are the only
correct and effective way of achieving a settlement of all
aspects of the conflict and that the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people should be ensured. We have no reason to
doubt that the provisions of that statement are still valid
and could and should serve as a basis for a comprehensive
solution.

102. I take this opportunity of a meeting of the Council to
express the views of my Government on the situation in the
occupied Arab territories that disturbs peace and stability in
the Middle East and has an adverse effect on the whole
world. We find it very useful that the Council has again
taken up this vital issue, because it reflects the lasting concern of the international community for the attainment of
the ultimate goal of peace in that area.
103. For more than three decades the fundamental issues
of the Arab-Israeli conflict have been on the agenda of the
Organization without being settled, mainly because States
try to conceal facts and realities and gain time for the
realization of selfish interests. The attempts of those States
to protract the solution of the main problems connected
with the peace and security of the Middle East evoke justified concern. They intend to justify the need to wait for
conditions to ripen for a compromise and a comprehensive
settIement. Those attempts are nothing else but a screen to

107. The occupation by Israel of Arab territories poses a
grave threat to international peace and security, and the
tension in the area can easily spill over the confines of the
Middle East. We deplore the measures taken by Israel to
alter the geographic, demographic, political, social and cultural characteristics of the occupied Arab territories. This
policy does not help the search for a peaceful settlement of
11

the conflict; Quite the contrary; it is%‘violation of the
fundamental principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territories by means of warAa’ principle embodied,
inrer alia, in the Charter of the United I&t&s and in the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council. Annexation and integration of lands and cities
of other peoples can lead only to enmity and hatred, endangering the foundations of a possible understanding between
Israel and its Arab neighbours. In the final analysis, the
danger that hostilities will erupt anew in the Middle East
will exist so long as Israel remains in the occupied territories
of the Arab countries, and so long as the Arab people of
Palestine is deprived of its inalienable national rights.
108. For those reasons, my Government welcomes the
fact that the Security Council is taking up again the real
heart of the Middle East conflict-namely,
the question of
the occupied territories and the national rights of the Arab
people of Palestine. We are happy to note the presence of
the legitimate representative of the Arab people of Palestine
during the deliberations on the present agenda item. This is
a very promising sign for the global solution of the Middle
East problem.

115. The events which have subsequently characterized
the Middle East arena, since the injection of Israel, an alien
body, into the midst of the Arab world, have been brutal
and barbarous. However, the very nature of Zionism and its
philosophy, according to its own prophet, Theodor Herzl,
is’ based on force and coercion. In fact, Hen1 confided his
belief that military power was an essential component of the
Zionist strategy: “the Zionists should acquire the land of
their choice by armed conquest”,
116. The continued waves of terrorist measures and practices affecting the human rights of the Arab population of
the occupied territories have clearly demonstrated to those
who maintain a romantic relationship with the Zionist State
the true nature of zionism as a form of racial discrimination
rightly condemned by the United Nations.
117. The situation in the Arab territories under Israeli
military occupation gives ample evidence of calculated and
systematic measures designed to emasculate the Arab Moslem legacies in a manner abhorrent to any standard of
civilized and responsible behaviour.
118. In this connexion I should like to draw attention to
the Israeli practices aimed at desecrating the mosque of the
Hebron-Al-Haram
Al-Ibrahimi
Al-Sharif-which
has,
since the Zionist aggression in June 1967, been transformed
into a synagogue.

109. My Government has always supported the genuine
national liberation movements, and we do so in the case of
the Arab people of Palestine. These people have the right to
a national identity, to self-determination, to a homeland.
This right was endorsed by the General Assembly when it
accepted the recommendations of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
As a member of that Committee, we hope that the Council
will do its best to put an end to the striking injustices that
have afflicted the Arab people of Palestine for more than
three decades, and will follow the path and the example of
the General Assembly in supporting the Committee’s recommendations on this issue.

119. Just today Reuters reported from Jerusalem that
Israeli forces and armed Jewish settlers tired on West Bank
demonstrator, killing two Arab students, one a teen-age
girl, and wounding other students.
120. Furthermore, Israeli terrorist acts have caused a
larger flow of Arab refugees from the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip; since June 1967 the number has risen to more
than 400,000.

110. My country and its people express their solidarity
with the Arab people of Palestine and assure them again of
our full support for their fight for their national independence.

121. Israel has continued to pursue a policy of outright
expulsion of the Arab civilian population in the occupied
territories, through deliberate intimidation,
oppression,
economic strangulation and psychological warfare. The
Zionist goal has been and continues to be to de-Arabize
Palestine and other Arab lands and substitute the Zionists
for the indigenous people.

111. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yemen. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

122. The aggressive and expansionist policy of the Zionist
leaders has no limitation, a fact recognized by and often
confusing to Israel’s friends. Indeed, the late President Lyndon Johnson of the United States once told the Zionist
leaders, “You ask me for secure and recognized boundaries.
Tell me first what boundaries you want”.

112. Mr. AL-HADDAD
(Yemen): May I at the outset,
Sir, express to you my felicitations on your assumption of
the presidency of this lofty organ of the United Nations, and
wish you successin your highly important and delicate task.
113. Once again the Security Council has-been convened
to deal with the worsening situation in the Arab territories
resulting from the Israeli-Zionist military occupation, which
has embarked on waves of terrorist actions and intimidation aimed at evicting the inhabitants from their homes to
make room for new waves of alien settlers.

123. The report of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories clearly shows the daily
violation of basic human rights of the Arab population
under Israeli military occupation.

114. Eighty-five years ago, Yusuf Zia Al-Khalidi, the
Mayor of Jerusalem and former Deputy in the Ottoman
Parliament, said in a letter which he sent fr0.m Constantinopie to Zadok Kahn, Chief Rabbi of,France: “In the name of
God, leave Palestine in peace”.

124. My Government has repeatedly asserted its belief
that the question of Palestine is at the heart of the Middle
East problem, and that, consequently, we should address
ourselves to restoring the legitimate and inalienable rights
12

United Nations and the Security Council, take whatever.
measures it deems necessary within its power, as specified in
Chapter VII of the, Charter, to ensure Israeli compliance
with United Nations resolutions.
“~ ,”
*
130. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, upon whom
I ,now call.
..
r
131. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
This is the International Year of the Child. Children all over
the world have a right to life. They have a right to enjoy
peace and security. Children all over the world merit our
attention, our loving ‘care and tenderness, in particular
during this very year.

of the Palestinian people to self-determination, national
independence and sovereignty in Palestine. To that end, and
in view of Israel’s persistent defiance of the principles of the
Charter and the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Security Council is duty-bound to take effective measures as
laid down by the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter.
125. My delegation believes that the Council will do an
injustice to the cause of peace if it allows itself to adopt a
routine decision condemning Israel for its gross violations
of human rights in the Arab occupied territories in complete
disregard of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the Geneva Convention of 1949. What is needed now,
in view of the Zionist measures of subjugation and annexation of Arab territories aimed at establishing permanent
domination over those territories, is strong and effective
measures to frustrate the Zionist policy of colonizing the
Arab territories, thus preventing further victimization and
human suffering. In the interests of international peace and
security, the Council should abandon its apathetic attitude
towards this grave problem and act in accordance with the
duties and responsibilities vested in it by the Charter.

132. We all have children, and we know what that means.
Children all over the world have high hopes that theirs will
be a world of peace and happiness, a world in which they
can pursue their education and learning and contribute to
the advancement and welfare of mankind. Children have a
right to go to school and to return home without hindrance
or fear. In theory, at least, this is true of children everywhere
except in occupied Palestinian and other Arab towns and
villages, where children are treated as non-human beings. Is
that the kismet, or fate, or our children, or is it the result of a
conspiracy by so-called humans?

126. Everyone in this chamber, and particularly the
members of the Council, are certainly aware and evidently
convinced that Israel is neither interested in a just peace that
involves the restoration of the Palestinians’ right to return
to their homes and properties nor willing to withdraw from
the occupied Arab territories in the Golan, in the West
Bank, including Jerusalem, and in Gara and Sinai.

133. Only this morning, the Fascist forces of occupation
opened tire on schoolchildren at Halhoul, south of Jerusalem, murdering two young students in cold blood. Children,
we say in Arabic, are the apples of our eyes;they are our joy.
The parents of those two children have tonight lost the best
of their lives.

127. The people of the world are unanimous in their
condemnation of Israeli occupation of Palestine and other
Arab lands and are demanding restoration of the Palestinian rights to self-determination and establishment of
their national home in Palestine. For us, the United Nations
remains the only forum which lawfully and rightfully has
the duty of bringing just and permanent peace to our region.
We fully share the view of the Secretary-General expressed
in his annual report to the thirty-third session of the General
Assembly)-that: irrespective of developments which may
ensue from the endeavours currently undertaken, in the
final analysis all concerned parties must come together and
search for a way which will lead to a permanent and just
peace.

134. Students are the hope of our future. Yes, two young
students were murdered by the military forces of illegal occupation, by neo-Fascists, by the racist Zionists.
135. In my statement of two days ago [2lZsth meeting], I
referred to another atrocity that had been committed by the
racist Zionists against students at Ramallah, north of Jerusalem, under the very eyes of an unwelcome visitor heading a
big Power, almost the biggest in military potential, but not
so big in its morals and its defence of morals. The unwelcome visitor proves to be not only a provocation and a
challenge; he proves to be the curse that brings devastation
to Palestinian land and Palestinian people. He not only
provokes, but he finances and arms the murderers with
lethal weapons to deprive our children of their first rightthe right to life. And that right is taken away by force, the
force of guns made and provided by the United States of
America.

128. My Government has today declared that the Yemen
Arab Republic is fully and unreservedly committed to the
unanimous Arab position as stated in the resolutions
adopted by the Arab summit conferences in Algeria, Rabat
and, most recently, Baghdad. The Government of Yemen
believes that any separate solution will harm the cause of a
just peace in the Middle East. The Yemen Arab Republic
confums its long-standing position that the Palestine Liberation Organization is the sole legitimate representative of
the Palestinian people.

136. That he was unwelcome can be confirmed by the
violent reception accorded him by the Palestinian people.
On 13 March the Daily News Bulletin of the Jewish Telegraphic Agency reported from Tel Aviv as follows:
“Violent demonstrations against President Carter’s
peace-keeping efforts erupted on the West Bank for the
fourth consecutive day. . . . Ramallah, near Jerusalem,
and Bir Zeit. site of the Arab University, were the focal

129. I must add that United Nations documents clearly
and amply demonstrate that Israel is the only party that is
consistently rejecting a just peace. Hence it is imperative
that the international community, represented by the
1 Gflcial Records
Supplement No. I.

of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session.

13

points of diQmbances.... Widespread violence occur&
‘in many more towns and villages during the past 24
,
hours. . : .
“All shops and businesses were closed. Schools remained open but most students roamed the streets setting up roadblocks, burning piles of tyres, and hurling
barrages of stones at police and Israeli vehicles. The
situation was the same at Bir Zeit.
“[On 12 March] three Bir Zeit students were wounded
when Israeli security forces opened fire to break up a
demonstration. A curfew was imposed, and all male
residents were rounded up in the church square .for
screening and- identification. The Military Governor
appointed a special committee to investigate the incident.

And when the correspondent proceeded further and asked:
“No? Is it not written so in the Camp David agreement
about peace in the Middle l&t?”
I.
1
.the Minister said:
._I‘

“Other incidents occurred yesterday**-that is, on the
12th--“at Ramallah, Al-Bira, Beth Sahour, Halhoul and
Bethlehem.

“True, it is written so, but six appendices have been
added to that agreement, andin one of them President
Carter writes to Prime Minister Begin that he, the President, certifies that the Prime Minister has informed him
that in every place where it is written ‘the Palestinian
people’ the Prime Minister’s meaning of this phrase is
‘the Arabs of the Land of Israel’.”
., 1
140. Now, what is this “Land .of Israel”? Menachem
Begin has written a book, and, to make it still more infamous, the foreword to it is by a certain Rabbi Meyer Kahane,
the founder of the so-called Jewish Defense League. He
defines the “Land of Israel” as follows:

“A large number of security forces”-that is the name
they give the illegal forces of occupation-“patrolled
East Jerusalem. . . in an effort to put an end to the
continued unrest among Jerusalem’s Arabs. The present
wave of unrest began when President Carter arrived [at
Jerusalem] last weekend and intensified with the positive
end of the talks.”

“The Land of Israel has been regarded since biblical
times as the motherland of the children of Israel. It has
always comprised what came subsequently to be called
‘Palestine’ on both sides of the River Jordan-that is to
say, not only western Palestine, but also the territory
formerly occupied by three .of the 12 Hebrew tribes,
Manasseh, Gad and Reuben:” .‘.

137. Not only the regular and undisciplined or illdisciplined members of the Israeli armed forces committed
these crimes. The settlers in the illegal settlements also
participated in the commission of those crimes. Fascists.

Well, I am glad he did not mention Ur, the city from which
Abraham came.
“*‘.
141. Now, continuing this interview with the Minister, he
was asked about this wording. The interviewer commented:
“It is one of those legalistic pieces:of sophistry.” And his
answer was:

138. In an attempt to demonstrate what the future holds
for the Palestinians, a group of those colonial settlers
stormed the house of a Palestinian Arab citizen, Ibrahim
Ghosheh by name, in Wadi El-Jhoz, Jerusalem. For us who
know Jerusalem, who were raised in Jerusalem, Wadi ElJhoz stands on the slopes of the Mount of Olives, the place
of ascension of Our Lord the Redeemer. It is in the vicinity
of the Palestine Archaeological Museum, but the Zionist
racists stormed the house and fatally shot Ibrahim Ghosheh. And while we sit here deliberating, our children are
being slaughtered, in their ownhomes, by a Member of the
United Nations.

“Yes, it is a piece of sophistry, but Israel will insist on
this interpretation and by no means will it agree to any
right of creation of a Palestinian State or’*-mind you“of self-determination. The, American positions have not
changed from the time of the ‘six-day-war. Had Israel
refused to sign the Camp David agreements, the Americans would have stated their’positions-which
are completely opposed to ours-both openly and immediately
on the Palestinian subject. In Camp David the procedure
for dealing with the problem was faed. The United
States has agreed to the presence of the Israel Defence
Forces in Judaea and Samaria and Gaza.”

139. Of course, it is the right of some to ask why the
Palestinians reject and oppose the bilateral or the trilateral
approach. Simply because the Palestinians know exactly
what that means. Yitzhak Modai, Minister of Energy and
Infrastructure of Israel, in an interview with Ma’ariv, was
asked the question:

And when pushed further by’ the joumahst with this
question:
.
“But Israel has given up the source of its authority in
Judaea and Samaria, in agreeing to abolish the military
government.“,
-/
the clever Minister said:
“It is not so, absolutely! ,The source of the authority
was not changed. In the negotiation Israel will demand
that the military government shall continue to be the
source of the authority of the autonomy, even though it
will not sit physically in the areas of the autonomy but in
Tel Aviv or in Haifa.”

“Now that Israel has given up the settlements, recognized the legitimate rights of the Palestinians and their
just demands, and has agreed to abolish the military
Government in Judaea, Samaria and Gaza, are Israeli
relations with the United States tolerable?”
And the answer of the Minister was:
“First, I must disagree with the basic assumptions in
your question.’ True, Israel has given up the settlements
in Sinai. It is not true that it has recognized the legitimate
rights of the Palestinians.”

Yes, that is exactly why the PaIestinians reject and,oppose
the so-called autonomy theme.
14

142. Yesterday we saw the Mayor of Gaza,Mr. Shawa,,on
American TV. He made it clear he strongly rejected the
Sadat-Begin-Carter plot, and he said it was a new name
given to continued illegal occupation. Yes, it is a plot. It was
concocted in the dark. It left out the heart of the conflict in
the Middle East-namely, the question of Palestine and,t’he
future of the Palestinian people. It completely ignored the
United Nations, its principles and relevant resolutions. It is
a plot against the Palestinians, the Arabs, international
peace and security and the United Nations.
143. We still believe that it is high time that the Security
Council took action‘in accordance with the terms of the
Charter-and, in particular, Chapter VII-to see to it that
its decisions are respected and implemented.
I. ‘
144. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Somalia
has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

take upon himself the task of answering on my behalf. I
must confess that I find this both-gratifying and intriguing:
gratifying because the Israeli representative has made my
task much easier, as by referring to allegations which are
non-existent, he .has demonstrated to the rnembers of the
Council that his contribution to the debate is not really
serious; and intriguing because the fact that the Israelis,
constantly seeking to sow’seedsof suspicion and contention
between peoples who live together in peace and harmony,
are giving us a demonstration of the role they intend to play
in the territories and regions which have the misfortune to
be adjacent geographically to theirs.
150. In the course of the debate over the past few days, we
have heard the Israeli representative huffing and puffing
and lashing out at any representative who took the floor
and expressed a point of view that he considered inimical to
the Israeli stand. That attitude is only to be expected of a
lifelong supporter of the Irgun Zvai Leumi. The diversionary tactics adopted by him, and the deliberate avoidance of
a discussion of the substance of the issue inscribed on the
agenda of the Council, are designed to frustrate the work of
the Council.

145. Mr. HUSSEN(Somalia):
I have asked to exercise the
right of reply to respond briefly to the references which the
Israeli representative made to my country in his intervention yesterday [2126rh meettig]. At the outset, I must categorically reject his allegations and those he claims to have
been made elsewhere as baseless and as a gross distortion of
the facts. It should be quite evident that the Israeli representative, by injecting “red herrings” into these discussions,
hopes to divert the attention of the Council from the crucial
subject under discussion, which is Israel’s expansionist policies in the Middle East, its usurpation of the rights, property
and land of the people of Palestine and, above all, its
unacceptable encroachment on and occupation of the Holy
City of Jerusalem.

15 1s I turn now to the allegations of the Israeli renresentative. The unsavoury words &ed by him, such as “siaughtering” and “bloodiest regime”, were meant to produce a
dramatic effect, although he knows full well that they are
neither pertinent nor relevant to the cimmstances prevailing
in the Sudan. There is simply no conflict between the north
and the south; the Addis Ababa Agreement, which was
signed in 1972 between the Sudan Government and the
representatives of the southern region, put an end to the
conflict and launched the country on a course towards
national unity and stability. The resolution of the conflict
between the north and the south waseventually followed by
other steps leading to national reconciliation with major
opposition groups in the north, and the total release of all
political detainees and all sentenced political prisoners by
April 1978. The report of Amnesty International for 1978
has this to say:
“The reconciliation thus finally embraced all political
opposition groups. Political discussions following this
key preliminary measure continued and several released
detainees took part in the elections as Sudan Socialist
Union candidates. Some were elected and given office in
the National Assembly and the ruling Sudanese Socialist
Union. An indication of the degree of reconciliation
achieved may be found in the appointment of Clement
Mboro to be Speaker of the Southern Regional Assembly and of Hassan Al-Tourabi to the political bureau of
the Sudan Socialist Union.

146. In the course of this debate the Council has been
treated to railing and rancour by the Israeli representative in
a vain endeavour to defend his country’s indefensible policies. But he must be made to understand that the Security
Council, in its deliberations on an issue as crucial and
explosive as the one before it, must be guided solely by the
tenets and precepts of ‘international law.
147. As long as Israel continues its inhuman, illegal and
immoral policies, in defiance of international opinion, the
representative of Israel must be left in no doubt that the
international community ,will always remain firmly opposed
to those policies and will side with justice, for to do otherwise would be to undermine the objectives and purposes of
the Charter and, indeed, would gravely erode the whole
structure of international order.

“After each phase of releases, Amnesty International
cabled President Nimeiri, congratulating his Govemment on the amnesty measure.**

148. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of the
Sudan, who has asked to speak in exercise of the right of
reply, to take a seat at the Council table and t&take his
statement.

152. If we turn the pages of the same report to pages 261 to
264, we find some interesting reading material about the
record of the Israeli authorities, which prompted the
authors of the report to express their deep concern:
“Amnesty International was sufficiently concerned by
the allegations of torture committed by the Israeli security forces to renew its request, in July 1977, that the

149. Mr. SAHLOUL (Sudan): May I express my gratitude to the members of the Council for permitting me to
exercise my right of reply to the remarks made yesterday
[ibbid] by my neighbour to the right. He was kindenough to
make his remarks about the state of affairs between the
north and the south in the Sudan and, at the same time, to
15

in 1967 and involves the entire Arab nation in view of the
military, political, economic and cultural danger which
the Zionist enemy represents to the entire Arab nation,
its fundamental nationalist interests, its civilization and
destiny.‘14

Israeli Government permit an independent inquiry into
the allegations. To this request, as to Amnesty Intemational’s earlier ones, the Israeli authorities have not, at
the time of writing, replied.”
153. I feel that the two quotations that I have just read
absolve me of the obligation to tax the patience of the
members of this august body and to take up any more of
their valuable time. The issues at stake are too serious to be
sidetracked by the theatricals and frivolities of the Israeli
representative.
154. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Israel, who has asked to speak in exercise of the right of
reply.
155. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The sad procession of speakers
aligning themselves with the opponents of peace was joined
earlier this week and today by India and a number of
countries from the Soviet bloc. As I listened to the representative of India condoning the “armed struggle” inspired by
the criminal PLO it made me wonder what had happened to
the ideals of the great Mahatma Gandhi, who led his country to independence.
156. We have been lectured by the representative of Bangladesh. It is fortunate that we in Israel do not model our
relations with the Arabs in Judaea and Samaria on the
example set by that State, for no country representedon the
Security Council today has a more abysmal record than
Bangladesh. I will not dwell on that record here but would
refer representatives to the devastating report by the Minority Rights Group of London entitled “The Biharis in Bangladesh”, which details the plight of the remnants of the
community, who were the victims twice over of the most
brutal slaughter and massacre. For those who remain
unconvinced, Amnesty International has new evidence in
its most recent report of the “inhuman conditions” in which
between 10,000 and 15,000 political prisoners are still held,
the majority without trial. It also reports on hundreds of
executions which took place in October 1977, either without
trial or after summary military trials without any possibility
of appeal. According to Amnesty International, “trials
before military tribunals in Bangladesh fell short of intemationally accepted standards”.

159. So those are the peaceful intentions of Syria and its
friends. It is the peace of the graveyard for Israel, the demise
of which the Syrian representative also prophesied here
today. It would be interesting to hear from him upon which
article of the Charter this prophecy of the destruction of a
State Member of the United Nations is based.
160. The Soviet representative made a predictable statement, although the purely fictitious horror stories that
punctuated that statement were rather crude, even by Soviet
standards. His country’s position on the Arab-Israel conflict, like his country’s record on other matters concerning
international peace and security, is, after all, well known. In
essence it is to block any genuine progress towards peace,
for it is the situation of.“no peace, no war” in the Middle
East which best suits the Soviet Union’s purposes, as it has
done for almost three decades. If there must be peace, then
at least let it be a peace dictated by Soviet interests. But in
the context of the present debate, better by far would be a
clear field in Judaea and Samaria so that the massive supplies of Soviet weapons in the hands of the Governments at
Damascus and Baghdad, as well asat the disposal of the
terrorist PLO, could reach the outskirts of Jerusalem and.
Tel Aviv unimpeded.
161. The Soviet representative also spoke darkly about
the conditions of the Arabs living under Israeli administration. He will forgive me if I observe that many of the
peoples, national minorities and religious communities living in the Soviet Union and in the extensive territories
annexed by it in the wake of the Second World War wouId
have been fortunate had they enjoyedi or could enjoy, even
a fraction of the rights and freedoms enjoyed by the Arab
inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza district,
which, let me remind the Council, include freedom of movement and expression, freedom of religion as well as many
other fundamental freedoms denied to the citizens of the
Soviet Union.

157. It was reassuring to see that the representative of
Yemen could take time out from his country’s difIiculties at
home and be with us here today. We are presumably to
assume from his presence that the war between North
Yemen and South Yemen-and it is no small or uncomplicated war-has been resolved to the satisfaction of all sides.
I do not think that I shall be divulging any secret if1 say that
the information available to all of us here is by no means as
reassuring.

162. As for Czechoslovakia, Hungary and East Germany,
individual replies are not really called for. These are countries which follow a collective line. Incidentally, they are
also countries which have distinguished themselves in everything to do with human rights and-fundamental freedoms
and apparently cannot refrain from raising their pious voices when Holy Places at Jerusalem and elsewhere are
discussed.
163. Having said that, I must, however, refer to the
remarks of the representative of East Germany, Here is the
representative of a country that has buried its hideous
record towards the Jewish people as though it never existed,
a country with virtually no Jewish population, no Jewish
memories and no Jewish problem, a country that has cut
itself off from its own past in the most cynicalway. indeed,
all of this is necessary, for East Germany now trains PLO

158. The Syrian representative in his elegant statement
quoted extensively from the concluding statement of the
Baghdad summit conference of last November. Interestingly enough, he deleted one passage which reveals the true
intentions of the signatories of that declaration, that is, the
elimination of Israel. I should like to quote from a subparagraph of paragraph 3 u:
“The conflict with the Zionist enemy goes beyond the
struggle of the countries whose territories were occupied

' A/33/400,annex.

16

terrorists in special camps near Leipzig and Dresden and,
more actively than any other Government in Eastern
Europe, encourages those terrorists in their most extreme
designs for the destruction of the Jewish State. When Jewish civilians are killed in bomb blasts in a Jerusalem supermarket or at a Tel Aviv bus station, we are bound to ask
ourselves whether the perpetrators of those crimes were
trained in East Germany.

resolution 181 (II). I have chosenThe New York Times,but
they will no doubt find the samedetails in any newspaper
they choose, including those publishedin Arab capitalsat
the time. i’7zeNew York Timesof 1 December 1947,reporting from Palestinethe events of 30 November, that is the
day after the resolution was adopted, had the following
front-page headline: “Palestine’s Arabs kill seven Jews,
call three-day strike-buses tired on from ambush+Arab]
higher Committee adoptsplansagainstpartition”. The article begins:

164. Here is a regime that must build a massive wall to
keep its citizens from fleeing to freedom accusing a free
country-Israel-which
allows free movement across its
borders and the free right of its citizens to settle where they
wish. Has the representative of East Germany forgotten the
3 million persons who fled to the West before that infamous
wall was built in 1961-a wall that remains the physical
symbol of repression to millions? Has he forgotten the
200,000 of its citizens still patiently awaiting exit visas? Has
he forgotten the thousands of dissidents languishing in East
German gaols as his Government cynically barters their
lives for foreign exchange? Under the headline, “Trade in
humans divulged”, i”Re Christian Science Monitor on 2 June
1978 reported the extent of this “Menschenhandel”. or trade
in human beings, and the most recent Amnesty Intemational report remarked that an estimated 1,300 prisoners
were released from East Germany in 1977 for prices ranging
from DM 30,000 to DM 60,CKXlper person. It appears that
doctors and scholars fetch considerably better prices than
unskilled labourers.

“In a violent Arab retort to the United Nations decision on Palestine seven Jews were killed by Arab
ambushesin Palestinetoday 30 November. Five were
slain in an attack on one bus and one in an assaulton
another bus.”
The article goeson to report that a Jew was killed in Jaffa
and eight buses were attacked in Jerusalemand Haifa.
Incidentally, the samearticle notes that in Damascusan
Arab mob killed a memberof the Soviet legation there.
170. The New York Times of 2 December 1947had the
front-page headline: “Arab States call meeting; riots over
Palestinego on”. The samenewspaper,page 11,headlines:
“Palestine firings keep tension high-Arabs try to invade
Tel Aviv”. The report states:
“One Jew was killed and four other Jews and two
Polish Christians were wounded as Arab bandsroved
through the Holy Land, punctuating their protestswith
gunfire and bomb blasts.”

165. But if the East German renresentative has forgotten
these facts, he has certainly not forgotten the sight ofgoviet
tanks in the streets of his country when thousands of
workers marched into the streets in June 1953, calling for
the downfall of his country’s regime.

The article added that two Jews had been wounded by
grenadesin Tel Aviv.
171. The New York Times of 3 December 1947had the
front-page headlines. “Eight Jews reported killed in
Palestine-clashes-mob loots shops-Moslem sagesask
holy war”. One article began:

166. Before he begins to rewrite the history of the Middle
East, I would suggest that he take a long, hard look at his
own country’s record and examinecloselythe propriety of a
German attack on Jewishrights while the holocaustgeneration is still alive.

“Arab threats of violence. . . materialized today in
stoning and stabbing attacks against Jews and in the
burning and looting of their shops.”

167. Yesterday I challenged the Jordanian representative’s description of what he called the few peacefuldemonstrations which A”rabsstagedin 1947to expresstheir dismay
at General Assembly resolution 181(II), and I quoted from
United Nations reports of February and April 1948 to
refute his assertion. The Jordanian representative then
backtracked and claimed that he was speakingonly about
the few days following the adoption of the resolution in
question. I shall quote him yesterday’s record:

The article continues on page 4 of the sameedition:
“The trouble in Jerusalembeganwhen a crowd of 200
to 300 young Arabs marched from the Walled City into
the central businesssectionabout 9 o’clock in the moming and begansmashingshop windows and looting. The
mob spirit swelledfast, and the youths turned on passing
Jews;a Jewish newspaperman,Ashar Lazar of Haaretz,
was draggedfrom his car and stabbedthree times in full
view of the crowd.”

“I stand completely by my statementthat the Palestinians did no more during the first few days that followed
the partition plan than protest and demonstrateagainst
the dismembermentof their country againsttheir will.”
[2126th meeting,para. 227.1

172. The New York Times of 4 December 1947 had the
front-page headline: “Palestinestrife widens,gripsJaffa-Tel
Aviv area; Arabs rebuff peaceplea-pillage, arson, sniping
mark the secondday of protest strike.” The article goeson
to state clearly that the Arabs usedautomatic weapons.

168. The trouble is that that statement is historical nonsense,and the representativeof Jordan surely did not think
that membersof the Council would accept such hogwash
uncritically.

173. The New York Times of 5 December 1947 had the
front-page headline: “Arabs make roads new battlefields;
rake bus convoys-casualty toll mounts.” The article began:
“The Arab three-day strike ended today with bloodshed
throughout Palestine.”

169. Let me refer membersto the world pressin the days.
immediately following the adoption of General Assembly
17

Are we to believe that Jordan has joined the ranks of the
land-locked countries?

174. Those were the “peaceful” demonstrations staged by
the Arabs during the first few days after the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 181 (111. We can readily
understand what the Jordanian representative means
when he talks of “peace” in this chamber.

176. We are all familiar with the expression “eyeless in
Gaza”, but “eyeless in Aqaba” is surely a new one. How are
we to suppose that ships proceeding to Aqaba get there if
not through the Straits of Tiran? It is just conceivable that,
unknown to us, they are taken overland to avoid interfering
with the water-skiing and speed-boating off Aqaba. Or
perhaps the crews blindfold themselves and let themselves
be guided in by Israeli pilots?

175. If this is not enough to eliminate completely whatever little credibility the Jordanian representative may have
claimed for himself, I do not know what ‘else is needed. I
shall avoid the temptation to pick up such an absurd contention as that no Jordanian had ever seen the Straits of
Tiran. And that too is taken from yesterday’s record, which
I shall quote: “I do not think that any Jordanian or Palestinian had ever seen the Straits of Tiran.” [ZM, para. IZ8.1

The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

18
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

ai

79-70002-November

1982-2.250
