S/2020/1124

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 13 November 2020 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2542
(2020) of 15 September 2020, in which the Council requested me to assess the steps
required to reach a lasting ceasefire in Libya and the possible role of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in providing scalable ceasefire support alongside
my interim report on the proposals for effective ceasefire monitoring under the auspices
of the United Nations, no later than 60 days after the adoption of the resolution.
Following the signature of the agreement for a complete and permanent
ceasefire in Libya on 23 October 2020, which was welcomed by the Security Council
in its press statement of 27 October 2020 (SC/14339), the Libyan parties have
intensified their face-to-face interactions and pursued their discussions on the
operationalization of the ceasefire agreement. In this regard, the UNSMIL -facilitated
5+5 Joint Military Commission has met twice in Libya and intend s to convene again
on 16 November 2020 to advance the design of the ceasefire monitoring mechanism.
Meanwhile, the United Nations Secretariat has established an inter-agency
Libya planning team to prepare for possible support for the implementation of th e
ceasefire monitoring mechanism in an integrated and timely manner. To further
inform internal planning, UNSMIL conducted preliminary logistical and security
assessments in Sirte, where the mechanism will likely be headquartered. However,
critical elements of the mechanism are still being discussed by the Libyan parties
within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. The outcome of the
ongoing talks is essential for the Secretariat to move forward in its planning process.
In the light of the above, I would like to request an extension of the deadline for the
submission of my interim report to the Security Council until 30 December 2020. This
would enable the Secretariat to submit to the Security Council an effective proposal for
the ceasefire monitoring mechanism, which is informed by the ongoing talks.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Council for its continued
support for the ongoing efforts of my Acting Special Representative, Stephanie
Williams, UNSMIL and the United Nations country team in Libya to bring peace and
stability to the Libyan people.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

20-15622 (E)

231120

*2015622*
