1

i

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 4 APRIL 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1412) . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . .
Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (A/85 16);
f&j Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/85 17) . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1412

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of fhe Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered jn accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND TWELFTH MEETING
Meld in New York on Thursday, 4 April 1968, at 3 p.m.
Ptwidcnt: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics),

PLeselzf: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Rfpublics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l412)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8.5 16);
(b) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/85 17).
Adoption of the agenda
The ugerldu was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(8) Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8516);
fbj Letter dated 29 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Couccil (S/8517)

1. The PRESIDENT (trunslated from Russian): In accordance with the decision previously taken by the Council, I
propose to invite the representatives of Jordan and Israel to
take places at the Council table to participate, without the
right to ibte, in the Council’s discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. .H; ELFarra
(Jordort) arld Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) too’: places at the
Senrrity Council table.
2, The PKESlDENT {translated from Russian): In accordance with the decision previously taken by the Council, I
propose to invite also the representatives of Syria, the
United Arab Republic and Iraq to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber, on the
understanding that when they wish to address the Council
they will be invited to take places at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. J. Tomeh
(Syria), Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic) and Mr.
A. Pachachi (Iraq) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Security Council Chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Russian): The first
name on the list of speakersis that of the representative of
Jordan, on whom I now call.
4. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I am taking the floor again to
make a few observationson behalf of my Government.
5. Last Friday, 29 March, we brought an urgent complaint
IV85161 to the Security Council. We presented facts and
emphasized the need for action. Howevx, attempts were
made to inject irrelevant matters into our deliberations. The
emphasis in our complaint wasshifted, therefore, from the
crhne committed to whether or not we should have
observersin tne so-calledJordan-Israel cease-firesector. The
Israeli representative took advantage of this to present still
other irrelevant issues,such as the question of the Jews in
Iraq and Syria, their welfare and security and so on, in
order further to divert the attention of the Council from
the Israeli act of aggression.Thus, at our last meeting, we
witnessed this diversion taking place and a clear attempt
being made to widen the scope of the debate. I therefore
find it my duty once again to remind the Council that what
is before it is a specific complaint.
6. Much has been said about the observers.I have already
spent much time reminding the Council that this is not the
question before the Council. I have stated, and I will
reiterate, that we are not agicinstobserversas such, but we
are definitely and unequivocally against any idea which is
intended to create or which may lead to creating a new
situation not envisagedby the cease-fireresolution.
7. The cease-fireresolution wasnever intended to consolidate the Israeli aggression,nor to create a new line, with
observersstationed thereon, to be used as a shield for such
consolidation. And, as I said earlier, a cease-fireis never a
permanent arrangement: it is conceived of as a temporary
stageto enable the Security Council to take steps to bring
about the complete liquidation of the consequencesof the
act of aggressionso that no fruits can be gained through
force.
8, I submit that if it is really the intention of some
members to help the Security Council bring tranquillity and
peace to the area, there are prerequisites to peace. The
United Nations has adopted many resolutions intended to
cultivate and prepare the ground for peace.It waswiti that

-

tion, shooting,terrorism, demolition of housesat random,
andhouse-to-house
searcheswere amongthe methodsused
by the Israelisin Gaza to scare the Arabs out of the&homes.Scoresof housesin a refugeecampin the GazaStrip
were bulldozed in a singlenight. Severalhousesin Dcir el
Balah in the Gaza Strip were destroyed. Neither housesof
worshipnor hospitalshave beenspared.The impositionof a
curfew isbeingresortedto more and more.

intention that the Security Council adopted resolution
237 (1967), which called on Israel to permit “the return of
those inhabitants who have fled the areas since the
outbreak of hostilities”. But what was Israel’s answer to
that? No permission to return, and more expulsion of
people, including many dignitaries from the west bank of
the Jordan.
9. The Security Council has received a report on this
matter and the question arises: what has the Council done
to make the Israelis abide by its will? What have the
members who today call for observers done to help in that
respect? What is more, did not the Security Council in
resolution 237 (1967) request Israel to ensure the safety,
welfare and security of the inhabitants who remained in the
occupied territories, be it in Sinai, the Caza Strip, the west
bank or Golan? What was the Israeli answer to that?

14. Thus the question arises: what has the Security
Council done to help the Secretary-Generalachievethe
implementationof resolution 237 (1967)? What has the
Security Council saidon this question? Today, why single
out observerson a so-calledcease-fireline and ignore the
crimesthat challengeyour own authority and your own
resolutions?
15. With the above-mentioned background which is
familiar to the Council, doesthe Israeli representative
really
believe that he can persuadethe Security Council that
everything is rosy in the occupiedterritories andthat there
is an understandingbetween the occupier and the occupied? Do not all these inhuman Israeli acts belie such
Israeliclaims?For, if thingswere quiet in thoseterritories,
why thoseactsof repression?

10. I have brought to your attention on previous occasions
and in official letters cases of expulsion, such as that of the
Nuwaseirat tribe, consisting of 294 Jordanians who had
lived for ages in the Jericho area. The way to their
expulsion was paved by an Israeli army raid on their
village.1 I brought to your attention the deportation of the
President of the Islamic Supreme Court in Jerusalem,
Sheikh Abd Al-Hamid Al-Sayeh, the leading Muslim personaIity.2 I brought to your attention the expulsion of Ibrahim
Bakir and Kamal Nasser from the west bank of the Jordan.3
I brought to your attention the arbitrary expulsion of the
leader of the Christian Arab community in Jerusalem, the
former Foreign Minister of Jordan, Mr. A. Atalla. He was
deported simply because he said: “We cannot accept that
Israel should place us under its sovereignty with a mere
stroke of the pen.“4 I brought to your attention in
document S/8445 the deportation last month of Mr. Rouhi
El-Khatib, the Mayor of Jerusalem, for similar reasons.

16. In resolution 237 (1967), the Security Councilalso
requestedthe Secretary-Generalto follow the effective
implementationof the saidresolution andto report thereon
to the Security Council. The Secretary-General,I amsuw,
in this casealso regrets his inability to submit to the
Security Council a helpful report on all the abovementionedIsraeli crimessimply becausethe Israeliswould
not permit the Secretary-General to have observers
stationedwithin the occupiedterritories so asto beon the
spot and able to report on all acts of destruction and
oppression.Why doesnot the Council call on Israelto have
the Secretary-Generalstation such observers?What is the
Security Councildoingto help the Secretary-General
follow
the effective implementationof its resolution?

11. Last week, during their aggression against the Karameh
camp, the Israelis kidnapped around 150 refugees and
Jordanian citizens-from the Karameh camp, from the east
bank of the Jordan. Those innocent people are still
subjected to various forms of torture and oppression. What
has the Council done to bring about the release of those
Jordanian citizens?

17. Surely, the executive organ of the United Nations
cannot act above the wishes of the United Nations
Members,simply becausein most cases,you, the Council,
can makethe stand of the Security Council weakor strong
and your decisionseffective or ineffective. Your resolution
237 (1967) refersto the GenevaConvention of 12 August
1949.5 Article 53 of that Convention expresslyprohibits
destruction of movable or immovable property, and other
articlesprohibit actsof oppression.Your resolutionempha.
sizesthe samedoctrine.

12. Moreover, the United Arab Republic wrote to this
Council on 19 January 1968 [S/8344/ about military
operations in the.Gaza Strip. The scope and nature of those
operations are identical to military operations, resorted to
only during actual hostilities.
13. In another letter of 31 January 1968 [S/8373], it was
stated that 100 to 300 persons a day from the Gaza Strip
cross from the west bank to the east bank of the Jordan.
Today we have 450,000 refugees who have been expelled
by the Israelis. Those who had been expelled told our
people in the east bank that they had been coerced by the
Israelis into leaving their homes and dwellings. Intimida-

18. Here is what an American visitor, Mr. Joel Lieber,had
to say on what the Israelisdid in Golan, Syria, in violation
of that Convention and of your resolution. Thisiswhat he
said on 28 March 1968, which is last week, concerning
Golan:

]. See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second
Year, Supplement for October, November rind December 1967,

“We passedquietly through the rubble of a razed
village . . . The village had been crushedas though by a
giant foot; every building was down , . , except the
mosque and minaret, so they won’t be accusedof
desecratingholy places.”

3 Ibid.
1 Ibid., Twenty-third Year, Supplement for January, February
and March 1968, document
S/8354.

5 C&nova
Convention
relativeto the Protectionof CivilianPersons
in Timeof War of 12 August1949.SeeUnitedNations,Treat)

document
S/8290.
ZIbid., document
S/8311.

Series, vol. 75 (19501, NO. 973.

2

3s at random,
methods used
out of their
he Gaza Strip
ses in Deir el
her houses of
nposition of a :
the Security
1 achieve the
What has the

my,why single
nd ignore the
nd your own
Ed wlrich is
:ntative really
Council that
and that there
nrd the occu:ts belie such
3se territories,
Council also
the effective
zport thereon
ral, I am sure,
,ubmit to the
I1 the above.
Israelis would
we observers
.s to be on the
struction arid
Israel to have
? What is tha
;eneral follow

ThenMr. Lieber went on to say:
“It was a fOi%Uh I Saw repeated throughout the
Golan’s40 by 12 miles area-thirty, maybe fifty, villages
identically and systematically reduced to rubble, after the
war, by Israelidemolition squads,”
19. Mr. Ben Zvi, an Israeli guide, said: “It givesme a sick
feeling in my stomach to see these villages.” He then
continued,according to Mr. Lieber: “Go look for yourself.
Maybe you will find them interesting. I have been there
beforeandmy memoriesmake me sick.”

24. 1 have so far been speaking about United Nations
resolutionsadopted after the Israeli aggressionof 5 June.
Let usnow turn ,to two other resolutions on the questionof
Jerusalem.

Treu!,

28. It is perfectly well known that the Israelisdo not want
United Nations observersto report on their crimes,But is
not a United Nations presencewithin the occupied territories essentialto peace? Wehave witnessedmany efforts
and manoeuvresin variousshapesandforms that havebeen
made to make this idea of observerson a cease-fireline the
basicthemein the Security Council.

22. In this respect, do you not think that the United
Nationspresencein the occupied territories would be the
first step to stopping such Israeli crimes and reporting to
the Council thereon? You do not need United Nations
peopleto observeon so-called cease-firelines, but United
Nations action to stop active aggression,The Israelis are
complainingin this Council becausethey are suffering the
consequences
of their aggression,and you are not helping
the areaby not effectively emphasizing to Israel that the
answerto aggressionis withdrawal, not observation on
so&led cease-firelines.

)el Lieber, had
ia, in violation
fhis is what he
:k, concerning

Nations,

27. I submit, it doesnot need a report or a reminderto
have the Council face up to its responsibilityand work for a
more effective and helpful solution to secure Charter
values, Geneva Conventions and Security Council resolutions.

21, I neednot refer to other villageson the west bank that
suffered the samefate. And the samequestion, the very
samequestion,arises:what is the Cauncil doing to help the
SecretaryGeneral”

nited Nations
nited Nations
,, the Cnuncil,
,veak or strong
our resolution
of 12 August
:ssly prohibits
rty, and other
jlution empha-

FCivilian Persons

26. Certainly it was largely becausethere is no United
Nations presencewithin Jerusalemduring this illegal and
forcible Israeli occupation to observe and report on the
non-implementationand on the other Israelistepstaken to
alter the status of Jerusalem,including the bulldozing of
Moslem shrines, the dynamiting of housesbelonging to
JerusalemJordanian citizens, and the expelling of Jerusalemleaders,that the Secretary-Generalhas been unable
better to serveyour resolution.

20. In Golan, even dogs, man’s most faithful friends, had
not beenspared.Mr. Lieber had this to say last week: “The
shootingof dogs was horrible. The Israeli guide Ben Zvi
answered:‘What elsecould we do with thesedogs?We shot
them by the dozens,the hundreds, the thousands.’” Thus
evendogscould not escapethe cruelty of Zionism.

23. It is upsetting, it is indeed unfortunate, that so many
efforts were exerted to secure observation of what is
happeningacross the cease-fire line, while too little or
nothingat ail is being done to stop what is goingon and to
work for the elimination of the causesof tension through
immediateand complete withdrawal. Through withdrawal
you would be reactivating, giving force to and reviving the
only valid machinery in the area, that: is the Armistice
machinery. Then the observers could certainly function
moreeffectively on the armistice demarcationline, which is
the only line recognized by the United Nations. And that
line is indivisible; I am referring to an indivisible line
incorporatedin an Armistice Agreement.

le of a razed
s though by a
, except the
e accused af

the Assembly again, ten days later on 14 JUIY 1967,
deplored the failure of Israel to implementthe resolution,
reiterated its call and requestedthe Secretary-Generalto
report to the Security Council and the GeneralAssembly
on the situation and on tl& implementation of the
resolution on Jerusalem[resohtiun 2254 (ES-V)].

29. We reject observersin the cease-fireareabecausewe
see what the Israelis are after, and we do not want the
Council to take any stepswhich would eventually accommodate Israeli designs.The designsshouldbe obvious. On
the one hand, the Israelishave refused to implement each
and. every one of the Council’s resolutions,including the
resolution of 22 November 1967. On the other hand, the
Israelis,through their everyday acts, deedsand behaviour,
are planning‘to stay. Membersof the Security Council, put
thesetwo together and then you will have the answerclear
and simple. When you add this to your refusal to take
action ensuringthe implementationof your resolutionsYOU
can seewherethe areaisheading.
SO. Israelibombingof food-producing andpopulatedareas
in the eastbank of Jordan,together with irrigation projects,
is not an invitation to peace. It doesnot bring peacebut
exposes the motives of the Israelis. It strengthensthe
determination of the people of Jordan now under Israeli
occupation to resistthe invadersand to fight for freedom
irrespectiveof the price.
31. Mr. Tekoah shouldnot comehere and allegethat the
Arabs resistthe JewsasJews.The resistancemovementof
Palestine is not struggling against the Israeli invaders
becausethey are Jews.The Palestinepeople’sPosition and
strugglewould have been equally vehement and unequivocal if the crimes committed against them, their homes
and their people had been perpetrated by any other race,
religion or ideology. This is simply becausethese people,
like all peace-lovingand freedom-lovingpeoples,feel that
foreign invadersshould be expelled. Their struggleiS not
different from the liberation strugglesin Angola, Rhodesia,
South Africa; nor,’ for that matter, is it different from the

25. What did the Security Council do to protect the Holy
City of Jerusalem?In defiance of United Nations authority, Israel annexed the Arab city of Jerusalem.The General
Assemblyadopted a resolution /2253 (ES-Vj] in which it
considered-by99 votes in favour, with only 2 abstentions,
thoseof the United States and Israel-the measurestaken
by Israelinvalid and called upon Israel to rescindthem and
to take no action which would alter the statusof Jerusalem.
Israelrefusedto heed the injunction of the Assembly, and
3

indiscriminate Israeli bombing of Jordanian positions,
food-producing areas and populated areas.

struggle of all European countries that were occupied by
the Nazis during the last world war. Your own great
country, Mr. President, the Soviet Union, offered a shining
example of heroism and resistance. Your country lost 20
million people to get rid of the Nazi invaders.

38. They cannot allege that they do not know which air
force operated first because Jordan, the victim of the
5 June surprise attack, is still without an air force, and
defends itself against continued Israeli aggression without
air cover. Therefore, even on this question of the use of a
huge number of Israeli jets, the Security Council should
condemn the act, censure Israel and call for a halt to the
sending of arms to it.

32. The Palestine people are presently dispersed under
every sky, but they are determined to have their homes and
their homeland, to live in dignity, freedom and self-determination. No one expects them to submit to destructive
Zionism. Those who keep hearing the Hitlerite-style threats
from Mr, Tekoah understand why the Arabs are determined
to resist.

39. In this connexion, I should like to refer to the letter of
2 April 1968 [S/8528/ of the Permanent Representative of
Italy, Ambassador Vinci, in which he states that the Italian
Government has not granted any licence for the sale of
milit‘ary supplies to Israel. We are grateful to the Government of Italy for this information. I certainly did not imply
that Israel was now acquiring arms and military supplies
from Italy. I referred to an Israeli conference at Tel Aviv in
which, according to the Israeli radio, the State radio, the
Israeli military mission in Rome participated. The Israeli
military missions in the United States and in many
European capitals are now preparing the 1968 plans for
acquiring arms and military supplies from the United States
and certain other Western countries. That wasthe informa.
tion announced on the radio. Israel wants to achieve its goal
and purpose for 1968. Whether all the Western Powers will
help Israel achieve its goal and purpose for 1968 remains to
be seen.

33. My Government is shocked to see that some responsible members in this Council find it fit to raise the
argument that there was no evidence to warrant the
Jordanian charge. This Council is converted at times into a
court of law, with all its technicalities and legal formalities,
and at other times is used as a political and practical organ
primarily responsible for peace and security. Why is it that
while the crime is clear some members insist that the
evidence is not sufficient? Some here maintain that there is
no evidence showing who started the firing. But cannot this
be the case in every situation if the Council wants to be
that legal minded?
34. If this Council wants to be a court of law, then there is
something called deduction from assertions and motives,
behaviour and Surrounding circumstances. I have cited the
admission of Israeli leaders and other statements. This week
even Time magazine, of 5 April, reported, on the subject of
our complaint, that Israel had massed troops, tanks and
artillery in the Beisan valley awaiting an excuse to renew
the offensive. A mine exploded and thus the “Israelis got
the provocation they were looking for. . . . Three hours
later, the Israeli army opened . , , fire. , , . The Jordanians
fired back, and the battle wason.”

40. Indeed, why does not the Council call for sanctions
against Israel? The act of bombing alone warrants such an
injunction. We honestly and sincerely cannot understand
why the Security Council did not treat with more concern
this act of genocide, which even provocation-assuming that
there was such provocation, which is not the case-would
not justify. The adoption of an adequate resolution
continues to face strong resistance in this Council despite
all these facts, Is not the indiscriminate bombing enough to
stir the conscience of those who refuse to take positive
action? We submit that the effects of ill-advised political
expediency-a curse which has made this body what it is,
weak and ineffective-are again being felt on the interna.
tional scene.One wonders why all these unhealthy attitudes
exist. Is it the morality of the question? Is it the precedent
involved? Is it because Jordan is a small country, its
influence limited, its power limited, and therefore its
legitimate complaint can be exploited to serve other
purposes?

35. However, neither statements of the press, nor statements of the Israeli leaders, nor evidence adduced, nor
surrounding circumstances, nor pieces of fragmentation
bombs have convinced the Council of the need to consider
the seriousness of the charge and to adopt an adequate
remedy for the situation.
36. Even if some members feel that they should not
accept the clear and conclusive evidence adduced by Jordan
but want to argue that the Israelis acted in reprisal-which
is not the case-did not the Council in its previous
condemnations of Israel determine that military reprisals
could not be tolerated, and that if they were repeated the
Council would have to consider more effective steps as
envisaged in the Charter?

41. Jordan is a small country but its duty vis-&vis its
citizens is great. We shall not surrender to Israeli whims. We
shall not give up our legitimate rights nor shall we
accommodate aggression. By adopting no adequate resolu.
tion you are calling for more resistance. That is only logical
since you are accommodating the Israeli military occupa,
tion of the west bank of my country. You do not expect
the people to be indifferent to the occupation of the west
bank of Jordan, Everyone has a cousin or a brother or a
nephew or children there. This is our people, the family of
Jordan. They refuse to be divided. They refuse to be a
divided family and will reject any attempt to have a line
separate them and observersto ensure such separation, That
is what the people will not permit. We appeal to the

37. Moreover, is not bombing more than a dozen villages,
food-producing areas and civilian population and extending
the bombing to villages far beyond the cease-fire area,
something that should warrant censure and sanctions? Is
not the act of bombing civilians by itself an act of genocide
that constitutes a crime? When the country attacked does
not possessan air force to defend itself, that makes it more
of a crime. Those who insist on proof have witnessed
through their experienced embassy personnel the extent of
the damage and human suffering resulting from the
4

sitions
LiChail
of the
:e, and
without
se of a
should
to the
rtter of
ltive of
Italian
sale of
;overn.

: imply
Jpplies
4viv in
io, the
Israeli
many
ms for
States
forma.
ts goal
:rs Will
ains to
actions
uch an
rstand
Sncem
lg that
,would
JlUtiOfl

lespite
ugh to
ositive
llitical
t it is,
rterna:itudes
:edent
ry, ifs
jre its
other
vis its
ns. We
111we
resolulogical
ccups
:xpect
e west
:r or a

councilto be guided by its Charter, which protects the
right,hopes and aspirations of the people of Jordan and the
&de world.
42. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I call on
iherepresentative of Israel.
43, Mr, TEKOAH (Israel): As the Security Council proceeds
with its deliberations, Arab aggression against Israel
goeson. Warlike pronouncements are made daily in the
Arabcapitals. The terrorist machine is being openly geared
far further operations. Armed attacks and incursions
continue.
44. Last night at 2045 hours Jordanian military positions
againattacked. with mortar fire kibbutz Tirat Zvi. Approximately ten minutes later mortar fire was opened by the
Jordanian army on the Israeli village of I(efar Ruppin.
Israeliforces returned fire.
45. I have just received an additional report. Last night at
2300hours local time an Israel vehicle was blown up by a
mine on a track near Beer Ora in the Negev, where the
schoolbus was attacked on 18 March. Today at 1245 hours
firewasopened from Jordanian military positions on the
eastbank of the Jordan on a jeep travelling east of Newe
Ur, north of the Beit She’an valley. Israeli forces returned
fire, I shall keep the Security Council informed of any
furtherinformation as soon as it becomes available.
46, I cannot stress too strongly the urgency of measures
thatthe Jordanian authorities must no longer delay to put a
final and total end to acts of aggression perpetrated from
theirterritory against Israel.
47. I should like to reiterate Israel’s policy. It remains to
abidefully by its obligations under the cease-fire on the
basisof reciprocity. However, we expect the Arab States to
actaccordingly.
48, Mr. President, I regret that the representative of
Jordancompels me to exercise my right of reply. Listening
to the words of venom, distortion and slander heaped by
him on this Council, one cannot but repeat the ancient
Jewishprayer: “May the wicked forsake his way, and the
manof iniquity his thoughts.”
49, Who are they that come before the Security Council
to speak of the rights of peoples? Those who razed Jewish
villagesto the ground in 1948, those who attacked and
indiscriminately shelled Jerusalem in 1948 and again in
1967,those who destroyed the Jewish quarter in the old
city of Jerusalem with all its synagogues and houses 0f
learning,those who did not leave a single tomb standing in
the cemetery on the Mount of Olives, those who did not
leave a single Jew alive in the Jordanian-occupied west
bank, those who have tortured Jewish captives for years,
thosewho still victimize their Jewish citizens in ghettos and
concentration camps.
50. Who are they that try to appear as defenders of
self-determination? Those who have waged a war against
the Kurdish nation, a war of extermination, those who have
kept the Druzes in suppression, those who have used gas
and napalm against Yemenite tribesmen, those who deny

freedom and independence to a people uprooted by Roman
imperialism, a people that, even after its defeat, revolted
repeatedly during centuries against the invaders and colonizers of its land, a people that through the ageshas borne
the brunt of oppression and discrimination directed against
the Oriental and the Asian,
51. The representative of Jordan has joined the chorus of
those who expressunhappiness about the relations between
Israelis and Arabs in Israel-controlled areas. The object of
his particular interest is the westbank, an area occupied by
Jordan in 1948 in defiance of the United Nations, an area
kept under occupation for nineteen years without the
world, including the Arab States, recognizing Jordan’s
rights to it. For nineteen years this wasa hotbed of political
ferment, of social unrest and resistance to the Amman
authorities. Riots, strikes and military repressive measures
against the local population, and arrests were a daily
Occurrence,
52. It is sufficient to recall the record of public clisturbantes and the drastic measures adopted by the Jordanian
authorities to suppressthem during 1966.
53. In January 1966 the Jordanian authorities arrested
200 persons in Jericho; in April they arrested 2,000 persons
in the west bank. In May mass demonstrations took place in
east Jerusalem, Hebron and Ramallah. The police used
force, closed down schools and arrested hundreds of
persons.
54. In July disturbances and mass demonstrations broke
out in Nablus. The Jordanian police used tear gas; twelve
persons were wounded and 250 arrested.
55. That November saw a series of stormy disturbances
and clashesbetween civilians, police and army forces, with
numerous casuaiities. On 21 November, shop and business
strikes broke out in the Ramallah area. The Army was
called in to intervene and employed tanks. The Jordanian
authorities imposed a curfew and closed all schools. Similar
events reoccurred through November and December in
most other towns. On 24 November the Jordanian Army
again employed tanks and tear gas. Twenty demonstrators
were killed and many more wounded. On 8 December 1966
a general business strike was put down by force by the
police and the Jordanian Army.
56. On 13 January 1967 the population of Nablus rose up
and barricades were put up in the streets. The Jordanian
Army had to surround the city and suppress resistance by
force.
57. With an army composed mainly of Bedouin from the
east bank, the Jordanian Government succeeded in retaining its military hold over the west bank. The Jordanian
authorities knew, however, that’the west bank was at best
only a stepchild, not a member of the family; they knew
well,that the heart of the Arab inhabitants of the west bank
was not with them, The Amman Government treated the
west bank accordingly.
58. The area had almost half of Jordan’s population but it
accounted for only one third, of the output. Per capita
average income on the east bank was$335 annually; in the

the fact remains that for the first time ever the
Arabs are travelling in large numbers to and fro between
Israeli Arab territory.

west bank only $216. The east bank enjoyed priorities of
development and investment out of all proportion to the
size of the population and the economic potential of the
area. In the years of Jordanian rule, not a single investment
was authorized for the west bank that amounted to more
than 10,000 dinars. Of the $884 million invested in 1966,
two thirds went to Transjordan, that is, to the east bank,
seat of all the country’s sizable industries, such as oil
refining, cement and phosphates. The west bank was
relegated to agriculture. The Government gave east bank
merchants priorities in such matters as import quotas and
buying privileges. It even blocked loans to west bank
projects, resulting in a steady exodus of economic concerns
and persons eastward. This left the westbank with only 22
per cent of Jordan’s industry and 16 per cent of its
transport.

‘I

.

.

.

“ . . * It is a development arguably more important than
any of the other aspects of the Middle East situation . , .
“Some 30,000 people have already taken advantage of
this, and presumably they can and do report to the east
bank that they are not being slaughtered by the Israelis,
that the west bank is prospering agriculturally, that the El
Fatah terrorists are making no serious impact on the life
of the west bank.”
63. I believe that this testimony must be regarded as
somewhat more authoritative than the partisan presentation
we heard from Mr. El-Farra. No verbal acrobatics will
succeed in distorting this picture; no semantic fantasy will
controvert the fact that those who want war, those who
sowhatred, those who murder and sabotage, come from the
outside. It is too late for the representative of Jordan to try
to draw a different picture. The world knows the truth, The
Security Council has received the evidence. If the information submitted by me at the meeting of 1 April 1968
/141&h meeting] still does not deter the Jordanian
representative from attempting to question established
facts, let King Hussein himself speak for the facts.

59. In the light of this, it is not surprising at all that the
Jordanian representative, like certain other Arab representatives who preceded him, voiced unhappiness with Israel’s
efforts to encourage and assist west bank development. I
can well understand that he would have preferred the
present situation there to be one of chaos as in the days of
Jordanian rule-one of economic deterioration or at least
stagnation, as before June 1967.
60. One thing must be clear. Whatever the political views
and desires of the Jordanian representative, the Arab
population on the west bank does not want war and
conflict with Israel. It wants peace and coexistence, In the
same manner as thousands and thousands of Arab inhabitants began to frequent Israeli hospitals when the doors were
opened to them after the cease-fire, so did scores of
thousands of Arab farmers ask for Israeli machinery and
Israeli instruction in agriculture. When Israeli authorities
helped recently the farmers in the Jenin area to increase by
three times the land under tobacco growth, it was, of
course, not expected that this would please the rulers in
Amman. They in the last eight years had gradually limited
the area under tobacco growth on the west bank from
7,000 dunams to only 2,000, while at the same time
extending tobacco cultivation on the east bank.

64. I read from a report by George de Carvalho in Life
magazine of this week:
“ . , . I visited Karameh and became the first Western
journalist to interview the Arab ‘storm’ troops”-1 repeat,
“the Arab ‘storm’ troops”-“who are waging the growing
campaign of terrorist and guerrilla action against IsraeI
and her outposts on the land she occupies. With an escort
of Jordanian soldiers, I witnessed the marshaling of
terrorist raids and extensively inspected the training and
outfitting of those who take part in them. , . ,
“ . . . One of the Jordanian officers put in his comment:
‘These commandos are the vanguard of the Arab battle
against Israel. We give them all the help we can with
covering fire acrossthe river’ . . .

61. No; what concerns the Arab rulers today is perhaps
less the fact that Israel has successfully repelled their
aggression than the fact that in areasunder Israel control it
has been proven that Israelis and Arabs can live together,
work together and understand each other, Those who want
the war to continue cannot be happy with this situation,
They cannot find much pleasure in the fact that local Arab
authorities have continued to function uninterruptedly,
that schools, courts, public servicesare operating normally,
that hundreds of trucks with vegetables, fruit and other
produce are crossing daily the Jordan bridges, that trade
between the east and west banks is today at the same level
as before June last, that Arabs are free to move in all parts
of Israel, that thousands of them are visiting their families
and friends and calling on Jordanian cabinet members and
the King himself and then returning peacefully to their
homes on the west bank.

“ . . . Armed terrorists were everywhere. Since fall the
storm troops have moved arms depots, training camps and
headquarters from Syria to Karameh and other Jordan
valley bases. They showed me practice firing ranges,
stacks of Russian ammunition boxes stashed outside
town, crates of new Soviet arms still packed in grease,
even a kitchen where tiger-suited terrorist KPs peeled
vegetables , . ,
“ . . . Many veterans talked about terror raids they had
gone on. My section leader named Abdullah told me:
‘Once the Israelis spotted a group in daytime and nearly
cut us off with armored cars, but Jordanian guns opened
tire to help us escape’ . . .
“ . . . King Hussein now says: ‘We are all commandos
now’.
“ . . . But for all his show of militancy, I found him
close to despair: ‘Last June’, he said, ‘I wasforced into a

62. The Foreign Editor of The Financial Times of
London, Mr. J. D. E. Jones, has the following to say on the
situation in the 28 February issue of that newspaper:
6

he
en
an
.I
of
tst
2
:fe
as
Ill
ill
eill
it
ii
la33
Fin
:d

war which I warned against. I may be forced into another
one long before we’re ready’.
“Hussein is aware, of course, terrorist
Israel increase the threat of war . . .“.

70. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I now
call on the representative of Jordsn in the exercise of his
right of reply.

raids against

71. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): What the Council has just
heard is not something new. Every single point raised this
evening has been heard by the Council at least six or seven
times from the same speaker. I have answered all the
distortions and fabrications, and I think I would be taking
advantage of the Council’s patience if I were to repeat what
I said earlier. But certain points need some reference.

65. King Hussein seems to have more understanding of the
gravity of the situation and Jordan’s responsibility for it
than the representative of Jordan at the United Nations.
66. As for the desperate attempt made at this table to
glorify this type of warfare, I should like to repeat what I
said at a previous meeting:

72. Mr. Tekoah started his speech the way he started his
statement the day before yesterday and the way he started
his statement three days earlier-with a charge. In every
single statement, at the very beginning, he starts making a
charge against Jordan or claiming a mine here or there.
Although we have denied time and again having anything to
do with the resistance of the people within the occupied
territories, the surprising thing is that Mr. Tekosh is
complaining about the consequences, of Israeli aggression.
Israeli armed forces, through aggression, in defiance of
every value in the invaded lands, occupied areas through
surprise attack, sneak attack, occupied the west bank,
occupied Sinai, occupied the Gaza Strip, occupied the
Golan of Syria, The people are resisting and Mr. Tekosh
comes here to shout with emotion: “They are attacking
us”.

‘&One cannot say the same of the terrorist raiders that
the Arab Governments have been sending against Israel.
Look at them and their activities. To steal across the
border in the security of the night; to plant a mine on a
truck near a childien’s camp used by children only, so as
to blow up a children’s bus; to throw a grenade into a
house where a family is asleep; to fire a mortar blindly
into a village and to run away into the darkness; to
murder a lonely Druze watchman guarding tractors in a
forlorn field; to shoot a policeman in the back in a
crowded market place: there is no bravery, no valour, no
honour in these acts. Those who perpetrate them are
cowardly,
miserable creatures who deserve no respect
from anyone. If the Arab Governments wish to stoop to
glorifying these marauders, the world can have nothing
but disdain for such Governments.” [1410fh meeting,
para. 45.1

73. The Council has heard this charge before, and my
question was: what are they doing in the occupied areas? If
they are suffering the consequences of their aggression,
they should get out. Any resistance calls for getting rid of
the occupier. Occupation calls for resistance. Conquest calls
for liberation. It is only logical.

Ill
6
18
el
rt

of
rd

le

td
m
!S,
le
e,
!d
td
;
:d
IS
:n
a

67. Have words lost all meaning in the Arab language?
Have principles and ideals become completely warped in
Arab thinking? After twenty years of teaching school
children, in history, language, even arithmetic classes, that
it is a virtue to kill Jews do the Arab Government, now
want to teach them that one wages war by planting
button-shaped mines in playgrounds, by blowing up school
buses, by throwing grenades into bedrooms? Is this how
conflicts are settled? Is this how nations are moulded? Is
this how the future is shaped?

74. Therefore, Mr. Tekoah should not come and complain
here with emotion. All that he has to do is just to
remember that there is something in the Charter which says
aggression should give no fruits. If he could ponder this and
think of these resistance movements within the occupied
territories and the reasons behind them, then he would
come to the same conclusion every invader reached in past
history.

68. Mr. President, while the twenty-year war goes on in
the Middle East, supreme efforts are being made to attain
peace in other parts of the world. We live in momentous
times, when great leaders spare no pain, cast aside all
personal considerations, and devote themselves with all
their heart and all their soul and all their might to the cause
of peace, They do it because they know that this is what
the people .want, that this is what the entire world yearns
for.

75. Mr. Tekoah spoke of how beautiful it is on the west
bank, in Gaza, in Golan, in Sinai, and said that it is the fault
of the neighbouring areas which do not want peace-people
are happy. If this is true, why are people in gaol? Why are
people expelled? Why are villages destroyed, houses bulldozed? Why are there all these crimes? I do not have to
refer just to names, I have here a statement by an
Englishman, Michael Adams of The Guardian, written on
26 January of this year. What did he say? I do not want to
burden the Council with the whole article, but I shall read
the conclusion. Mr. Adams said:

69. From this rostrum we challenge the Arab leaders to
show the same degree of responsibility and love for their
peoples. Turn to your people. Ask them whether they want
peace or war. Do not play with the lives of nations. Ask the
Jordanian people, the Egyptian people, the Syrian people:
do they want to continue killing, hating, destroying
themselves and others? Or do they want, like people
everywhere,
peace, peace and tranquillity, happiness and
progress? When you do ask them, when you do fulfil their
hopes and prayers, come back and we shall have peace, and
understanding and bliss in our region.

“I had my ups and downs during four years as a
prisoner of war in Nazi Germany but the Germans never’
treated me as harshly as the Israelis are treating the Arabs
of the Gaza Strip, the majority of whom are women and
children”6
6 See official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-third
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1968, dam*
mentS/8380, annexI.

7

76. I could spend hours quoting the words of eyewitnesses
in order to expose the many crimes of the ‘Israelis, but the
hour.is late and I do not want to dwell on this. I have cited
many of them in the past.
77. I have one other question about good Arab-Israeli
relations. It is very simple. If the Arabs are good-they are
good, and he has admitted that they are good-then why
does he not get out of the occupied areas, accept the people
who are expelled from what was allotted to be Israel,
implement the decision calling for repatriation and showby
their behaviour that they can live with the Arabs? Yes sir,
the Arabs are tolerant; this has been their tradition
throughout history. But let us see. The proof can only be
shown by implementing the United Nations resolutions,
getting out of what they occupied by force, putting an end
to their aggression and opening the doors for the repatriation of the Arabs since they are no longer fifth columnists;
they used to call them fifth columnists and did not want
them on that account.

82.. Unfortunately, we have been the victims of the
negative side. We have been dealing with the destructive
side, with the folly-not with the creative side. We have
been dealing with the people who wreck and destroy, not
the people who build and live and want others to live.
83. The PRESIDENT (translatid from Russian): I have
just received a letter from the Permanent Representative of
Saudi Arabia, asking to be allowed to take part in the work
of the Security Council and in the discussion of the item on
our agenda.
84. If there is no objection I shall invite the representative
of Saudi Arabia to take a place at the Council table and to
participate, without the right to vote, in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took a place at the Council table.

85. The PRESIDENT (translated f?om Russian): I call on
the representative of Saudi Arabia.

78. But these distortions are made for obvious reasonsand
I do not need to take the time to answer them. Neither
shall I dwell on the statement about the people of the west
bank and how they have been treated. This is an old
trick-the divide and rule trick. Mr. Tekoah is not speaking
to the Council; he is trying to exploit the Council in order
to convey messages to people across the ocean. But the
people are determined to live in freedom and full determination. They are determined to breathe the spirit of liberty,
not the spirit of foreign invasion and occupation.

86. Mr, BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I thank you,
Mr. President, and through you the members of the
Council, for granting me the opportunity to speak.
87. Some of you may question why the representative of
Saudi Arabia should, at this stage, participate in the
discussion of the item now before the Council. Many
statements were made by the representative of Israel during
the last few meetings of the Council which I thought should
be corrected. I found that his assertions were made with
such vehemence and credulity that if they were not
corrected they might pass as historical facts before world
public opinion.

79. Mr. Tekoah spoke about napalm. I think that those
who committed the crime of using napalm are not
competent to discuss napalm. We had the opportunity to
present pictures to the Council of the victims of napalmmen, women and innocent children. Those pictures are
incorporated in an official document which can be obtained
from the booth by anyone who wishesto seeit. The victims
of napalm are still in the memory of every Member of the
United Nations. Those who committed that crime are not
competent to mention the name of napalm. But to Zionists
everything is possible.

88. Furthermore, there was a reference to the Arab
conquest of Palestine giving the impression that the Arabs
of the peninsula flooded the Holy Land-or the fertile
crescent-with men and displaced the Jews of the area.
89. The representative of Israel knows very well that one
of the major diasporas took place when the Romans
destroyed the temple in Jerusalem. I referred during my last
intervention to Nebuchadnezzar and the Babylonians, and I
do not have to take up that historical fact again. But I was
taken aback when the representative of Israel assertedthat
the Jews-I am glad he did not say “the Zionists” because1
do not think they existed as such at that time as a political
entity-fought the Crusaders. Saladin the Chivalrous has
been erased from the history books. Salah al-Din Yusuf
ibn-Ayyub-and the Israeli representative knows this well,
because he is a learned gentleman-was an Arabized Kurd.
That shows you what the Arabs have been able to
accomplish through their culture.

80. We have heard a great deal here about peace, Peace: of
course we are for peace. No one likes war except those
whose thinking is vicious and destructive; those who
practise invasion, expansion, expulsion, acquiring more land
and displacing more people.
8 1. In conclusion, I would saythat the problem is not one
of words, but of deeds, of behaviour. Mr. Tekoah referred
to a proverb from Jewish history. He spoke about the
wicked: Let the wicked forsake his way. I shall not quote
from any source other than the first President of Israel,
Mr. Weizmann. On his deathbed Mr. Weizmann’s last words
were:

90. He also said that the Jews fought the Ottomans. I am a
humble student of the history of the area. I am not aware
of any Jewish resistance to the Ottoman rule. There were
Pleadings to Kaiser Wilhelm when he visited Istanbul, for a
Jewish enclave in Jerusalem, and Sultan Abdul-Hamid said
at that time: “I have so many sects, religions and peoples
that I Cannot accommodate a Jewish enclave. They are
welcome asJews, like the followers of other religions,”

“We, the Israelis, are a small people, but a great people;
a creative and a destructive people; a people in whom
genius and folly are equally co-mingled. We are an
impetuous people who have time and again repudiated
and wrecked what our ancestorsbuilt.”
He appealed to his people to see the positive side rather
than the negative.
8

the
:tive
law
not

/
I

lave
e of
rork
Ion

~
;
I
/
/
/

ltive
dto

I on
rou,
the

1

e of
the
[any
ring
wld
uith
not
orld
krab
rabs
rtile

one
lam
last
ndI
was
that

i

1se I

tical
has
usuf
veil,
urd.
to

una
vare
vere
bra
said
ples
are

I
1

j

91. But this is only a preface. For the benefit of my
colleagues sitting around this table, who probably are
engrossed not so much with history but with the political
problems of today, I feel in duty-bound to draw attention
to the fact that the indigenous people of Palestine were not
drawn from the peninsula but were Arabized. Some of
them embraced Islam; others did not and they remained
Christian; many were Jews, and remained Jews-those were
the Semitic Jews. I have mentioned in many of my
statements in this Council and in other committees of the
General Assembly that some of the indigenous people of
Palestine may have been Jews; some of them who are
Muslims may have been Christians; and some of the
Muslims may also have descended from the Crusaders.
Many families-in
Syria, in Lebanon, in Palestine-that
embraced Islam were decendants of the Crusaders.
92. The indigenous people of a country cannot be assessed
or defined by blood. It has been proven that there is no
such thing as Jewish blood or Muslim blood, or any
national blood for that matter. Blood is typed for transfusions, but not for ethnological reasons. There is a
common saying: “We are of the same blood.” It might be
journalistic, but it is not scholarly in its interpretation.
When the indigenous people of Palestine were Arabized
they remained in Palestine. When Mo’awiyah went to
Damascus from the peninsula, and Omar Ibn al-Khattab,
also from the peninsula, went to Jerusalem, of course they
had troops with them. But many of the women and
children of the Arabs from the peninsula were left there, so
there was an entity that had a personality; the people of
Palestine. To set the record straight, we know very well that
the word “Palestine” is derived from the Philistines who
came from the island of Crete and who lived in the region
of Gaza and we know that the Cretan civilization even
preceded the history of the Jews, You only have to refer to
English scholars to read this. I think it was Evans who
wrote a book on the Cretans-a fascinating work on that
civilization which was contemporary with the ancient
civilizations. Like all islanders, many of them emigrated,
and they settled in the region of what was called Palestine
afterwards. They were the Philistines of the Bible.
93. Then here comes the representative of Israel to try to
impress the Council, and the world at large through the
Council-because the press and the media of information
seem to be at the command of many Zionists, not only in
this country but in many Western countries-by stating that
Palestine was given to the Jews. And by whom was it given
to the Jews? By God.
94. Again I would remind the representative of Israel of
one passage in the Psalms attributed to the Prophet David,
which says: “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness
thereof.” I asked in a Committee of the General Assembly
for the representatives of Israel to produce any type of
deed signed by God Almighty giving them Israel.
9.5. Unfortunately,
the late Mr. Balfour paved the way for
the establishment of an alien people in Palestine. I say
“alien” not because they are Jews, but because they come
from Eastern Europe, I ask my colleagues in the Council
and on other Committees to see where in the archives of
the United Kingdom the imperialist United Kingdom had a
power of attorney from God Almighty to transfer the

Mandate to those European Jews. Just because they had the
power, they insinuated and wormed themselves into certain
Western Powers. They could sometimes play with the
Governments as you and I play with a piece of dough or
clay. They mustered the votes and they got two votes in
1947. I happened to be present at Lake Success when the
partition took place. It was as if the United Nations had
been created in order to establish those alien people in the
midst of the Arab homeland.
96. Are we to take it for granted that there is no
Palestinian people? As I said before, the whole argument
here and at previous meetings proceeds on the assumption
that the dispute is between Jordan as such, and Israel as
such. But, whether they like it or not, there is still a
Palestinian people, and that people is pursuing its struggle
and no Arab Government has the right to tell them, “You
cannot struggle to regain your homeland.”
97. On the other hand, we find Eastern European Jews
who use Judaism-and I always say Judaism is a noble
religion; it has produced Prophets in many of whom we too
believe as a motivation for political and economic ends. I
dare say most of the leaders of Israel-the leaders who
really hold the power and I am not talking about the
religious leaders because there are fundamentalists among
them as there are fundamentalists in other religions-are as
secular as those of any other country.
98. Here they say that the United Nations voted in 1947
for the partition; that there is an Israel and it is there to
stay. I do not have to go into details about the reaction of
the Arab peoples as ,such-and not only the Palestinian
people. The Arab people thought these were Europeans just
as the British were Europeans when they had the Mandate
and just as the French were Europeans when they had the
Mandate over Syria and Lebanon. The Arab people reacted
against them. It was not because they were Christians, but
because they were aliens and they came from Europe.
99. Among the people I see sitting in this room I
sometimes see the physiognomy of an oriental Jew who
probably had to become a Zionist because he had to live in
Palestine. But the Jews we are talking about belong,
ethnologically and culturally, to Eastern Europe and to
those tribes that populated what is now southern Russia,
before Rurik began the movement that resulted in the
Russian nation, Later came the Romanovs, and then we
come down to the Revolution. Those Jews were converted
to Judaism.
100. I assert that in 1947 the United Nations committed
an error because there was pressure applied, Self-determination was not respected. It was enshrined in the Charter,
but it was neglected and ignored, Forcibly, thanks to two
or three votes that were mustered by Mr. Truman by means
of direct telephone calls and without the knowledge of even
the State Department, they established Israel. But they did
them a disservice, because after all the Palestinians are
human beings and they are going to continue this conflict
until doomsday. I say doomsday because perhaps some day
there will be a miscalculation and the world will commit
suicide. But till doomsday there is going to be a conflict
there. Whether we are Jews, Christians or Muslims, we
deplore this fact as much as anyone. We deplore it whether

we are Jews, Christians, Muslims, pagans or for that matter
atheists; it does not matter what our creed or belief may be.

their eye on the Bosphorus. This is history and I am not
making it up.

101. Therefore, what is the use of coming here-and I have
witnessed what has been going on for the last twenty-one
years-and quibbling over texts and interpretations? IS
there no way out of this difficulty? Shall we spend another
twenty years-if this Organization survives-in such meetings, listening to incriminations and accusations which
would be difficult to substantiate in fairness to one side or
the other in all objectivity? Shall we go on arguing over
who is to blame and who is not to blame, over what is a
terrorist and who is a freedom fighter, and giving definitions, each one subjectively interpreting certain words in
accordance with the policy of his Government or whatever
his desires may be? If so, there will be no end to it. This
thing will be under review, I am sure, till the end of the
year, and then there will be other meetings and other
incidents.

10.5. Muhammad Aly was a wise man. He weighed matters
in his mind. He wanted a face-saving device to withdraw his
troops. He said: “The Sultan at one time promised to make
me a Khedive when I participated in the war against Greek
liberation but he did not keep his word.” They then said:
“All right, we will see that the Sultan makes you a
Khedive.” And so he withdrew.
That was in 1840 or
thereabouts.
106. Since there is coexistence now between the major
Powers, what prevents both Powers, if they mean to help
the weaker States, from issuing an ultimatum, as they did in
the days of yore, and saying to Israel: “Withdraw, or we
mean business,” But it seems nobody means business.
107. Here we find two major Powers. We respect them and
we benefit from their technology, culture, science and
universities. But unfortunately, with few exceptions, they
seem to have clients and that is why the Council is divided
into two camps. For heavens sake, clear it up with your
Governments, you major Powers, and if you want peace in
the Middle East do not keep meeting here to bicker about
legal terms and how we should enunciate this phrase or
spell out that paragraph in a resolution. For heavens sake,
we are all happy that you are coexisting. If you think that
the Palestine people have been wronged, what prevents
your leaders from issuing a joint declaration, as you did to
Muhammad Aly, and telling the Israelis: “Withdraw from
those occupied lands.”

102. There is a way out of this impasse. I mentioned it in
the General Assembly during the last special session and
also in certain Committees. Anyone who cares to can read
the suggestions I made about asking many of those who are
in Israel whether they would like to emigrate to Western
countries, provided certain Western countries opened their
doors to them. The United States opened its doors to
immigration, and many would like to come and find
opportunities here, Many Western countries supported
these Eastern European Jews who called themselves
Zionists. If the Arab refugees were asked to find out how
many of them would like to go back to their homelandand some of them may not want to go back to their
homeland, they are free to choose-then we begin to see the
light.

108. But, as I said, we find that we and the poor innocent
Jews that happen to be in Israel-there are many innocent
Jews there as not everyone in Israel is a leader-will suffer.
The Palestinians will suffer. There will be interminable
bickering and we will become the prey of power politics,
neither more nor less.

103. On the other hand, all the discussions in the Council,
with all due respect to you, Mr. President, and to members
of the Council, are getting to be purely academic. At one
time the veto was really useful. Now consensus has taken
the place of the veto. We applaud the coexistence of the
great Powers because it may pave the way for world peace.
But we small Powers, weak Powers, we pay a stiff price
when there is a consensus of the Council-you will permit
me to be frank with you here, after all, I have been in the
United Nations too long to keep silent-on certain questions and what should be done to resolve them.

109. If only the President of the United States and
Mr. Kosygin or Mr. Brezhnev, or whoever is the leader,
would issue an ultimatum. If they condemn here and do
nothing about it, it is all academic. Our colleague here from
Israel knows all about it. He uses oratory. He is a learned
man and he sometimes distorts historical facts too much, as
he did in the case of the Crusades,

104. Before I make a suggestion, I should like to go back
to the year 1840 when Ibrahim Pasha, the son of
Muhammad Aly invaded not only Palestine but Lebanon
and Syria, and was on his way to seize Istanbul. I am
talking of the days of imperialism-not
on the part of
Muhammad Aly, because he was later made a Khedive over
Egypt by the Sultan of Turkey. In those days Tsarist Russia
had its eye on what was known in Europe as Constantinople-Istanbul today. The British, before the Suez Canal
was built, were afraid that if a strong man like Muhammad
Aly took over the Ottoman Empire their route to India
would be jeopardized. So both Tsarist Russia and monarchist Great Britain sent an ultimatum to Muhammad Aly to
withdraw his troops because they were not interested in a
strong Turkey then. They wanted a weak Turkey so that
the overland route to the Red Sea via the Suez could
ensured. Also our friends, the Russians of those days, had

110. That is the only solution, Nobody denies that your
Government, Mr. President, and the Government of the
United States wield world power. They are responsible.
Anyone who exercises world power has responsibilities.
Nothing will come out of mediating here and mediating
there and trying to make something out of a jigsaw puzzle.
I am old enough to say that nothing will come out of this
policy of protracting this issue indefinitely.
111. I may have been unorthodox in participating in the
item before you. But if I have used this method it is
because I felt that otherwiseI would be failing in my duty
towards my own conscienceas a human being, without
taking into account that I am an Arab, if we go on aswe
have beendoing lately in the Council and the wholeUnited
Nations-not only the Council; do not think I amthrowing
any aspersions
on the Council, though it haslost a lot of
10

lot

ers
his
Ike
!ek
id:
a
Or

IPI
:Ip
in
we
nd
nd
.ey
.ed
llll
in
jut
k”,’
1s;
nts
to

1rn
:llt
:nt
‘er,
ble
cs,

md
.er,
do
3m
ted
, as
1ur
the
de,
ies.
ing
de.
.his

the
: is
JtY
3ut
we

ted
ing
of

prestigesinceyou were here, Mr. President,when we knew
eachother in the late forties and early fifties-then the
peopleof the world will losefaith in US.

becausePalestineconstitutesthe veritablecentre of world
political power, the strategicmilitary centre of world
conquest’.”

112. WCare all heartened by the newsthat there may be
peacein certain parts of Asia-but after what sufferingand
tribulation. This corner of the world is fraught with bigger
dangers
than South-East Asia becausethe Middle Eastarea,
whichincludesthe Arab world, is at the crossroadsof three
continents.It is the portal of Asia and EastAfrica.

115. That wasone of the apostlesof Zionism,The Israelis
cannot shakehim off becauseNahumGoldmanwasone of
the apostlesof Zionismandhe happenedto be an American
citizen. Here is another excerpt that wascontained in the
Revue deParisof 1 June 1928,on page574. Do not tell me
now that this is a fabrication similar to the prbtocols
of
Zion. The excerpt reads:

113. I regret that the other day I did not have the
documentI wished to cite, a document I receivedfrom a
knowledgeablesource, to show you that Israel wasestablishedin Palestine not for religiousmotives, nor for the
gatheringtogether of all the Jews of the world. There are
many Jews in the world who are loyal citizens of their
countries of birth or adoption; loyal Americans, loyal
Soviet Jews, I would even say we have loyal Arab Jews.
They cometo me and complainabout what they call those
Ashkenazis,meaning the European Zionists, ‘Lwho are
spoilingit for us”. After the Dreyfus affair the Zionists of
EasternEurope thought that there could be no peacefor
them until they were gathered together in someland. At
onetime they thought of Ugandabut they decidedthat the
motivation should be religiousand therefore Palestine,tied
in with the Bible, should be the location, However, after
the Dreyfus affair, legislationwas adopted in almostevery
country whereby the Jewswere given not only equalrights,
but sometimes also privileges-perhaps because certain
WesternPowers felt guilty about the persecutionof the
Jewsin their midst. So there was no longer any raison
d’&tre for the gathering together of the Jews. HOWcould
they gather 16 million Jews in Palestine? I think that
Belgiumis a highly populated country of about 7 million.
But Palestineis even smallerthan Belgium and there were
16 million Jews. But supposesomeJews did not want to
leavetheir countries of birth or adoption.

“The Jewishpeopleasa whole will beits own Messiah.
It will attain world domination by the dissolution of
other races, by the abolition of frontiers, by the
annihilation of monarchy which has always been the
support of individualism,and by the establishmentof a
world republicin which the Jewswill everywhereexercise
the privilegeof citizenship.In this new world order, the
children of Israelwho are scatteredover the world will
furnish all the leaderswithout encounteringopposition.
This will more particularly be the caseif they succeedin
getting the working massesunder their control. The
governmentof the different peoplesforming the world
republic will, through the victory of the proletariat, fall
without difficulty into the handsof the Jews.It will then
be possiblefor the Jewish rulers to abolish private
property and everywhereto makeuseof the resourcesof
the State. Thus will the promise of the Talmud be
fulfilled, in which it is saidthat when the messianictime
has comethe Jewswill have the property of the whole
world in their hands.”
That was written and addressed
to Baruch Levy. I do not
want to take too much time by reading exerpts, but I
thought that I shouldlike to let our colleagueswho are
sitting there behind the signof Israel, which has usurped
Palestine,know this.

114. This is an adventure which started with a dream of
TheodoreHerzl and which had a raison d’etre at that time
becausethey thought they would like to lead their own
lives,as they were being persecutedin Europe. Then when
there was no longer any reason, although the motivation
wasreligious,the end becamepolitical and economic,Here
I should like to read an excerpt from a French Canadian
newspaper,L’Unitd Nationale, Nov. 4, 1953, publishedin
Montreal. It states:
“The President of the World Jewish Congress,Doctor
Nahum Goldman, declared at Montreal in 1947: ‘The
Jews might have had Uganda, Madagascarand other
placesfor the establishmentof a JewishFatherland but
they want absolutely nothing except Palestine’“-

116. This is from a book written by MauriceSamuel.I do
not know whether he wasthe sonof Herbert Samuel;I am
not sure.I shallhave to do someresearchon it. I believe
that Herbert Samuel was the High Commissionerin
Palestinein the twenties.Of coursehe wasa Jew but he was
a good Britisher,I believe;I do not know. He had what you
might call the fanatic Zionist spirit. 1 should not call it
spirit; it was a fanatic Zionism which had to do with
territory than with the spirit. As I interpret it in the Bible
Zionismof the spirit issomethingnoble. He said:
“Look, we Jews, we the destroyers, will remain
destroyersforever. Nothingthat you will do will meetour
needsand demands.We will forever destroy becausewe
needa world of our own.”

It is a good thing he called it Palestineand not Israel;that
wasin 1947. The excerpt continues:
“ . . . ‘not becauseof the biblical or religioussignificance
of Palestine, not because the Dead Sea waters, by
evaporation can produce $5 trillion worth metalloidsand
powdered metals, not becausethe sub-soilof Palestine
contains twenty times more petroleum than all the
combined reserves of the two Americas, but because
Palestine is the crossroadsof Europe, Asia and Africa,
11

That was from page 155 of a book by Maurice Samuel,7
publishedby Harcourt Braceand Company of New York,
United States,1924. If I am not mistaken,that publishing
firm is still in business.
117. I have many other excerptsbut I do not wish to read
them. If all Jewsthought like that, God help the Jewsand
God help himanity. But the Jewsare human beingslike
7 YouGentiles.

you and me and everybody else. They have a right to live
but they do not have a right to twist certain passagesin the
Bible, for example, that they are the chosen people of God.
My interpretation of the chosen people of God is that God
chose those people to have prophets rise among them, not
that God is a discriminator. If God is a discriminator, then
God help us. We are fighting here against discrimination. Of
course, the fundamentalists believe to the letter, and the
letter killeth. There is nothing nobler than the Jewish
prophets who are Semitic prophets. I hope that the
representative of Israel and his colleagues are not too
secular. If they are religous they should be proud. We are all
proud of the prophets of Judaism; they are our prophets,
from our area. This Zionist movement is embellished with
religious decorations, The motivation is religious, but the
end is political and economic,,for domination and for
exploitation. We are living in an age of computers and
technology, and they are going back 2,000 or 3,000 years.
Instead of taking the moral values of the Bible, they are
taking certain words and following what the fundamentalists among them, like’ fundamentalists in other religious
movements, want to make them believe.

119. We are not fooling anyone here except ourselves if
we try to make believe that the chims of Israel have
validity in fact. This is sheer, stark occupation and
domination, When I was in London in the forties and the
late thirties I told some Zionists time and again, when I was
on speaking terms with them, “If YOU had come to
Palestine motivated with religious zeal, nobody would have
molested you, but you want to establish a State, and there
will be a reaction.” They did not heed me and they still do
not heed me, and there will be a continuation of conflict; a
chain reaction. One day, those whom we call the freedom
fighters and they call terrorists will hit and run. Of course,
they are not equipped with aircraft and tanks. There is no
chivalry in throwing oneself on a cannon or a tank. They
have to go by stealth until they muster power. It is all
deplorable and ‘nobody wants it.
120. Forgive me for taking up so much of your time at
this late hour but, although my intervention may have
rambled into the recessesof history and other lanes, I hope
that at least the world will be untrammelled by prejudice
and will think clearly and ponder this question. I hope that
you, Mr. President, as the representative of a great Power,
and the United States Ambassador will not continue in this
manner but that in your wisdom-and we place great hope
in you because of the responsibility and power you
exercise-you will issue an ultimatum to those who, I regret
to say, happen to be aggressors, taking a land and
considering it their own, to withdraw. Otherwise, this
situation will continue, and both Arabs and Jews, as human
beings, will be the victims, and the price will be very high.
Such conflicts may one day-1 hope not, but they may one
day-lead to a world conflict.

118, There is no problem between the Arabs as such and
the Jews. The problem is simply due to a conflict between
the people of Palestine who happen to be Arabs, and the
Zionists. Zionism is a political movement. They talk of “per
capita”. This is all Western: you earn so much per capita.
Supposing we earn $10 per capita per year, that is our
privilege; leave us alone. If that is going to be the yardstick,
any country that has a high per capita income should
occupy another land in order to raise its standard of living.
We do not always talk in economic terms. We have our
family ties, we have our affections and we have a social
system which suits us. This does not mean that we are
static. We welcome many good things from others and
sometimes bad things, I dare say. But they do not leave us
alone. The West has not left us alone for a long time-since
the time of the Crusades.They will not leave us alone. They
had a religious war in China, you remember; the Boxer
Rebellion They will not leave us alone; the colonialists, the
vested interests in the hands of Western Powers. If you want
certain economic advantages, we are willing to trade with
you, to co-operate with you, to participate with you. But
to displace a people, to chase people out of their homes,
under the banner of Zionism, becauseit is mentioned in the
Bible that God, according to certain texts, gave Israel or
Judea that land-if we go by that standard, God help us.
Anyone could be the follower of a god of his own and by
inspiration or by intuition say, “God gave me this land,”
and if he could gather followers he could occupy another
land. Leave God in the heavens. Leave Him alone. Do not
drag God into our political bickerings here, This is a
question of exploitation.

121. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The list
of speakers has been exhausted. I should like to make the
following statement.
122. As a result of consultations which have taken place
on this item, if falls to me, as President of the Security
Council, to make the following statement on the results of
those consultations.
“Having heard the statements of the parties in regard to
the renewal of the hostilities, the members of the
Security Council are deeply concerned at the deteriorating situation in the area. They therefore consider that
the Council should remain seized of the situation and
keep it under close review.”
123. If there are no further speakers, we shall adjourn
today’s meeting.
The meeting rose at 7.45 p. m.

12

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Genevc.

moy be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
to: United~Notionr,

and

COMMENT

LES PUBLlCATtONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

SE PROCURER

distributors
Soles Section,

throughout
New York

Les publications
des Notions
Unier
sent en vente
dans
les libroiries
et 1.1 ogsncar
diporitoires
du monde
entier,
Informez-vous
auprCs
de votre librairie
ou odrerrer-vous
b:
Nations
Unies, Section
des venter, New York ou Gen&ve.
KAK

IlOJlYqMTb

M3AAHIIR

OPrAHH3AuHH

OGbEAHHEHHblX

HAIJMA

~h~l~llllll
Opr~~llll:l2Il~IIII
O?LC~IIllClllll~lS
Ihp~
~IOitillO KyUIlTb
II HIIIIXlll~IS
StWKIll11aX
:Il'CIITI'TIILlS
110 IlVl'X ~MilOllaS
JIII~XL hlO~llTC
NI~lllll:ll
06 ll:\#lllIlllS
II IltllllCJl
I~llllXillOM
~awniic
II.111 I.IllUIllTC
110 n;(pccy: Opranmaqw
Ohe,q~~iiciiiIhix
Ilni(llii.
CClillllH
IlpO~MiC
lI:I~Ulllil,
IIhWllOl)li
II.lll SR.?llOll~.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

tar publicocioner
de las Nacioner
Unidor
estdn
en todas porter de1 mundo. Conrulle
o su librero
Ventas, Nuevo York o Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

uo

UNIDAS

en vento en librerlar
o dirfjose
a: N&ones

in other

II

currencies)

y cosos distribuidaror
Unidar,
Secci6n

de

35377-September

1972-2.100
