68

36/95.

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need to allay the legitimate concern
of the States of the world with regard to ensuring lasting
security for their peoples,
Convinced that nuclear weapons pose the greatest threat
to mankind and to the survival of civilization,
Deeply concerned at the continuing escalation of the arms
race, in particular the nuclear-arms race,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the complete
elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to remove the
danger of nuclear war,
Taking into account the principle of the non-use of force
or threat of force enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Deeply concerned about the possibility of the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing that the independence, territorial integrity
and sovereignty of non-nuclear-weapon States need to be
safeguarded against the use or threat of use of force, including the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is achieved
on a universal basis, it is imperative for the international
community to develop effective measures to ensure the security of non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons from any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure the nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons can constitute a positive contribution to
the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons,
Recalling its resolution 326 I G (XX[X) of 9 December
1974,
Further recalling its resolution 3 I /189 C of 21 December
1976,
Bearing in mind paragraph 59 of the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 56 the
first special session devoted to disarmament, in which it
urged the nuclear-weapon States to pursue efforts to conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of the relevant
provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session,
Recalling its resolutions 33/72 of 14 December 1978, 34/
85 of II December 1979 and 35/155 of 12 December 1980,
Further recalling paragraph 12 of the Declaration of the
1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, contained in the
annex to its resolution 35/46 of 3 December 1980, in which
it is stated, inter alia, that all efforts should be exerted,
therefore, by the Committee on Disarmament urgently to
negotiate with a view to reaching agreement, and to submit
agreed texts where possible, before the second special session devoted to disarmament, on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Welcoming the in-depth negotiations undertaken in the
Committee on Disarmament and its Ad Hoe Working Group
on Effective International Arrangements to Assure NonNuclear-Weapon States against the Use or Threat of Use
of Nuclear Weapons, with a view to reaching agreement on
this item, 57
'" Resolution S-1012.
"See Official Records of the Gnwral A.,.,emhlr. Thirtr-,irlh S,·ssion.
Supplement No. 27 (A/36127), rara. IOI

Noting the proposals submitted under that item in ~he
Committee on Disarmament, including the drafts of an mtemational convention,
Taking note of the decision of the Sixth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries,
held at Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979, as well as the
relevant recommendations of the Eleventh and Twelfth Islamic Conferences of Foreign Ministers, held at Islamabad
from 17 to 22 May 1980 and at Baghdad from I to 5 June
1981, respectively, calling upon the Committee on Disarmament to elaborate and reach an agreement on an international basis to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Further noting the support expressed in the Committee
on Disarmament and in the General Assembly for the elaboration of an international convention to assure non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons, as well as the difficulties pointed out in evolving
a common approach acceptable to all,
I. Reaffirms the urgent need to reach agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons;
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Committee on
Disarmament there is no objection, in principle, to the idea
of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
although the difficulties as regards evolving a common approach acceptable to all have also been pointed out;
3. Appeals to all States, especially the nuclear-weapon
States, to demonstrate the political will necessary to reach
agreement on a common approach and, in particular, on a
common formula which could be included in an international
instrument of a legally binding character;
4. Recommends that further intensive efforts should be
devoted to the search for such a common approach or common formula and that the various alternative approaches,
including in particular those considered during the session
of the Committee on Disarmament held in 1981 , should be
further explored in order to overcome the difficulties;
5. Recommends that the Committee on Disarmament
should actively continue negotiations with a view to reaching early agreement and concluding effective international
arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, taking into
account the widespread support for the conclusion of an
international convention and giving consideration to any
other proposals designed to secure the same objective;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled ''Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons".
9 l st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/96.

Chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons
A

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2454 A (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2603 B (XXIV) of 16 December 1969. 2662
(XXV) of 7 December I 970, 2827 A (XXVI) of 16 December 197 I, 2933 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3077
(XXVUI) of 6 December 1973, 3256 (XXIX) of9 December
1974, 3465 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/65 of IO
December 1976. 32/77 of 12 December 1977. S-10/2 of 30

Ill.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

June 1978, 33/59 A of 14 December 1978. 34172 of 11
December 1979 and 35/ 144 B of 12 December 1980, relating
to the complete and effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons
and to their destruction,
Reaffirming also the necessity of strict observance by all
States of the principles and objectives of the Protocol for
Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous
or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare.
signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925, 58 and of the adherence
by all States to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction, 59
Having considered the report of the Committee on Disarmament, 60 which embodies, inter alia, the report of its
Ad Hoe Working Group on Chemical Weapons, 61
Taking note of the recommendation in the report of the
Ad Hoe Working Group on Chemical Weapons that the
Committee on Disarmament should re-establish, at the beginning of its session in 1982, the Ad Hoe Working Group
with an appropriately revised mandate. which would enable
the Committee to build upon the areas of convergence and
to resolve the differences of views which were identified
by the Group during its sessions in 1980 and 1981 . so as
to achieve agreement on a chemical weapons convention
at the earliest date,
Considering it necessary that all efforts be exerted for the
resumption and successful conclusion of the bilateral and
multilateral negotiations on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons
and on their destruction,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the work of the Committee on Disarmament during its session in 1981 regarding
the prohibition of chemica! weapons, in particular the progress in the work of its Ad Hoe Working Group on that
question;
1. Expresses its regret that an agreement on the complete and effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their
destruction has not yet been elaborated;
3. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to continue,
from the beginning of its session in 1982, negotiations on
such a multilateral convention as a matter of high priority.
taking into account all existing proposals and future initiatives, and in particular to re-establish its Ad Hoe Working
Group on Chemical Weapons with an appropriately revised
mandate enabling the Committee to achieve agreement on
a chemical weapons convention at the earliest date;
4. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to report
on the results of its negotiations to the General Assembly
at its second special session devoted to disarmament, to be
held from 7 June to 9 July 1982, and at its thirty-seventh
session.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December /98/
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in paragraph 75 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly . 62 it
8
-' League of Nations. Treat\' Series. vol. XCIV ( 1929). No. 21 J8.
p. 65.
9
·' Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.
60
Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirt_v-.11xth Session. Supplement No. 27 (A/36/27).
61
/bid., para. 110.
62
Resolution SI 10-2.

69

stated that the complete and effective prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons and their destruction represented one of the most
urgent measures of disarmament.
Convinced of the need for the earliest conclusion of a
convention on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their
destruction. which would contribute to general and complete
disarmament under effective international control.
Taking into consideration the work done in this area in
the Committee on Disarmament as well as in the bilateral
negotiations between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America, which regrettably
had been suspended and did not take place in 1981 .
Deeming it desirable for States to refrain from taking any
action that could delay or further complicate such negotiations.
Expressing profound concern over the production of new
types of chemical weapons and other actions that would
intensify the chemical arms race and compromise international efforts on the prohibition of the development. production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their
destruction,
I. Reaffirms the necessity of the earliest elaboration and
conclusion of a convention on the prohibition of the development. production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their destruction;
2. Appeals to all States to facilitate in every possible
way the conclusion of such a convention;
3. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to continue,
from the beginning of its session in 1982, negotiations on
such a multilateral convention as a matter of high priority,
taking into account all existing proposals and future initiatives, and in particular to re-establish its Ad Hoe Working
Group on Chemical Weapons with an appropriately revised
mandate enabling the Committee to achieve agreement on
a chemical weapons convention at the earliest date;
4. Calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and the United States of America to resume at the earliest
possible date bilateral negotiations on the prohibition of the
development. production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons and on their destruction and to submit their joint
initiative to the Committee on Disarmament;
5. Calls upon all States to refrain from any action which
could impede negotiations on the prohibition of chemical
weapons and specifically to refrain from production and
deployment of binary and other new types of chemical weapons, as well as from stationing chemical weapons in those
States where there arc no such weapons at present.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

C

The General Assemhlv,
Recalling its resolution 35/144 C of 12 December 1980
in which. inter alia, it decided to carry out an impartial
investigation to ascertain the facts pertaining to reports regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons and requested
the Secretary-General to carry out such an investigation with
the assistance of qualified medical and technical experts,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General. 6 ' to
which is annexed the report prepared by the Group of Experts to Investigate Reports on the Alleged Use of Chemical
Weapons.
Noting that, as indicated by the conclusions of its report,
the Group of Experts has not yet completed the investigation

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

70

called for under paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution
35/144 C,
Noting also the views of the Group of Experts concerning
the importance of prompt on-site investigations of allegations of the use of chemical weapons and the need to devise
appropriate procedures for impartial collection and analysis
of samples that may be obtained in the course of any such
investigations,
Considering, accordingly, that the Group of Experts
should continue its investigations,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General,
2. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance
of the Group of Experts to Investigate Reports on the Alleged Use of Chemical Weapons, to continue his investigation pursuant to General Assembly resolution 35/144 C
and to report to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

'36/97.

General and complete disarmament
A

STUDY ON CONVENTIONAL DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 351156 A of 12 December 1980
in which it approved, in principle. the carrying out of a
study on all aspects of the conventional arms race and on
disarmament relating to conventional weapons and armed
forces, to be undertaken by the Secretary-General with the
assistance of a group of qualified experts appointed by him
on a balanced geographical basis,
Recalling the discussions at the substantive session of the
Disarmament Commission in 1981 on the general approach
to, and the structure and scope of, the study on all aspects
of the conventional arms race and on disarmament relating
to conventional weapons and armed forces,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to establish the
Group of Experts on All Aspects of the Conventional Arms
Race and on Disarmament relating to Conventional Weapons and Armed Forces, in accordance with the provisions
contained in paragraph I of General Assembly resolution
35/156 A;
2. Requests the Disarmament Commission, at its substantive session in 1982, to complete its consideration of
the general approach to, and the structure and scope of, the
study and to transmit the conclusions of its deliberations to
the Group of Experts;
3. Agrees that the Group of Experts should pursue its
work after the above-mentioned session of the Disarmament
Commission, taking into consideration such conclusions as
the Commission may submit to it, and, if necessary, the
deliberations at the substantive session of the Commission
in 1981, in particular those reflected in paragraph 21 and
annex III of the report on that session; 64
4. Requests the Secretary-General. in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 35/156 A, to submit a final report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

64

Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirtv-sixth Session, Sup-

plement No. 42 (A/36/42).

B
CONCLUSION OF AN INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION PROHIBITING THE DEVELOPMENT, PRODUCTION, STOCKPILING AND USE OF RADIOLOGICAL WEAPONS

The General Assembly.
Recalling the resolution of the Commission for Conventional Armaments of 12 August 1948, which defined weapons of mass destruction to include atomic explosive weapons.
radioactive material weapons. lethal chemical and biological
weapons and any weapons developed in the future which
have characteristics comparable in destructive effect to those
of the atomic bomb or the other weapons mentioned above.
Recalling its resolution 2602 C (XXIV) of 16 December
1969,
Recalling paragraph 76 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, h 5 in which
it is stated that a convention should be concluded prohibiting
the development, production. stockpiling and use of radiological weapons,
Reaffirming its resolutions 34/87 A of 11 December 1979
and 35/156 G of 12 December 1980 on the conclusion of
such a convention.
Convinced that such a convention would serve to spare
mankind the potential dangers of the use of radiological
weapons and thereby contribute to strengthening peace and
averting the threat of war.
Noting that negotiations on the conclusion of an international convention prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and use of radiological weapons have been
conducted in the Committee on Disarmament,
Taking note of that part of the report of the Committee
on Disarmament' which deals with these negotiations, 66 including the report of the Ad Hoe Working Group on Radiological Weapons, 67
Recognizing that divergent views continue to exist in connection with various aspects relating to a convention prohibiting radiological weapons.
Noting with satisfaction the wide recognition of the need
to reach agreement on the text of a treaty prohibiting radiological weapons.
1. Calls upon the Committee on Disarmament to continue negotiations with a view to an early conclusion of the
elaboration of a treaty prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and use of radiological weapons, in
order that it may be submitted if possible to the General
Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to 9 July 1982;
2. Takes note, in this connection, of the recommendation of the Ad Hoe Working Group on Radiological Weapons, in the report adopted by the Committee on Disarmament.
to set up at the beginning of its session in 1982 a further
ad hoe working group. under an appropriate mandate to be
determined at that time, to continue negotiations on the
elaboration of a treaty prohibiting radiological weapons:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to the
discussion by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session of the prohibition of the development. production,
stockpiling and use of radiological weapons:

" Resolution S-10/2.
"" Official Records of the General Assemb/v, Thirtv-sixrh Session. Supplement No. 27 (A/36/27). sect. Ill. E.
"Ibid.para. 117.
