UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/994
19 December 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 12 DECEMBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to refer to the situation in the Great Lakes region and
Central Africa, and to the need to adjust the United Nations political presence
in that region to the new environment brought about by the momentous changes
that have taken place there since the beginning of the year.
As you know, the United Nations contribution to the regional mediation
concerning Burundi and to the international peace initiatives which accompanied
the changes of regime in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic
of the Congo has been largely carried out by Mr. Mohammed Sahnoun, in his
capacity as Joint United Nations/Organization of African Unity Special
Representative for the Great Lakes Region of Africa. His mandate was outlined
in my letter of 22 January 1997 to your predecessor (S/1997/73) and endorsed by
the members of the Security Council (S/1997/74).
I wish now to seek the Council's concurrence with a new mandate for
Mr. Sahnoun in Africa, as well as for a new political and humanitarian presence
for the United Nations in the Great Lakes region, in the person of my former
Special Envoy for Sierra Leone, Mr. Berhanu Dinka.
As my Special Envoy in Africa, Mr. Sahnoun will continue to follow closely
developments in Central Africa, including the Great Lakes region. He will also
lend his support to existing peacemaking and peace-building initiatives there,
and give special attention to Burundi. In addition, he will be available for
preventive and other missions that I may ask him to undertake in other regions
of Africa as needed. Mr. Sahnoun will operate on an as and when employed basis.
I estimate the cost of his mission as my Special Envoy in Africa at US$ 890,000
for the biennium 1998-1999.
Mr. Sahnoun could not have carried out his difficult assignments over the
last 11 months without the generosity of those Governments who have made funds
available for his mission through the Special Fund set up in support of his
efforts. To those Governments, I wish to express here my deep gratitude.
As for Mr. Dinka, he will serve as my Representative and Regional
Humanitarian Adviser for the Great Lakes Region.

97-37575 (E)

191297

/...

S/1997/994
English
Page 2

In his capacity as my Representative, Mr. Dinka will represent me in
meetings held in the region, monitor developments and their implications for
peace and regional security, and seek to contribute to regional efforts in the
prevention or peaceful settlement of conflicts. With specific regard to
Burundi, he will oversee the political activities of the United Nations in that
country, and support ongoing political initiatives for Burundi both inside and
outside the country. In carrying out the above functions, Mr. Dinka will
consult my Special Envoy in Africa as required.
In his capacity as Regional Humanitarian Adviser, Mr. Dinka will represent
the Emergency Relief Coordinator in the Great Lakes region, facilitate the
coordination of humanitarian assistance, support the Resident Coordinators,
Humanitarian Coordinators and agency heads, and coordinate resource mobilization
efforts at the regional level.
He will set up an office in Nairobi with a complement of three
Professionals, two internationally recruited General Service staff, one Security
Officer, and three locally recruited staff. The total estimated cost of the
Office of the Representative of the Secretary-General and Regional Humanitarian
Adviser for the Great Lakes Region is approximately US$ 3 million for the
biennium 1998-1999.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
