VI.

24S

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Commends the efforts made so far by various organs
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies in
mobilizing humanitarian assistance to assist the efforts of
the Govemment of Ethiopia;
2. Appea/s to Member States and to intemational
organizations and voluntary agencies to render maximum
material, financia! and technical assistance to the Govemment of Ethiopia in its efforts to provide relief and rehabilitation to displaced persons, voluntary retumees and refugees in Ethiopia;
3. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to intensify his efforts in mobilizing humanitarian assistance for the relief, rehabilitation and resettlement of voluntary retumees, refugees and displaced persons in Ethiopia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1986, ofthe
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/134. Humanitarian assistance to refugees in
Djibouti
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/ l 82 of 15 December 1980,
36/156 of 16 December 1981, 37/176 of 17 December
1982, 38/89 of 16 December 1983 and 39/107 of 14
December 1984 on humanitarian assistance to refugees in
Djibouti,
Having heard the statement made on 11 November
1985 by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 130
Having considered with satisfaction the reports of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on
humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti, 175
Appreciating the determined and sustained efforts made
by the Govemment of Djibouti, despite its modest economic resources and limited means, to cope with the pressing
needs of the refugees,
A ware of the social and economic burden placed on the
Govemment and people ofDjibouti as a result ofthe presence of refugees and of the consequent impact on the
development and infrastructure of the country,
Deeply concerned about the continuing plight of the refugees and displaced persons in the country, which has
been aggravated by the devastating effects ofthe prolonged
drought,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the Govemment of Djibouti, in close co-operation with the High
Commissioner, to implement adequate, appropriate and
lasting solutions in respect of the refugees in Djibouti,
A/so noting with appreciation the concem and unremitting efforts ofthe Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Health Organization, the World Food Programme,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the intergovemmental and non-govemmental
organizations and the voluntary agencies which have
worked closely with the Govemment of Djibouti in the
relief and rehabilitation programme for the refugees in that
country,
175 See O{fidal Records 1,/ the &ennal ,h1emb/.v. Fortieth Se1·swn. Supp/e
ment No 12 (A/40112); and A/40'588.

1. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on
humamtarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti and appreciates his efforts to keep their situation under constant
review;
2. Welcomes the steps taken by the Govemment of
Djibouti, in close co-operation with the High Comm1ssioner, to implement adequate, appropriate and lasting
solutions in respect of the refugees in Djibouti;
3. Requests the High Commissioner to mobilize the
necessary resources to implement lasting solutions in
respect of the refugees in Djibouti;
4. Urges the High Commissioner to continue to take
the necessary measures to ensure that adequate, appropriate and lasting solutions are implemented to assist the refugees in Djibouti, in co-operation with Member States,
intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations
and the voluntary agencies concemed, with a view to
mobilizing the necessary assistance to enable the Govemment ofDjibouti to cope effectively with the refugee problem, which has been particularly aggravated by the
debilitating effects of thc prolonged drought;
5. Appreciates the assistance provided thus far by
Member States, the specialized agencies, intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations and voluntary agencies to the relief and rehabilitation programmes
for the refugees and displaced persons in Djibouti;
6. Ca/Is upon al! Member States, the organizations of
the United Nations system, the specialized agencies, intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations and
voluntary agencies to continue to support the efforts constantly being made by the Government of Djibouti to cope
with the current needs of the refugees and the other victims of drought in that country;
7. Requests the High Commissioner, in close co-operation with the Secretary-General, to report to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation
of the present resolution.

116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/135. Situation of refugees in the Sudan
T/;e General Assembl)',
Recalling its resolutions 35/ l 8 l of 15 December 1980,
36/158 of 16 December 1981, 37/173 of 17 December
1982, 38/90 of 16 December 1983 and 39/ l 08 of 14
December 1984 on the situation of refugees in the Sudan,
Having considered the reports of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the situation of refugees in the Sudan, 176
Appreciating the measures which the Government of the
Sudan is taking in order to provide shelter, food, education, and health and other humanitarian services to the
growing number of refugees in the Sudan,
Recognizing the heavy burden placed on the Government of the Sudan and the sacrifices it is making in caring
for the refugees and the need for substantially increased
international assistance to enable it to continue its efforts
to provide assistance to the refugees,
Expressing its appreciation for the assistance rendered to
the Sudan by Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations in support of the refugee
programme,

Genenl Assembly-Fortieth Session

246

Recognizing the need to view refugee-related development projects within local and national development
plans,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the implementation of resolution 39/108; 177
2. Commends the measures that the Govemment of
the Sudan is taking to provide material and humanitarian
assistance to refugees in spite of the drought and the serious economic situation it faces;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the High Commissioner, donor countries and intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations for their
efforts to assist the refugees in the Sudan;
4. Expresses grave concern at the shrinking resources
available for refugee programmes in the Sudan and the
serious consequences of this situation on the country's
ability to continue to act as host and provide assistance to
the increasing numbers of refugees;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in view ofthe massive and increasing presence of the refugees, shrinking
financia} resources, drought and the serious economic situation in the country, to send, in co-operation and co-ordination with the High Commissioner and relevant specialized agencies, a high-level inter-agency mission to assess
the needs and the magnitude of assistance required by the
programmes for refugees in the Sudan, as well as the
impact of the refugees on the economy and vital public
services, with a view to preparing a comprehensive programme of assistance to be submitted to the intemational
community;
6. A/so requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
necessary financial and material assistance for the full
implementation of the projects submitted by the Govemment of the Sudan to the Second Intemational Conference
on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, 172 held at Geneva
from 9 to l l July l 984;
7. Appea/s to Member States, the appropriate organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations, intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations and the
intemational financial institutions to provide the Govemment of the Sudan with the necessary resources for the
implementation of development assistance projects in
regions affected by the presence of refugees;
8. Requests the High Commissioner to continue coordination with the appropriate specialized agencies in
order to consolidate and ensure the continuation of essential services to the refugees in their settlements;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session, through the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of the
present resolution.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/136.

Emergency assistance to returnees and displaced persons in Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/ 106 of 14 December l 984,
Taking note of the report made by the United Nations
Disaster ReliefCo-ordinator on 26 November 1985 on the
situation of returnees in Chad, 17s
177 N40/589.
178 See Officia/ Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Third

Committee, 54th meeting, paras. 6-10.

Deeply concerned by the persistence of the drought,
which is compounding the already precarious food and
health situation in Chad,
Conscious that the large number of voluntary retumees
and displaced persons as a result of the war and the
drought in Chad poses a serious problem of integrating
them into society,
Considering that, in addition to being a land-locked
country and one of the least developed countries, Chad is
placed in a particularly difficult situation by reason of the
war and the drought,
Bearing in mind the many appeals made by the Govemment of Chad, in particular that made on 9 October 1985
to the General Assembly, 179 and by humanitarian organizations regarding the gravity of the food and health situation in Chad,
Reca/ling the urgent appeal made by the General
Assembly during its thirty-ninth session for international
emergency assistance to the voluntary returnees and displaced persons in Chad affl.icted by natural disasters,
l. Endorses the appeals made by the Govemment of
Chad and by humanitarian organizations concerning
emergency assistance to the voluntary retumees and displaced persons in Chad;
2. Reiterates its appeal to all States and intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations to support by
generous contributions the efforts being made by the Govemment of Chad to assist and resettle the voluntary
retumees and displaced persons;
3. Takes note with satisfaction ofthe action undertaken
by the various bodies of the United Nations system and
the specialized agencies with a view to mobilizing emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary retumees
and displaced persons in Chad;
4. Again requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator to mobilize emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary retumees and displaced persons in
Chad;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to
report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/137. Question of human rlghts and fundamental
freedoms in Afghanistan
The General Assembly,
Guided by the principies embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 6 the lntemational Covenants on Human Rights 24
and the humanitarian rules set out in the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, 180
Aware of its responsibility to promote and encourage
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali
and resolved to remain vigilant with regard to violations
of human rights wherever they occur,
Emphasizing the obligation of all Govemments to
respect and protect human rights and to fulfi.l the responsibilities they have assumed under various intemational
instruments,
11 9 /bid., Plenary Meetings, 29th meeting. paras. 1-28.
l80 United Nations, Treaty Serie~. vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
