United Nations

S/PV.5961

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5961st meeting
Tuesday, 19 August 2008, 4.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Grauls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kafando
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Georgia
Letter dated 19 August 2008 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2008/561)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-46619 (E)

*0846619*

S/PV.5961

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Georgia
Letter dated 19 August 2008 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
France to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2008/561)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Georgia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alasania
(Georgia) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in response to a
letter dated 19 August 2008 from the Chargé d’affaires
ad interim of the Permanent Mission of France to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, contained in document S/2008/561.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Edmund Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.

2

It is so decided.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, and by Mr. Edmond
Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations. I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: The most important event since my
last briefing on Georgia, on 11 August, was the
agreement to six principles sponsored by the
presidency of the European Union (EU), which led to
the end of the military hostilities. While the members
of the Council are fully aware of those principles, I
would like to reiterate them for the record.
The first is the commitment by all parties to
renounce the use of force. The second is the immediate
and definitive cessation of hostilities. The third is free
access to humanitarian aid. The fourth is the
withdrawal of Georgian forces to their places of
permanent deployment. The fifth is the withdrawal of
Russian forces to their lines of deployment prior to
7 August 2008. That includes the additional provision
that “pending the definition of an international
mechanism, the Russian peacekeeping forces may
implement additional security measures”. The sixth is
the convening of international discussions on lasting
security and stability arrangements for Abkhazia,
Georgia, and South Ossetia, Georgia.
Discussions on the implementation of those
principles are continuing. The Secretary-General has
been engaged in consultations with all concerned
parties. In those consultations he has called for the
cessation of all military acts and for unimpeded
humanitarian access to all those in need in all of the
affected areas. While welcoming the fact that the
ceasefire plan has now been signed by both the Russian
Federation and Georgia, the Secretary-General stressed
the need for it to be implemented and for all forces to
immediately withdraw as required. With all of his
interlocutors the Secretary-General has reiterated the
importance of respecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Georgia. The Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Mr. Jean Arnault, who is on the ground
in Georgia, is in close contact with parties there. The
Secretary-General has also dispatched Mr. Johan
Verbeke to Brussels as his representative. Mr. Verbeke
took part in a coordination meeting with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the EU. Close cooperation between all the

08-46619

S/PV.5961

relevant institutions is clearly important in the efforts
to solve the present crisis.
The Permanent Council of the OSCE took an
important decision today in Vienna to deploy
immediately 20 additional military monitoring officers
to Georgia. That will bring the total number of such
officers to 28. The request of the OSCE is to eventually
raise that number to 100. The deployment of additional
military monitoring officers is subject to further
decisions. The de facto South Ossetian authorities have
stated that they would only accept Russian
peacekeeping forces and that international observers
would not be welcomed on their side of the ceasefire
line. Yesterday, they asked the Russian Federation to
establish a permanent military base in South Ossetia.
With regard to the situation on the ground,
Mr. Mulet will again brief the Council on the
developments in and around Abkhazia. I shall limit
myself to sharing available information on South
Ossetia and Georgia proper. As I mentioned before, the
United Nations has a limited presence in the area and
must therefore largely rely on secondary sources.
The Russian leadership announced that it would
start withdrawing its troops on Monday, 18 August.
Press reports make it clear that that has yet to get under
way on a significant scale. As of today, the Russian
troops remain in and around Gori in Georgia, although
there are some reports indicating that a convoy of
armoured vehicles and tanks left Gori for South
Ossetia early today. Foreign Minister Lavrov indicated
that the withdrawal of troops would take three to four
days. Russian military authorities explained that Russia
started the withdrawal of rear units and troops of the
third echelon. The vanguard troops now in Georgia will
be the last to withdraw. The Russian General Staff
indicated that the withdrawal would intensify after
22 August. At the same time, the Russian military has
stated that Georgia has not returned all of its troops to
their bases.
The de facto president of South Ossetia dismissed
his Government on 17 August and declared a monthlong emergency to cope with the aftermath of recent
hostilities. He has criticized his cabinet for the slow
response to the needs of displaced and affected people.
The South Ossetian de facto authorities reported over
2,100 dead as a result of the conflict. Georgia disputes
those figures, while humanitarian agencies on the
ground cannot independently verify that information.

08-46619

The investigative committee of the Russian Federation,
which is conducting an investigation of events at
Tskhinvali, had recovered 60 civilian bodies by
17 August. Russian peacekeepers in South Ossetia lost
74 men, according to official sources.
On the Georgian side, officials reported 215
military and 69 civilians killed during the hostilities.
Seventy military personnel are missing in action. An
exchange of Russian and Georgian prisoners of war
took place today near the village of Igoeti, south of
Gori.
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch
have reported serious human rights abuses. There have
been reports of looting in South Ossetia, the town of
Gori and other surrounding villages in Georgia. The
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
has dispatched an officer to Georgia to provide human
rights support and advice to the United Nations country
team, as well as to conduct a preliminary assessment of
the human rights situation there.
As a result of the recent hostilities, 158,600
people have been displaced. That figure includes
98,600 displaced within Georgia, about 30,000
displaced within South Ossetia and another 30,000
displaced in other parts of the area. The overall
planning figure for IDPs remains at 128,600, including
30,000 displaced to Russia from South Ossetia, on the
basis of data obtained from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
The number of those in need of immediate assistance,
including people fleeing from the Upper Kodori area of
Abkhazia, from South Ossetia and from the town of
Gori, has risen to 89,000. From the currently available
data, it appears that approximately 50 per cent of the
IDP population has been registered.
Today and tomorrow, UNHCR is sending two
planeloads consisting of 30.4 tons of non-food items to
Vladikavkaz in North Ossetia, Russia, following the
acceptance by Russian authorities of an aid offer from
the High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio
Guterres. The High Commissioner is visiting Georgia
today. He will then travel to Moscow for high-level
meetings and to Vladikavkaz. He is also planning to
visit South Ossetia, Georgia.
The President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross visited Vladikavkaz yesterday but was
unable
to
enter
South
Ossetia.
Several
non-governmental
organizations
(NGOs)
have

3

S/PV.5961

complained of difficulties in gaining access to South
Ossetia, where Russia’s Emergencies Ministry has been
coordinating a major relief effort. United Nations
agencies continue to appeal to all parties for the
opening of a humanitarian corridor.
As of 18 August, a number of locations, including
the town of Gori, are accessible for the first time since
the conflict began. Given the opening of the
humanitarian corridor allowing east-west access in
Georgia, the distribution of humanitarian relief is
gaining momentum beyond Gori and as far west as
Poti. United Nations humanitarian agencies were in
Gori for a short visit and were able to bring some
essential water and hygiene supplies. The town
appeared deserted, save for the presence of the elderly
and persons who were too sick to move. Water and
electricity lines have been reconnected. There is no
cooking-gas supply. Some apartment buildings have
clearly suffered damage.
On 18 August, an interagency flash appeal for
Georgia was issued. Ten United Nations agencies and
15 NGOs participated in the appeal. The flash appeal
was also launched today in Tbilisi by the Resident
Coordinator and by the Prime Minister of Georgia. The
flash appeal is requesting approximately $56 million
for six months of assistance to those affected by the
crisis. As of 18 August, more than $24 million in
contributions has been registered on the Financial
Tracking Service of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, with an additional pledge of
$3 million having been made.
The Secretary-General’s position on Georgia has
been clearly reflected in his various public statements
on this issue. Full implementation of the six principles
would allow for the provision of humanitarian
assistance to those affected, defuse the situation and
offer hope that a political solution to the problems can
be found. The United Nations stands ready to facilitate
international discussions in that regard and to take part
in any concrete arrangements for a settlement.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations.
Mr. Mulet: Allow me to update the members of
the Council on the situation that has prevailed in and

4

around the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict zone since my
last briefing, on 11 August.
In a key development, on 12 and 13 August, the
Abkhaz side launched a military operation in the Upper
Kodori Valley. No actual close combat took place,
because the Georgian armed personnel in the Upper
Kodori Valley had been withdrawn beforehand.
Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili accused Russia
and the Abkhaz side of expelling the entire ethnic
Georgian population from the Valley. The team base of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) in the Upper Kodori Valley remains
closed. The Mission is considering launching a patrol
there to assess the situation.
During the previous week, the Abkhaz side HAD
crossed the ceasefire line on several occasions despite
warnings from UNOMIG not to do so, causing
agitation among the local Georgian population. The
crossings took place mainly in the areas of the
Ganmukhuri and Khurcha “pockets” along the
ceasefire line on the Zugdidi side. Occasionally, the
Abkhaz crossed over to Georgian villages in the north
of the Zugdidi sector, but they withdrew on the advice
of the peacekeeping force of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). One serious incident
occurred on 17 August, when two Abkhaz personnel
were killed and two others wounded as a result of the
explosion of a radio-controlled landmine in the
Ganmukhuri Patriot Youth Camp.
The Zugdidi town and district administrations and
the police are functioning. Through the continuous
presence and patrolling of UNOMIG, the local
population in Zugdidi town has been reassured that,
despite the tense situation, there is no direct threat to
them. The people who left the town at the beginning of
last week have started to return home, and at the
moment it appears that almost all of the population has
returned to Zugdidi. An issue of serious discontent
between the administration and the CIS peacekeeping
force remains the fact that the force is still occupying
several buildings in Zugdidi town.
The Mission has been able to monitor major
movements of CIS and Russian troops along the main
road, the M27, on the Zugdidi side. It has concluded
that some of those forces are concentrated along the
southern edge of the zone of conflict. UNOMIG is not
in a position to confirm the number of those troops.
Outside the conflict zone, the Russian forces have

08-46619

S/PV.5961

reportedly conducted operations to destroy military
assets at the Senaki military base and at Poti harbour.
No targeting or damaging of public infrastructure has
been reported in those areas.
UNOMIG has continued to patrol in the Zugdidi
sector. It has resumed patrolling in the Gali sector, but
only along the main road for the time being.
Finally, I would like to mention an important
issue that could have implications for our area of
operations. As members are aware, UNOMIG counts
on CIS peacekeeping forces to provide security for our
military observers and our installations. However, on
14 August, the Georgian parliament unanimously voted
in favour of Georgia’s withdrawal from the
Commonwealth of Independent States. By a unanimous
vote, the parliament also adopted an appeal to the
international community to replace the CIS
peacekeepers with “international peace contingents”.
Yesterday, the Georgian Foreign Ministry advised that
it had sent a note to the CIS Executive Committee
notifying it of the aforementioned resolution and of
Georgia’s renunciation of all obligations related to its
membership in the CIS as of 18 August 2008. A day
earlier, the Abkhaz de facto foreign ministry had stated
that it considered it necessary to maintain the presence
of a considerable contingent of Russian peacekeepers
on its territory as a security guarantor.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mulet for his briefing.
I now call on the representative of Georgia.
Mr.
Alasania
(Georgia):
Thank
Mr. President, for convening this meeting.

you,

In my previous addresses to the Council, we
asked this body to act swiftly to stop the aggression
that my country was facing. Unfortunately, the state of
affairs in Georgia has not changed, despite the
ceasefire agreement reached a few days ago. The
Russian side continues to violate agreed ceasefire
arrangements. At the moment, the entire territory of
Abkhazia, Georgia, and South Ossetia, Georgia,
together with the cities of Zugdidi, Senaki and Poti in
western Georgia and Gori and Kaspi in eastern
Georgia, are under Russian occupation.
Georgia is occupied by Russian military forces,
forces that are determined to devastate my country.
Their actions have crossed all imaginable boundaries
of common sense. Roads, bridges, railway tracks and

08-46619

other Georgian communications infrastructure have
become targets of the Russian armed forces. Russian
forces continue their attacks on Georgian seaports, oil
refineries and terminals. Russian naval forces are
blocking Georgian seaports and have destroyed vessels
of the Georgian coast guard.
In addition to that, Georgian came under a cyber
attack from the Russian side, causing a shut-down of
Georgian information sources for the rest of the world.
Moreover, Russian forces have completely destroyed
and looted Georgian military bases in Senaki and Gori,
and now are proceeding towards the Sachkhere
mountain training centre. Russia is continuously
conducting reconnaissance flights in sovereign
Georgian airspace.
Looting, destruction and murder have become
commonplace. Russian militaries are conducting raids
in various parts of Georgia and keeping the population
under constant threat and in constant terror. The
population is in fear that the next destroyed city will be
theirs.
All of that is aimed at destroying Georgia as a
sovereign independent State and is in contravention of
the commitments undertaken by the Russian side to
stop the violence and withdraw. Through its
aggression, Russia threatens the freedom and ability of
Georgia and other emerging democracies throughout
Eurasia to build political, legal and judicial systems
without fear of external threats or domination.
The total number of people killed in the armed
conflict reached 250 on the Georgian side as of
19 August. Sixty-nine of them were civilians; 133 of
those killed were Georgian Ministry of Defence
personnel, including four servicemen from the reserve
troops, and 13 were from the Ministry of the Interior.
Over 1,469 have been injured, and 446 of those remain
in hospitals; according to reports, that toll will
increase. The Government of Georgia regrets the
human losses in all communities of Georgia. Our
deepest sympathies go to the families of the deceased
victims of this brutal, provocative war.
I would like to focus attention on the
humanitarian crisis unfolding in Georgia in the
territories occupied by the Russian armed forces.
Moscow has decisively chosen ethnic cleansing as an
instrument for achieving its political aims. Ethnically
based robberies, persecution and slaughter are reported
from the Russian-occupied territories. As a

5

S/PV.5961

consequence, ethnic Georgians are forced to flee their
homes and seek shelter in cities under the control of
the Georgian authorities. More than 150,000 citizens of
Georgia are displaced. I quote Human Rights Watch:
“The remaining residents of these destroyed ethnic
Georgian villages are facing desperate conditions, with
no means of survival, no help, no protection, and
nowhere to go”.
The Moscow-backed, self-proclaimed Mr. Kokoity,
has declared that the de facto South Ossetian
authorities will not allow the Georgian population to
return to their homes. As was reported and affirmed by
Tskhinvali authorities, they have burned down the
houses of ethnic Georgians to ensure that the
Georgians will not have places to return to.
Russia’s aggressive actions have no boundaries.
Russian armed forces attacked the Borjomi Forest
Park, a unique 1,000-year-old Georgian heritage site.
Even further, Russians refused to grant access to
firefighting aircraft and vehicles to put out the fire.
I would like to thank the countries, United
Nations entities and non-governmental organizations
that have stepped forward and are providing muchneeded help to citizens of my country. Humanitarian
efforts are not as successful as they could be because
United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
organizations have no access to the conflict zones
because of the Russian refusal to provide access to the
occupied territories. We urge everyone to exercise their
utmost powers to ensure that humanitarian help and
relief will be provided to those in need without any
impediment.
Russian troops have invaded an independent
country and have settled themselves on our territory.
Towns and villages are bombed; peaceful citizens are
robbed, tortured and killed; and the victims are
numerous. Thousands of people are left homeless.
Under the aegis of the so-called unilateral peace
enforcement operation, Russian troops are annexing an
independent country. The transport infrastructure of the
country is paralysed. After these barbaric actions from
the Russian side, no arrangements in which Russia is
perceived as a mediator or guarantor will be acceptable
to the Georgian people.
Georgia once again adhered to the principles
agreed through the European Union presidency and
President Sarkozy’s mediation. We are complying with
the ceasefire agreement reached and fully commit

6

ourselves to it. We demand the same actions from the
other party to the conflict. The Russian Federation has
to withdraw its forces to the pre-conflict locations.
Along with full respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders, which cannot be questioned, the
ceasefire has to be backed with a subsequent Security
Council resolution. Georgia stands ready to
accommodate any legitimate security concerns that the
Abkhaz, Georgian and Ossetian population of Georgia
might have through direct dialogue and truly
international negotiations.
Having described the ravaged situation in
Georgia, I am still looking forward to creating certain
conditions that will only be possible after the
occupation of Georgia, when it will be possible to
discuss the rebuilding of severely damaged GeorgianRussian relations.
We appeal to the Council to act — and act
decisively.
The President (spoke in French): I call now on
the representative of France.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting at the request of my delegation.
Allow me also to thank Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe and Assistant Secretary-General Mulet for their
briefings and the Permanent Representative of Georgia
for his statement.
France has requested that this important and
urgent meeting be held because we are extremely
concerned by the current situation in Georgia. I would
like to recall the context that led us to call for this
meeting. Following 7 August, over the course of almost
a week, fierce fighting occurred in the separatist
enclave of South Ossetia and then, with the
intervention of the Russian army, throughout Georgian
territory, particularly in Abkhazia.
Historical accounts will say that it was a series of
provocations and reactions, but one thing is clear:
Georgia’s actions were followed by a brutal and
disproportionate reaction by Russia. The violence has
claimed numerous victims — at least hundreds of
dead — and caused tens of thousands of refugees and
displaced persons to take to the roads. Whole villages
have been destroyed. Instability has once again flared
up on the flank of Europe, threatening peace in the

08-46619

S/PV.5961

region and risking serious tensions in international
relations.
From the outset, France, on behalf of the
European Union, has undertaken massive efforts at the
highest levels to bring an end to the hostilities. The
French Minister for Foreign Affairs, Bernard
Kouchner, visited Tbilisi with his Finnish counterpart,
the current Chairman of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. President Sarkozy in turn
visited the region, where he met President Medevedev
in Moscow and President Saakashvili in Tbilisi.
The President Sarkozy’s mediation on behalf of
the European Union made it possible for the Russian
Federation, Georgia and the two separatist entities to
commit, in writing, to a six-point plan, which the
European Council has also endorsed. The plan does not
resolve everything, but it constitutes the essential —
and the only — basis that we have to reach a lasting
solution. The signatories have undertaken permanently
to cease hostilities and not resort to force. They have
also committed, on the Russian side, to withdraw
immediately to their pre-7 August positions and, on the
Georgian side, to return to their usual quarters.
It is essential that arms be put down, but that does
not mean that withdrawal any less essential. We should
be clear: it is the Russian forces that are primarily
concerned. The Georgian army was dislocated by the
deployment at a surprising speed of a Russian force
with massive, excessive numbers. It was completely
driven out of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. On the rest
of the territory of Georgia, a number of its essential
bases were taken over, occupied or partially or fully
destroyed by the Russian army. I am thinking in
particular of Gori, Poti, Senaki and Kaspi. Combat
operations have ceased, the Georgian army has been
almost entirely destroyed. Russian forces must now
withdraw in keeping with the undertakings entered
into. By definition, this commitment can only be
fulfilled by Russia.
On 12 August, President Medvedev undertook to
withdraw these forces. Since no movement was
apparent, the President of the French Republic
reminded him of his commitment on several occasions.
On 17 August, he again contacted President Medvedev,
who undertook to begin the withdrawal at mid-day on
18 August. The information from the ground and that
brought to us from the Secretariat show that nothing or
almost nothing has occurred. We even understand that

08-46619

new weapons have been introduced by Russia into
Georgian territory. The President of the French
Republic has met again today with Mr. Medvedev, who
assured him that the withdrawal would begin by
22 August. We hope of course that this announcement
will be given effect.
The Russian withdrawal is an essential
component for full implementation of the six-point
plan in order to achieve a lasting peace agreement and
an international mechanism to guarantee that peace.
France and the European Union are more determined
than ever to work to achieve this goal. The European
Union has expressed its commitment to working on the
ground. The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) is beginning to get involved, even if
only modestly, with the deployment of 20 additional
observers.
During this difficult period, our attention should
not be turned away from the humanitarian situation. I
would remind all parties of their commitment to
guarantee full humanitarian access on the ground.
France also would like to remind the parties of their
obligations stemming from the Sochi accords and
subsequent agreements on the necessity to maintain
order and prevent irregular forces from causing the
civilian population to suffer damage. France also
wishes to recall that it is a matter of urgency that
refugees and displaced persons must be allowed to
return promptly to their homes.
Lastly, we welcome the exchange of 20 prisoners
that occurred today through the mediation by the
Ambassador of France in Tbilisi. We hope that the
agreement of protocol signed at that time will be
extended to many further exchanges of this type.
We would like as rapidly as possible to achieve a
lasting solution which respects the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the independence of Georgia.
The withdrawal of forces is a necessary precondition.
Therefore, we have circulated to the Council today a
draft resolution that is very simple. It is necessary to
respect undertakings entered into in the six-point
ceasefire agreement. The agreement must be
implemented in good faith, and the forces, particularly
the Russian forces, must be withdrawn to their
respective positions. It is essential that the Council be
able to express in a united fashion how urgent this
necessity is. It is also essential to our capacity to

7

S/PV.5961

continue our collective efforts in the future to restore
peace to this region.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): This is a time of great
and deep concern over the continued instability in and
around Georgia. We are convinced that the Security
Council cannot delay its action any longer. We do have
in place a ceasefire agreement accepted by the parties
and endorsed by the main international players,
including the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
European Union. Now, we expect the full, immediate
and visible implementation of this agreement.
The draft resolution introduced by France aims at
nothing more than this, without blaming any particular
side for the current apparent stalemate. Moreover, we
cannot fail to reiterate our commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia, which
is being called into question.
Obviously, there are other dimensions of this
crisis which are of equal concern to us, including the
impact on other countries of the region and the
worrisome humanitarian situation. Yet it is now time to
focus on the most immediate goals. The adoption of the
draft resolution before us would be a first essential step
towards a comprehensive settlement of the current
crisis.
I would like to conclude by confirming that Italy
is ready and willing to contribute to the increase of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) monitors contingent as decided in Vienna
earlier today. This additional effort would complement
ongoing initiatives in the area of humanitarian
assistance.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I would
also like to extend my thanks to Mr. Pascoe and Mr.
Mulet for their briefings, and to welcome Ambassador
Alasania to the Council.
The United States remains deeply concerned by
the situation in Georgia. We deplore the loss of life,
civilian casualties and extensive damage to civilian
facilities throughout the country.

and Gori. These Russian forces continue to destroy
civilian infrastructure, block Georgian highways and
impede the functioning of a humanitarian corridor.
We continue to receive reports that international
humanitarian organizations, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), continue to be denied access by Russia to
South Ossetia, the region hardest hit by this conflict.
By denying access, Russia is preventing what UNHCR
estimates to be 128,000 internally displaced persons
and thousands of other civilians from receiving
assistance, despite repeated appeals by humanitarian
groups.
We have disturbing reports from areas of Georgia
under Russian control. Russian forces have looted
Georgian facilities, destroyed essential infrastructure
and allowed paramilitary bands to do the same.
Georgia’s main rail bridge near Kaspi was blown up on
16 August. Russian naval vessels are destroying
Georgian ships and disrupting civilian shipping. This
situation cannot continue.
We are gravely alarmed by the humanitarian
situation, particularly in those parts of Georgia under
the de facto control of Russian forces and their
irregulars, where international human rights groups
have reported serious human rights abuses. We demand
that Russian forces fulfil their responsibility to prevent
such human rights violations and call for an immediate
investigation into the atrocities that are alleged to have
occurred behind Russian lines.
Statements by the so-called South Ossetian
president Kokoity and other de facto officials regarding
their intentions to displace ethnic Georgians
completely from South Ossetia are reprehensible and
should be condemned by the international community.
Such gratuitous incitement of ethnic hatred has no
place in the twenty-first century.

We support the call for an emergency meeting
today because of continuing Russian military
operations against Georgia despite agreement by the
parties, specifically Russia and Georgia, to a ceasefire.

Finally, we express our readiness to engage in
international discussions on the modalities for security
and stability in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Whatever
the final outcome of these discussions, one thing is
clear now: South Ossetia and Abkhazia lie within
Georgia’s internationally recognized borders. There is
no room for debate on this point.

As of today, Russia’s occupying forces reportedly
remain throughout Georgia, including in Poti, Senaki

The United Nations Security Council has adopted
numerous resolutions concerning Georgia. These

8

08-46619

S/PV.5961

resolutions are based on the premise that South Ossetia
and Abkhazia remain within the borders of Georgia and
that their underlying conflicts will be resolved through
international negotiations. Russia itself has endorsed
these resolutions. The international community is clear
that South Ossetia and Abkhazia are part of Georgia,
and the United States fully recognizes this reality.
We will continue to stand behind Georgia’s
democracy. We will continue to insist that Georgia’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity be
respected.
When this armed conflict erupted, we heard from
the Russian representative that his Government was
acting to defend its peacekeepers and civilians in the
South Ossetia region of Georgia. Yet the military
actions Russia has undertaken continue to belie that
claim.
Even in its early stages, Russia’s military
offensive and political objectives went far beyond any
reasonable or credible limit consistent with its claims.
Russia has expanded its operations far beyond the
conflict zone into areas that have nothing to do with
South Ossetia. We have seen a deepening and widening
Russian offensive that includes the opening of a second
front in Abkhazia and the occupation of Georgian
territory.
The objectives of this offensive suggest Russian
intentions to weaken and subjugate Georgia, a
sovereign country with a democratically elected
Government that poses no threat to Russia.
Last week, French President Sarkozy, acting on
behalf of the European Union, launched a diplomatic
effort to attain a ceasefire. The United States strongly
supported that effort. After Russian President
Medvedev agreed to the proposed terms of a ceasefire,
Secretary of State Rice travelled to Tbilisi to obtain
Georgia’s agreement. Georgian President Saakashvili
approved the ceasefire terms on the understanding that
his Government’s agreement would lead immediately
to a cessation of hostilities and withdrawal of Russian
forces to the status quo ante of 6 August. This did not
happen. Despite the Georgian agreement, the Russian
military offensive continued.
On 17 August, two days after the Georgian
President signed the ceasefire agreement, Russian
President Medvedev undertook to begin Russia’s
withdrawal on 18 August. This did not happen. Russian

08-46619

operations continued in an effort to consolidate the
occupation and continue to destroy Georgia’s
infrastructure.
We meet today on 19 August, seven days after
President Medvedev agreed with French President
Sarkozy’s plan, four days after Georgia’s President
Saakashvili signed it, three days after Russian
President Medvedev signed it, two days after President
Medvedev promised to begin the withdrawal, and more
than 24 hours after that last promise was supposed to
take effect.
Against this backdrop of Russia’s continued
military offensive and diplomatic delaying tactics, we
support the French delegation’s draft resolution calling
for immediate compliance with the terms of the
agreement, to which Russia, Georgia and other parties
subscribed, and particularly for the immediate
withdrawal of Russian forces from Georgia in
accordance with that agreement.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Pascoe and Mr. Mulet for their briefings to the
Council, and I welcome Ambassador Alasania.
On 11 August, in this Chamber, the United
Kingdom and others welcomed the French-led efforts
to secure an immediate end to the fighting in Georgia.
The culmination of those efforts was the six-point
agreement signed by Russia and Georgia a week ago,
together with the agreed clarifications issued by
President Sarkozy.
One week on, however, the Russian Federation
has failed to implement its part of the agreement.
Russian forces have not complied with the requirement
to withdraw to their positions prior to 7 August. Russia
has spoken publicly of its intention to withdraw, and
we have heard statements from Moscow claiming that
withdrawal has begun, but we see little evidence of this
on the ground. On the contrary, Russian forces remain
in their positions deep inside Georgia, way beyond the
conflict zones of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
We are equally troubled by the actions of the
Russian forces now occupying Georgian territory.
Since 7 August, we have seen a systematic attempt to
destroy Georgia’s infrastructure. On the military side,
naval patrol boats have been sunk at their moorings.
Barracks and other military installations well beyond
the conflict zone have been levelled. And Russian
forces have destroyed civilian infrastructure too. I

9

S/PV.5961

would like to ask the Russian ambassador what
justification there could possibly be for Russian forces
destroying a railway bridge on the main east-west rail
link and for blocking a tunnel on a major road. Why do
Russian checkpoints continue to block civilian traffic
on major transit routes, in breach of President
Sarkozy’s clarifications to the 12 August agreement?
Only yesterday, the United Kingdom’s defence attaché
to Georgia was turned back from a Russian checkpoint
in Georgia and told he required a Russian visa in order
to proceed further. Do foreigners now need Russian
visas to travel within Georgia?
It is hard to see how Russian actions are
consistent with Russia’s claimed justification for their
military assault — namely the protection of its
peacekeepers and civilians in South Ossetia and
Abkhazia, even though most of those civilians have
only recently been handed Russian passports and have
not lived in Russia.
I think the facts make it clear that this is a
conflict between Georgia and Russia. Russian
spokesmen try to present the problem as a conflict
between Georgia, South Ossetia and Abkhazia, with
Russia’s role one of peacekeeper. That claim was
always doubtful. The last two weeks have
demonstrated beyond any doubt that Russia is a party
to the conflict. Indeed, Russia’s letter last week, saying
that they were acting under Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, confirmed that they are a party to the
conflict, and Russian actions since 7 August have gone
way beyond those of a peacekeeper or mediator. So let
us not pretend that this is anything other than a conflict
between Russia and Georgia, a conflict which Russia
has clearly won militarily. Russian forces in Georgia
are now, in effect, an army of occupation, and they will
remain so until they withdraw to the positions held
prior to 7 August and force levels return to those that
prevailed then.
We remain gravely concerned too by the
humanitarian situation in Georgia. We are particularly
disturbed by reports of killings and ethnic cleansing
perpetrated by South Ossetian and Abkhaz irregulars,
in areas controlled by Russian forces. It goes without
saying that Russia has a legal and moral obligation to
prevent such acts, but, instead, what we have seen is
the eviction of virtually all ethnic Georgians from
South Ossetia. We welcome the visit of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to the
region. The return of refugees and internally displaced

10

people will be an important element of any long-term
settlement of the conflict in Georgia.
Russia’s failure to withdraw its forces, and the
actions of those forces, raise questions about Russia’s
objectives in Georgia and about its willingness to
honour the agreement signed by President Medvedev.
They also call into question Russia’s commitment to
some of the founding principles of the United Nations
and to respect for the resolutions of the Security
Council, which have consistently upheld Georgia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The United Kingdom calls on Russia to take
immediate steps to comply with the agreement it has
signed and to end its military aggression in Georgia.
First and foremost, that means immediate withdrawal
of Russian forces to the lines held prior to the outbreak
of hostilities. There can be no excuse for further delay,
and for that reason we support the draft resolution that
has been put forward by France.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me first of all to
join previous speakers in thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe and Assistant Secretary-General Mulet
for their briefings.
In previous meetings and consultations, my
delegation has made clear its position with regard to
the ongoing conflict, so we shall limit ourselves to a
few points that we find particularly important or see as
new and relevant elements with regard to the situation
in Georgia.
Croatia welcomes the six-principle agreement,
signed by Georgia and Russia through the diplomatic
efforts of the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
United States, to end the hostilities and reach a
political solution to the conflict. According to that
agreement, all military action must cease and military
forces must return to their positions held prior to the
outbreak of hostilities. We call on all parties to the
conflict to fully comply with the agreement.
Accordingly, we call on Russia to immediately
withdraw its forces from those areas within Georgia
that it entered following the outbreak of hostilities on
7 August, as specified in the aforementioned
agreement. We also call on Georgia to return its forces
to their usual bases, also in line with the situation that
existed before 7 August. In that regard, we would also
like to welcome today’s decision of the Permanent

08-46619

S/PV.5961

Council of the OSCE to appoint 20 additional military
observers.
Croatia is extremely concerned also by the
humanitarian situation on the ground. We deplore the
loss of life and the civilian casualties resulting from the
conflict. Croatia has undertaken measures in concert
with international organizations and interested
Governments, in order to provide much-needed
assistance to the civilian population affected by the
conflict. We call on all the parties to ensure that this
assistance reaches all affected populations.
Croatia also reiterates its support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia, which are recognized by international law and
existing Security Council resolutions.
Finally, Croatia fully supports the draft resolution
on the situation in Georgia prepared by the delegation
of France as a first and necessary step towards the full
implementation of the six-principle agreement. We
hope that the draft resolution can be adopted
expeditiously with the aim of ensuring that the parties
implement the six-principle agreement in its entirety
and in good faith.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): If there are no further speakers wishing to
take the floor, I should like to say a few words.
At a previous meeting of the Security Council, I
asked the representative of the United States a
question: What, in his opinion, should the Security
Council be focused on — serious political work or
propaganda? At that time, unfortunately, I received no
answer to that question, and today it is clear why.
Unfortunately, the statements made today by the
representative of the United States and others have
been clear expressions of propaganda, to the detriment
of the serious political work that must be done in the
Security Council and the political tasks facing us
today.
I believe that one can hardly fail to see that
today’s meeting was convened to a large extent under
the influence of the North Atlantic Council foreign
ministerial session just held in Brussels. I note in
passing that the final statement issued at that meeting
appears to be non-objective and biased and contains
not a single word concerning the reasons for the
conflict or about who initiated the aggression, who
armed Georgia and who has consistently blocked our

08-46619

insistent proposals to conclude a legally binding
agreement on the non-use of force. The impression has
been given that, behind the convening of today’s
meeting, there is a wish to distract the Security Council
from its task of adopting a decision endorsing the wellknown Russian-French peace initiative to end the
conflict and pave the way to a settlement.
Once again in this Chamber, there has been a
further attempt today to turn matters on their head and
to portray the aggressor as the victim. Once again,
rhetoric has been bandied about accusing Russia of the
most mortal sins, including some extremely wild
accusations. I wish in that respect to focus on the key
theme that the French delegation is now promoting for
the draft resolution it has proposed for adoption by the
Security Council. However, in the light of some of the
remarks that have been made in the Council Chamber
today, I cannot fail to say a few words first.
First, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
no one is undertaking a humanitarian operation as large
as that of Russia in the conflict zone. Not one country
or one humanitarian organization is doing as much as
Russia, not only inside South Ossetia and Tskhinvali,
which was effectively wiped off the face of the Earth
by the Georgian aggression, but also in some Georgian
areas that we have entered, such as the city of Gori,
which is in close vicinity to South Ossetia and where
our military has had to deal with massive stockpiles of
discarded weapons. In recent days, we have fed the
civilian population there and have called on the
Georgian authorities to help the people of that city,
who have been abandoned to their own fate. No one is
doing anywhere near as much as Russia to avoid a
humanitarian catastrophe.
With respect to the international humanitarian
organizations, with which we have of course sought
contact, the heads of those entities have either
concluded or are planning visits to Russia and the
conflict zone. We therefore hope that cooperation can
begin and that the international humanitarian
organizations will be able to do their humanitarian
work effectively in the conflict zone.
I should now like to address what may be a side
issue, but one on which I wish to focus. In several
statements made today, reference has been made to
what President Kokoity of South Ossetia said about
refugees. Our Foreign Ministry has issued a special
statement on that matter which lays out the facts with

11

S/PV.5961

respect to international norms applying to refugees.
That is undoubtedly one of the questions that will have
to be settled in the process of normalizing the situation
in the conflict zone.
Much has been said and many rhetorical
questions have been asked on the basis of unverified
information and even of disinformation. The
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom was
not present when previous statements were made, but
he has expressed concern about the fate of the United
Kingdom’s military attaché, who for some reason was
in the area of conflict and was arrested. I do not know
the facts of that specific situation.
As I read the statement issued today by the North
Atlantic Council foreign ministerial session, I was
struck by a phrase to which I would like to draw the
Council’s attention. It was obviously drafted by
military experts and not by politicians; NATO clearly
has good people working on such statements, just as
we do, and they should be appreciated. I am sure that
they understand each other very well in such matters.
In particular, the statement reminds Russia of its
obligation to maintain security and order in the areas
under its control. We do not need to be reminded of
that. I will cite one example to demonstrate our
awareness that we bear full responsibility for security.
Some illegal activities may have occurred there;
that cannot be entirely dismissed, of course, when the
entire region has been destroyed as a result of the
Georgian military adventure. We cannot deny that there
may indeed be such circumstances, but I can state that
Russian military personnel have the strictest orders to
stop such illegal activity when they witness it.
Some of my colleagues are behaving as if they
have not attended the five previous meetings and are
now making their own interpretations of events, but I
should like to recall that this is now the sixth meeting
on this topic. The first was convened as Russia warned
the Council that Georgia was on the verge of
unleashing a military adventure. We called for that
meeting on the night of 7 August; further meetings
were held in the course of the conflict in an attempt to
reach a settlement. That quest concluded in a meeting
in the Moscow Kremlin on 12 August at which the
Presidents of France and Russia read out the sixprinciple peace plan.
The task of the Security Council today is to
support that plan and to promote progress in its

12

implementation. Unfortunately, given the kind of
propaganda we have heard today, we are merely
making it harder for the Council to perform that task.
We do not understand why that must be so, but
returning to the core issue that the French
representative touched on today, I can say the
following.
The Russian side has consistently implemented
its obligations. Under the Moscow six-principle
agreement, by order of the President of the Russian
Federation the Russian armed forces have pledged to
pull back the forces and matériel provided to the
peacekeeping contingents. As of today, preparations are
under way to establish the logistical bases for the
peacekeeping posts that, again pursuant to the Moscow
agreement, are being set up as an additional security
measure in the peacekeeping zone. The construction of
the posts is slated to be concluded by 22 August. I
stress that the pull-back of the combat units that have
been attached to the peacekeeping contingents is
ongoing. Rear units and military hardware are being
pulled back, and the roads are being cleared for the
pull-back of forward units. At the same time, in full
compliance with the Moscow agreement, a security
zone is being created. When the peacekeepers assume
their positions on the external border of that zone,
those forces that were introduced in support of the
peacekeepers will return to their areas of deployment.
I should like in passing to ask the representative
of the United States a question. In the course of the
conflict, the United States withdrew 2,000 Georgian
servicemen from Iraq. Are they going to return to Iraq?
What does the future hold for them?
The withdrawal of Russian troops will be
commensurate with the effectiveness of the Georgian
side’s implementation of its obligations under the
Moscow peace plan, which stipulates first and foremost
the return of Georgian troops to their places of
permanent deployment: their barracks. And I would
like to point out that, although Mr. Saakashvili signed
the peace plan’s six points and pledged to withdraw his
troops, we note today that that obligation has not been
fulfilled. Every day there are incidents in which our
servicemen, in one part of the security zone or another,
hold Georgian troops who have not yet returned to
their barracks or groups of armed individuals who are
present for no comprehensible reason. Such incidents
seriously complicate the overall situation and hamper
the process of withdrawing troops according to plan.

08-46619

S/PV.5961

We appeal to all to be guided by objective
criteria, not by a desire to whitewash those who
initiated the aggression. We are convinced that the
Council’s attention should be focused on endorsing the
Moscow peace plan developed by the Presidents of
Russia and France. It contains six clear, consistent and
logically interlinked principles for stabilizing the
situation and overcoming the crisis. Singling out
individual elements of the Moscow plan and
interpreting them to suit the purposes of political
propaganda is counterproductive, and the Russian
Federation will therefore be unable to support the draft
resolution submitted today by France.
The representative of France referred earlier to
two of the peace plan’s six principles announced by the
Presidents of France and Russia. But even on those two
principles everything was mixed up: the order was
changed and additional suggestions were put forward.
Why is this being done? During all the work we have
done together with our French colleagues in recent
days, was there not an understanding that the six
principles of Presidents Sarkozy and Medvedev should
be clearly reflected, verbatim, in a draft resolution to
be adopted by the Security Council?
Incidentally, during today’s telephone conversation
between President Medvedev of Russia and
President Sarkozy of France, to which Mr. Lacroix
referred, the French head of State said not a word about
any kind of new draft resolution that would bypass the
12 August agreement.
In the light of all we have said, we appeal to
Council members to step up their endeavours to forge
truly effective and viable decisions to resolve the
situation in Georgia. The basis of such decisions
should be the six principles of the Moscow peace plan.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Belgium.
I too wish to thank Mr. Pascoe and Mr. Mulet for
their briefings, and would like to make the following
points.
Belgium remains gravely concerned at the
continued presence of Russian troops on Georgian
territory despite the repeated commitments and
assurances that they would be withdrawn. There is no
justification for that presence, which violates the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia.

08-46619

Belgium reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders.
Belgium is also very concerned at any action that
poses a threat to Georgia’s vital infrastructure. Belgium
calls for respect of the ceasefire and the immediate
withdrawal of Russian troops from areas from which it
must withdraw by the terms of the six-point agreement
signed by the Georgian and Russian Presidents on the
initiative of the President of the French Republic,
acting in his capacity as current President of the
European Union.
Belgium
believes
that
the
international
community has a crucial oversight and leadership role
to play. In that connection, Belgium welcomes the
decision taken by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe to rapidly deploy a larger
number of observers. Belgium considers that the
Security Council should remain seized of this matter
with a view to helping to find a solution. In that regard,
Belgium supports the draft resolution circulated by
France today.
Finally, on the humanitarian front, the suffering
of populations affected by this situation is clearly very
worrisome. Belgium once again appeals for the free
and unhampered access of humanitarian aid to the
victims. I wish to stress that ensuring such access is an
integral part of the six-point agreement.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Pascoe and
Mr. Mulet for their briefings this afternoon, and to
thank the representative of Georgia for being here with
us.
Eight days ago, on Monday, 11 August, I made a
statement here in which I briefly summarized
Costa Rica’s position on this matter. Today I am taking
the floor again to say that, in our view, the situation in
Georgia is not a European problem; nor is it a problem
that involves only the great economic and military
Powers. Costa Rica firmly believes that this is a crisis
in which small States that are not major economic or
military Powers also have a stake. We are the majority
in this Organization. Costa Rica wishes once again to
emphasize the need to restore the position and

13

S/PV.5961

observance of international law, which guarantees the
security of small countries.
We share the concerns raised by the failure to
comply with commitments, in particular because those
commitments were agreed upon by the parties as steps
necessary to normalize the situation in Georgia. We
welcome humanitarian action from any quarter,
because it eases the situation of a civilian population
that has been the victim of politically motivated
hostilities.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Georgia has asked to make a further
statement, and I call on him now.
Mr. Alasania (Georgia): I have a very simple
question, but before posing that question I want to say
that the representative of the Russian Federation
referred to the massive humanitarian intervention, of a
kind that had not been seen before, which they are
performing in Georgia. I just want to assure
Mr. Churkin that the face of the Russian humanitarian
efforts is well shown by the facts on the ground, by the
destruction and the killings, and that it has been well
reported by international observers, human rights
observers and the international media, so I will not
elaborate more on that.
The simple question is this. I could not really get
a sense, regarding the very important issue on which
we are gathered here today, whether the Russian
Federation is intending to comply with the agreement
reached by the French presidency of the European
Union, to ceasefire and to end the occupation of the
sovereign State of Georgia. This is a very simple
question, but I really felt deliberate ambiguity in the

answers provided by the Russian Federation’s
Permanent Representative. And by refusing to support
the French-sponsored draft resolution, does that in
effect mean that they are refusing to ceasefire in
Georgia?
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I shall begin with the second question posed
by the Permanent Representative of Georgia. Where is
the ambiguity? I said very definitely that we are
complying with and intend to implement the six
principles that were worked out by the President of
France and the President of Russia in the Kremlin on
12 August. In fact, I think that we and the whole
international community need the support of the
Security Council through an appropriate resolution
supporting the six principles. For some reason,
however, the Security Council does not want to do that
and is being distracted by propagandistic ventures.
Everything is very clear. The position of the Russian
Federation is crystal clear. Unfortunately, some
members of the Security Council are taking a position
that is no secret to anyone. It is misleading and not
constructive.
With regard to Mr. Alasania’s first question,
regarding the tragedy that the Georgian people are
currently experiencing, he can thank Mr. Saakashvili
personally and those who pushed him into the military
adventure in South Ossetia.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

14

08-46619
