A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/89
7 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 110 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/619/Add.2)]
51/89.

Respect for the right to universal freedom
of travel and the vital importance of
family reunification

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are
universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1
Stressing that, as stated in the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development,2 family reunification
of documented migrants is an important factor in international migration, and
that remittances by documented migrants to their countries of origin often
constitute a very important source of foreign exchange and are instrumental in
improving the well-being of relatives left behind,
Recalling its resolution 50/175 of 22 December 1995,
1.
Once again calls upon all States to guarantee the universally
recognized freedom of travel to all foreign nationals legally residing in
their territory;

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development,
Cairo, 5-13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
97-76657

/...

A/RES/51/89
Page 2

2.
Reaffirms that all Governments, particularly those of receiving
countries, must recognize the vital importance of family reunification and
promote its incorporation into national legislation in order to ensure
protection of the unity of families of documented migrants;
3.
Calls upon all States to allow, in conformity with international
legislation, the free flow of financial remittances by foreign nationals
residing in their territory to their relatives in the country of origin;
4.
Also calls upon all States to refrain from enacting, and to repeal
if it already exists, legislation intended as a coercive measure that
discriminates against individuals or groups of legal migrants by adversely
affecting family reunification and the right to send financial remittances to
relatives in the country of origin;
5.
Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its
fifty-second session under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996
