194

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

thirty-eighth, 57 thirty-ninth, 58 fortieth, 59 forty-first, 60
forty-second 61 and forty-third 26 sessions,
Reiterating its resolutions 35/35 B of 14 November
1980, 36/10 of 28 October 1981, 37/42 of 3 December
1982, 38/16 of22 November 1983, 39/18 of23 November
1984, 40/24 of 29 November 1985 and 41/100 of
4 December 1986,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 62
1. Reaffirms that the universal realization of the right
of all peoples, including those under colonial, foreign and
alien domination, to self-determination is a fundamental
condition for the effective guarantee and observance ofhuman rights and for the preservation and promotion ofsuch
rights;
2. Declares its firm opposition to acts of foreign military intervention, aggression and occupation, since these
have resulted in the suppression of the right of peoples to
self-determination and other human rights in certain parts
of the world;
3. Calls upan those States responsible to cease immediately their military intervention and occupation of foreign
countries and territories and all acts of repression, discrimination, exploitation and maltreatment, particularly
the brutal and inhuman methods reportedly employed for
the execution of these acts against the peoples concerned;
4. Deplores the plight of the millions of refugees and
displaced persons who have been uprooted as a result of
the aforementioned acts and reaffirms their right to return
to their homes voluntarily in safety and honour;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to give special attention to the violation of human
rights, epecially the right to self-determination, resulting
from foreign military intervention, aggression or occupation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this issue to the General Assembly at its forty-third session under the item entitled "Importance ofthe universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights".
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/95.

Importance of the universal realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its faith in the importance of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Reaffirming the importance of the universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination, national sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the speedy grant57 /bid.,
1982, Supplement No. 2 (E/1982/12 and Corr.l),
cha¡- XXVI, sect. A.
5
[bid., 1983, Supplement No. 3 (E/1983/13 and Corr.l),
cha.p- XXVII, sect. A.
5 /bid.. 1984, Supplement No. 4 (E/1984/14 and Corr.l), chap. II,
sect. A.
60 /bid .. 1985, Supplement No. 2 (E/1985/22), chap. 11, sect. A.
61 /bid., 1986, Supplement No. 2 (E/1986/22), chap. 11, sect. A.
62 A/42/448 and Add. J.

ing of independence to colonial countries and peoples as
imperatives for the full enjoyment of ali human rights,
Reaffirming the obligation of all Member States to comply with the principies of the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of the United Nations regarding
the exercise of the right to self-determination by peoples
under colonial and foreign domination,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) and all relevant resolutions concerning the implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Recalling Jurther its resolutions on the question of Namibia, in particular resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966 and S-14/1 of20 September 1986, as well as the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 385 (1976) of 30 January 1976 and 435 (1978) of
29 September 1978,
Recalling the Declaration adopted by the World Conference on Sanctions against Racist South Africa 63 and the
Declaration of the International Conference for the Immediate lndependence of Namibia and the Programme of
Action on Namibia, 64
Taking note of the Luanda Declaration and Programme
of Action adopted by the United Nations Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary meetings, held at
Luanda from 18 to 22 May 1987, 65
Taking note a/so ofthe final communiqué adopted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia at its ministerial
meeting, held at United Nations Headquarters on 2 October 1987, 66
Bearing in mind the outcome of the International Conference on the Alliance between South Africa and Israel,
held at Vienna from 11 to 13 July 1983,67
Welcoming the holding at Tunis from 7 to 9 August
1984 of the Conference of Arab Solidarity with the Struggle for Liberation in Southern Africa, 68
Taking note of resolution CM/Res.1099 (XL VI)/Rev .1
on South Africa and CM/Res.1091 (XLVI) on Namibia
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity at its forty-sixth ordinai session, held at
Addis Ababa from 20 to 25 July 1987, 9
Recalling the statement issued on 21 August 1987 by the
President of the Security Council, on behalf of the members ofthe Council, in which he expressed their concern in
the face of the steady deterioration of the situation in Namibia owing to the intensification of the repression perpetrated by the South African occupation forces against the
Namibian people in the entire Territory, 70
Reaffirming that the system of apartheid imposed on the
South African people constitutes a violation of the fundamental rights of that people, a crime against humanity and
a constant threat to international peace and security,
Grave/y concerned at the continuation of the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa and the continued
violations of the human rights of the people in the Terri63 Report of the World Conference on Sanctions against Racist South
A/rica. Paris, 16-20 June 1986 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.86.1.23), chap. IX.
64 See Report of the 1nternational Conference for the 1mmediate
lndependence of Namibia, Vienna, 7-11 Ju/y 1986 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.86.1.16 and addendum), par! three.
65 Officia/ Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session.
Suf¡ilement No. 24 (A/42/24), part two, chap. III, para. 203.
A/42/631-S/19187, annex.
67 See A/38/311-S/15883, annex.
68 See A/39/450-S/16726.
69 See A/42/699, annex l.
70 See Resolution, and Decisions of the Security Council. /9ll7, p. 9.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

tory and of the other peoples still under colonial domination and alien subjugation,
Reaffirming its resolution 39/2 of 28 September 1984
and recalling Security Council resolution 554 (1984) of
17 August 1984, in which the Council rejected the socalled "new constitution" as null and void, Council resolution 569 (1985) of 26 July 1985 and the statement made
by the President of the Security Council on 13 June 1986
on the nation-wide state of emergency in South Africa, 71
Deeply concerned at the continued terrorist acts of aggression committed by the Pretoria régime against independent African States in the region, in particular the unprovoked attacks against Botswana, Mozambique,
Zambia and Zimbabwe,
Deeply indignant at the continued occupation of part of
the territory of Angola by the troops of the racist régime of
South Africa and the persistent, hostile and unprovoked
acts of aggression and sustained armed invasions committed by the régime, which violate the sovereignty, airspace
and territorial integrity of Angola, in particular the recent
armed invasion perpetrated by the racist régime on the
provinces of Cuando Cubango and Cunene,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 527 (1982) of
15 December 1982 and 535 (1983) of 29 June 1983 on
Lesotho, and Council resolutions 568 (1985) of 21 June
1985 and 572 (1985) of 30 September 1985 on Botswana,
Reaffirming the national unity and territorial integrity
of the Comoros,
Recalling the Political Declaration adopted by the First
Conference of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab
States, held at Cairo from 7 to 9 March 1977,72
Recalling also its relevant resolutions on the question of
Palestine, in particular resolution 41/43 of 2 December
1986,
Recalling further the Geneva Declaration on Palestine
and the Programme of Action for the Achievement of
Palestinian Rights, adopted by the International Conference on the Question of Palestine, 73
Considering that the denial of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination, sovereignty,
independence and return to Palestine and the repeated
acts of aggression by Israel against the people of the region
constitute a serious threat to international peace and
security,
Deeply shocked and alarmed at the deplorable consequences ofthe Israeli invasion ofLebanon and recalling ali
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in particular resolutions 508 ( 1982) of 5 June 1982, 509 (1982)
of 6 June 1982, 520 (1982) of 17 September 1982 and 521
(1982) of 19 September 1982,
l. Calls upon all States to implement fully and faithfully all the resolutions of the United Nations regarding
the exercise ofthe right to self-determination and independence by peoples under colonial and foreign domination;
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples
for their independence, territorial integrity, national unity
and liberation from colonial domination, apartheid and
foreign occupation by all available meaos, including
armed struggle;

11 !bid.,

195

3. Reaffirms the inalienable right ofthe Namibian people, the Palestinian people and all peoples under foreign
and colonial domination to self-determination, national
independence, territorial integrity, national unity and sovereignty without foreign interference;
4. Strongly condemns those Governments that do not
recognize the right to self-determination and independence of ali peoples still under colonial domination and
alien subjugation, notably the peoples of Africa and the
Palestinian people;
5. Calls for the full and immediate implementation of
the declarations and programmes of action on Namibia
and on Palestine adopted by the international conferences
on those questions;
6. Reaffirms its vigorous condemnation of the continued illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa;
7. Condemns once again the racist régime of South
Africa for its installation of a so-called "interim administration" at Windhoek and declares that action to be illegal, null and void;
8. Strongly condemns the illegal occupation régime of
South Africa for its increased repression of the Namibian
people, as recently manifested by the arrest and detention
of leaders of the South West Africa People's Organization
and of trade unions, the cold-blooded murder and torture
of children, women and the elderly, and the bombing and
destruction of social and educational institutions by the
racist army, police and murder squads, and demands the
immediate and unconditional release of all Namibians imprisoned and detained by the Pretoria régime;
9. Further condemns the policy of "bantustanization"
and reiterates its support for the oppressed people of
South Africa in its just and legitimate struggle against the
racist minority régime of Pretoria;
1O. Reajfirms its rejection of the so-called "new constitution" as null and void and reiterates that peace in South
Africa can be guaranteed ,only by the establishment of
majority rule through the full and free exercise of adult
suffrage by all the people in a united and undivided South
Africa;
11. Commends the efforts of the democratic forces
within various sections of the South African society that
are striving towards the abolition of apartheid and the
creation of a united non-racial democratic society in South
Africa and, in this connection, takes note with satisfaction
of the Dakar Declaration, adopted at the meeting organized by the Institute for a Democratic Alternative for
South Africa at Dakar from 9 to 12 July 1987;74
12. Strongly condemns the wanton killing of peaceful
and defenceless demonstrators and workers on strike, as
well as the arbitrary arrests of the leaders and activists of
the democratic mass organizations, and demands their immediate and unconditional release, in particular that of
Nelson Mandela and Zephania Mothopeng;
13. Strongly condemns South Africa for the imposition
of the state of emergency under its repugnant Internal
Security Act and calls for the immediate lifting ofthe state
of emergency, as well as the repeal of the Internal Security
Act;
14. Strongly condemns the holding of an all-white election by the racist régime in May 1987, in the midst ofthe
state of emergency, accompanied by the muzzling of the
press and increased brutal repression of the majority,

1986, p. 17.

72 A/32/61, annex l.
73 Repon ofthe Intemational Conference on the Question of Palestine,

Geneva, 29 August-7 September 1983 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.83.1.21), chap. l.

74 A/42/554-S/19126, annex. For the printed text, see Official Records
of the Security Council, Forty-second Year, Supplement for Ju/y, August
and September 1987, document S/19126.

196

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

which once again clearly manifested the apartheid
régime's arrogant defiance and intransigence;
15. Condemns South Africa for its increasing oppression ofthe Namibian people, for the massive militarization
of Namibia and for its armed attacks launched against the
States in the region in order to destabilize them politically
and to sabotage and destroy their economies;
16. Strongly condemns the establishment and use of
armed terrorist groups by South Africa with a view to pitting them against the national liberation movements and
destabilizing the legitimate Governments of southern
Africa;
11. Strongly condemns the repeated acts of aggression
and the continued occupation of parts of southern Angola
and demands the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the South African troops from Angolan territory;
18. Strongly condemns the persistent, hostile and unprovoked acts of aggression and sustained armed invasions carried out by the racist régime of South Africa,
which violate the sovereignty, airspace and territorial integrity of Angola, in particular the armed invasion perpetrated by the racist régime on the provinces of Cuando
Cubango and Cunene;
19. Strongly reaffirms its solidarity with the independent African countries and national liberation movements
that are victims of murderous acts of aggression and destabilization by the racist régime of Pretoria, and calls
upon the international community to render increased assistance and support to these countries in order to enable
them to strengthen their defence capacity, defend their
sovereignty and territorial integrity and peacefully rebuild
and develop;
20. Reaffirms that the practice of using mercenaries
against sovereign States and national liberation movements constitutes a criminal act, and calls upon the Governments of all countries to enact legislation declaring the
recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries in their
territories and the transit of mercenaries through their territories to be punishable offences, and prohibiting their nationals from serving as mercenaries, and to report on such
legislation to the Secretary-General;
21. Strongly condemns the continued violation of the
human rights of the peoples still under colonial domination and alien subjugation, the continuation of the illegal
occupation by the racist minority régime in southern
Africa and the denial to the Palestinian people of their
inalienable national rights;
22. Strongly condemns the racist régime of Pretoria for
its acts of destabilization against Lesotho, and strongly
urges the international community to continue to extend
maximum assistance to Lesotho to enable it to fulfil its international humanitarian obligations towards refugees,
and to use its influence on the racist régime so that it desists from such acts against Lesotho;
23. Strongly condemns the unprovoked and unwarranted military attacks of 14 June 1985 and 19 May 1986
on the capital of Botswana and demands that the racist
régime pay full and adequate compensation to Botswana
for the loss of life and damage to property;
24. Strongly condemns the escalation of massacres of
defenceless people and the continuing destruction of economic and social infrastructures perpetrated against
Mozambique by armed terrorists, who are an extension of
the South African army of aggression;
25. Denounces the collusion between Israel and South
Africa and expresses support for the Declaration of the In-

ternational Conference on the Alliance between South
Africa and Israel;67
26. Strongly condemns the policy of those Western
States, Israel and other States whose political, economic,
military, nuclear, strategic, cultural and sports relations
with the racist minority régime of South Africa encourage
that régime to persist in its suppression of the aspirations
of peoples to self-determination and independence;
21. Again demands the immediate application of the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa, imposed
under Security Council resolution 418 ( 1977) of 4 N ovember 1977, by all countries and more particularly by those
countries that maintain military and nuclear co-operation
with the racist Pretoria régime and continue to supply it
with related matériel;
28. Calls for the full implementation of the provisions
of the Declaration adopted by the World Conference on
Sanctions against Racist South Africa63 and of the Declaration of the International Conference for the Immediate
Independence of Namibia and the Programme of Action
on Namibia; 64
29. Demands once again the immediate implementation of General Assembly resolutions ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981 and S-14/1 of 20 September 1986;
30. Reaffirms all relevant resolutions adopted by the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations on
the question of Western Sabara, including General Assembly resolution 41/ 16 of 31 October 1986, and calls
upon the current Chairman ofthe Organization of African
Unity and the Secretary-General ofthe United Nations to
continue their efforts to find a just and lasting solution to
this question;
31. Urges all States, the specialized agencies, organizations ofthe United Nations system and other international
organizations to extend their support to the Namibian
people through their sote and legitimate representative,
the South West Africa People's Organization, in its struggle to gain its right to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
32. Notes the contacts between the Government of the
Comoros and the Government of France in the search for
a just solution to the problem of the integration of the
Comorian island of Mayotte into the Comoros, in accordance with the resolutions of the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations on this question;
33. Calls for a substantial increase in all forms of assistance given by all States, United Nations organs, the specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations to
the victims of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid
through national liberation movements recognized by the
Organization of African Unity;
34. Strongly condemns the racist régime for its wanton
arrests and detention of women and children in South
Africa and Namibia and demands their immediate and
unconditional release;
35. Strongly condemns the constant and deliberate violations of the fundamental rights of the Palestinian people,
as well as the expansionist activities oflsrael in the Middle
East, which constitute an obstacle to the achievement of
self-determination and independence by the Palestinian
people and a threat to peace and stability in the region;
36. Demands the immediate and unconditional release
of ali persons detained or imprisoned as a result of their
struggle for self-determination and independence, full respect for their fundamental individual rights and compliance with article 5 ofthe Universal Declaration ofHuman

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rights, 2 under which no one shall be subjected to torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;
37. Urges ali States, the specialized agencies, organizations ofthe United Nations system and other intemational
organizations to extend their support to the Palestinian
people through its sole and legitimate representative, the
Palestine Liberation Organization, in its struggle to regain
its right to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Charter;
38. Expresses its appreciation for the material and
other forms of assistance that peoples under colonial rule
continue to receive from Governments, organizations of
the United Nations system and intergovernmental organizations, and calls for a substantial increase in this assistance;
39. Urges ali States, the specialized agencies and other·
competent organizations of the United Nations system to
do their utmost to ensure the full implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and to intensify their efforts to support peoples under colonial, foreign and racist domination
in their just struggle for self-determination and independence;
40. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum
publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and to give the
widest possible publicity to the struggle of oppressed peoples for the achievement of their self-determination and
national independence and to report periodically to the
General Assembly on bis activities in this regard;
41. Decides to consider this item at its forty-third session on the basis of the reports on the strengthening of assistance to colonial territories and peoples that Governments, organizations of the United Nations system and
intergovemmental and non-governmental organizations
have been requested to submit.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987
42/96.

Use of mercenaries as a meaos to violate human
rights and to impede the exercise of the right of
peoples to self-determination

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need for strict observance of the
principies of sovereign equality, political independence,
territorial integrity of States and self-determination of
peoples, as well as scrupulous respect for the principie of
the non-use or threat of the use of force in intemational relations, enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and developed in the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, 75
Reaffirming the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples and
their liberation movements for their independence, territorial integrity, national unity and liberation from
colonial domination, apartheid and foreign intervention
and occupation, and that their legitimate struggle can in
no way be considered as or equated to mercenary activity,
Deeply concerned about the increasing menace that the
activities of mercenaries represent for ali States, particularly African, Central American and other developing
States,
75 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

197

Recognizing that mercenarism is a threat to intemational peace and security,
Recognizing also that the activities of mercenaries are
contrary to fundamental principies of international law,
such as non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
territorial integrity and independence, and seriously impede the process of self-determination of peoples struggling against colonialism, racism and apartheid and all
forms of foreign domination,
Recalling ali of its relevant resolutions, particularly
resolution 41/102 of 4 December 1986, in which it denounced the practice of using mercenaries, in particular
against developing countries and national liberation
movements,
Recalling also Security Council resolutions 239 (1967)
of 10 July 1967, 405 (1977) of 14 April 1977, 419 (1977) of
24 November 1977, 496 (1981) of 15 December 1981 and
507 (1982) of 28 May 1982, in which the Council, inter alia, condemned any State that persisted in permitting
or tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and the
provision of facilities to them, with the objective of overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the
United Nations,
Welcoming the adoption by the Economic and Social
Council of resolution 1987/61 of 29 May 1987, in which
the Council condemned the increased recruitment, financing, training, assembly, transit and use of mercenaries,
Reaffirming its decision, in its resolution 32/130 of
16 December 1977, to accord priority to the search for solutions to the mass and flagrant violations ofhuman rights
of peoples and persons affected by situations such as those
resulting, ínter alia, from aggression and threats against
national sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Organization of
African Unity and the convention adopted by the Assembly ofHeads ofState and Government ofthe Organization
of African Unity at its fourteenth ordinary session, held at
Libreville from 2 to 5 July 1977, 76 condemning and outlawing mercenarism and its adverse effects on the independence and territorial integrity of African States,
Deeply con cerned at the Joss of life, the substantial damage to property and the short-term and long-term negative
effects on the economy of southern African countries resulting from mercenary aggression,
1. Condemns the increased recruitment, financing,
training, assembly, transit and use of mercenaries, as well
as ali other forms of support to mercenaries for the purpose of destabilizing and overthrowing the Governments
of southern Africa and Central America and of other developing States and fighting against the national Jiberation
movements of peoples struggling for the exercise of their
right to self-determination;
2. Strongly condemns the racist régime ofSouth Africa
for its increasing use of groups of armed mercenaries
against national liberation movements and for the destabilization of the Governments of southern African
States;
3. Denounces any State that persists in the recruitment, or permits or tolerates the recruitment, of mercenaries and provides facilities to them for launching armed
aggression against other States;
4. Calls upon ali States to exercise the utmost vigilance
against the menace posed by the activities of mercenaries

7 6 See A/32/310. annex JI.
