A/61/PV.96

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

96

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 16 May 2007, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Highness Malietoa
Tanumafili II, head of State of the Independent State
of Samoa
The President: Before proceeding to the items on
our agenda, it is my sad duty to pay tribute to the
memory of the late head of State of the Independent
State of Samoa, His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II,
who passed away on Friday, 11 May 2007.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of Samoa to convey our condolences to
the Government and the people of Samoa and to the
bereaved family of His Highness.
May I now invite representatives to stand and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka): I stand before the
Assembly today on behalf of the Group of Asian States
at the United Nations to pay tribute to a great
statesman from Asia who has just passed away after
serving his people with distinction for long years.
His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II, head of
State of the Independent State of Samoa, who passed

away on Friday, 11 May, had been the head of State of
Samoa for 45 long years, since the independence of
Samoa in January 1962. The remains of His Highness
now lie in state in Samoa’s Parliament building. A
State funeral for His Highness will take place on
Friday, 18 May.
His Highness played a prominent role in leading
Samoa towards independence, and will therefore be
remembered as the father of Samoa. Samoa became the
first Pacific island country to achieve full
independence, on 1 January 1962. In 1990 the people
of Samoa celebrated 50 years of continuous service to
the Government by His Highness. In the year 2000 His
Highness was bestowed with the Grand Order of
Samoa for his dedicated service to the country.
His Highness was the founding Chancellor of the
University of Samoa when it was established, in 1984.
Honouring the service rendered to Samoa by
His Highness, the Government and the people of
Samoa mark his birthday as a national public holiday
and as a day of national celebration. His Highness
became the oldest and the third longest-serving head of
State in the world when he celebrated his ninety-fifth
birthday, early this year.
The astute leadership provided by His Highness
as head of State ensured the strong foundation on
which Samoa’s indigenous structures complemented
the country’s democratic processes and institutions.
That has made Samoa a prosperous democracy, a
legacy that that has earned the gratitude of all
Samoans. He will be remembered for his dignity,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-34389 (E)

*0734389*

A/61/PV.96

wisdom and lively sense of humour during his many
years of service to the Government and people of
Samoa.

the Independent State of Samoa following the death of
one of the founding fathers of the nation, His Highness
King Malietoa Tanumafili II, on Friday, 11 May 2007.

With the passing away of His Highness Malietoa
Tanumafili II, Asia has lost another outstanding leader
who served his country with distinction, dedication and
commitment for long years. On this sad occasion, on
behalf of all members of the Asian Group, I wish to
extend our deepest sympathies to the Government and
people of Samoa. The members of the Asian Group
also extend our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved
family of His Highness in their hour of grief.

He will be remembered as an illustrious
statesman who was greatly loved and highly respected
by Samoans for his warmth, compassion and humility.
People the world over will recall with fondness his
passion, commitment, loyalty and dedication to the
people of Samoa. The pivotal role played by King
Malietoa as father of the nation in preserving the
stability of the country during the incipient and
undoubtedly painful period following the attainment of
his country’s independence — for which he
struggled — will be indelibly inscribed in the annals of
Samoa’s history.

We are confident that the people of Samoa will
continue to keep the dreams and legacy of
His Highness alive and that Samoa and its people will
reach greater heights in time to come, traversing the
path of progress he envisioned.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Sniedze (Latvia): On behalf of the members
of the Group of Eastern European States, I extend our
sincere condolences to the nation of Samoa upon the
passing away of His Highness King Malietoa
Tanumafili II.
King Malietoa Tanumafili II dedicated his long
life to the people of Samoa and led Samoa since 1962,
when it became the first Polynesian nation to gain
independence. The King will be remembered for his
wise and compassionate leadership and for the stability
and progress that Samoa enjoyed under his reign. He
provided a steadying influence that allowed both for
modernization and the preservation of his beloved
Samoan culture and language.
In these days of sadness, our thoughts are with
the nation of Samoa. We extend our heartfelt wishes
for the future success of Samoa as an active
representative of the Pacific region and a deeply
committed Member of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): On behalf of the members
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, I
have the honour to join other delegations in conveying
profound condolences to the Government and people of

2

The death of the world’s third-longest reigning
monarch, who served in that capacity since 1963,
signals the end of an era. The people of Samoa can be
assured that King Malietoa Tanumafili II has left a
lasting legacy on which present and future generations
can continue to build. Our thoughts and prayers are
with the people of Samoa during this difficult time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and Other States.
Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): On behalf of the Group
of Western European and Other States, I should like to
convey our sincere condolences to the Government and
people of Samoa, and in particular to the royal family,
on the death of their head of State, King Malietoa
Tanumafili II.
Through his long reign, King Malietoa
represented Samoa with wisdom and insight. He helped
to frame Samoa’s constitution prior to the country’s
independence from New Zealand in January 1962. At
that time, he became joint head of State. From 1963,
following the death of Tupua Tamasese Meaoli, he
became sole head of State.
At the time of King Malietoa’s death at the age of
94, he was understood to be the world’s oldest national
leader. Despite this sad loss to the Samoan nation and
people, the King will long be remembered for his
passionate and committed service to Samoa and the
broader Pacific islands region. We therefore hope that
once the period of mourning is over, the Samoan
people will find renewed opportunities to pursue their

07-34389

A/61/PV.96

path to development in peace and freedom. Our
thoughts go out to the people of Samoa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, who
will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): On
behalf of the Group of African States, I wish to pay
tribute to His Highness the late Malietoa Tanumafili II,
who suddenly passed away on 11 May 2007.
His Highness the late Malietoa Tanumafili II will
be deeply remembered for his outstanding leadership,
which led to the independence of the State of Samoa
and his subsequent appointment as joint head of State
at the time of independence in 1962. His appointment
in 1963 as the sole head of State following the passing
away of Tupua Tamasese Meaoli, who had held joint
leadership at the time of independence, was a reflection
of the trust that the people of Samoa had in him. He
belonged to the league of giants and heroes of the
independence movements of the 1960s, which swept
the shores of many continents, from the Atlantic
through the Indian Ocean to the South Pacific. We have
lost him, but we have inherited from him the dignity of
independence, the virtues of peaceful coexistence and
the wisdom of a grand patriarch. Long live His
Highness the late Malietoa Tanumafili II.
At this painful period of great loss, the Group of
African States expresses its profound and sincerest
sympathy to the family of His Highness and to the
Government and the people of Samoa. We are
confident that his successor and the people and the
Government of Samoa will overcome this grief and
safeguard Samoa’s independence, stability and
prosperity. May the soul of His Highness the late
Malietoa Tanumafili II rest in eternal peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States, who will speak on
behalf of the host country.
Mr. Wallace (United States of America): The
United States was deeply saddened to learn of the
passing of His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II, head
of State of Samoa. My Government extends its sincere
condolences to King Malietoa’s two sons and two
daughters and to the people of Samoa during this time
of sorrow and mourning.

country’s founding fathers and served as head of State
since Samoa gained independence in 1962. He led by
example, working to promote democracy and
prosperity in his country and throughout the Pacific.
The United States joins the people of Samoa in
mourning the loss of their beloved leader.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tonga, who will speak on behalf of
the Pacific Islands Forum.
Mrs. ‘Utoikamanu (Tonga): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the 13 members of the Pacific
Islands Forum group of countries, and to express our
grave sorrow and profound sadness on the passing
away of His Highness the late Malietoa Tanumafili II,
head of State of the Independent State of Samoa, on
Friday, 11 May 2007.
His Highness the late Malietoa Tanumafili II had
been at the vanguard of Samoa’s quest for
independence. In 1962, when Samoa became the first
Pacific island country to achieve full independence,
His Highness was appointed head of State. He
faithfully served his people as head of State of Samoa
for 45 years with great humility, distinction and much
affection. He worked tirelessly to pursue the
development aspirations of Samoa. The death of His
Highness is a great loss to Samoa. His Highness’s
dedication and commitment in the service of his people
will always be remembered by the people of Samoa.
The passing away of His Highness the late
Malietoa Tanumafili II is also a great loss to the
Governments and peoples of the Pacific island
countries. His Highness provided vital leadership and
made enormous contributions to the development of
the Pacific region in the areas of regional peace and
security, health, education and cultural issues, as well
as environment and other social issues. We therefore
express our profound gratitude for all his leadership
and contributions to the betterment of the people of the
Pacific region.
May we pay our respects and cherish the legacy
of His Highness’s service to the people of Samoa, the
Pacific region and all humanity. May His soul rest in
eternal peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Samoa.

King Malietoa played an important and valued
role in the history of Samoa. He was one of the

07-34389

3

A/61/PV.96

Mr. Elisaia (Samoa) (spoke in Samoan): Aue! ua
maliliu toa, ua maumau ai auupega o le taua’.
(spoke in English)
How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of
war perished! So lamented David upon hearing of the
death of his best friend, Jonathan, and his father, King
Saul.
The Government and people of Samoa, on whose
behalf I speak, are touched by the honour accorded to
our beloved, the late head of State of Samoa, His
Highness Susuga Malietoa Tanumafili II. The
expressions of sympathy and the messages of
condolences from the representatives of the regional
groups, the Government of the United States of
America as host country, and the Kingdom of Tonga on
behalf of our Pacific Islands Forum group will
continue to be a source of strength and inspiration for
our people to draw from in our nation’s darkest hour,
as we try to come to terms with the enormity of our
loss.
To be superfluous on occasions like this can be a
tempting diversion, but that is not my mission or my
goal. It is equally difficult not to be emotional, but I
will try not to succumb. Why? Because if the heart
bleeds, it bleeds because it feels the truth. How I wish
that this occasion would not have taken place and that I
did not have to stand before the Assembly and grieve
the loss of His Highness the late head of State, who for
me was the embodiment and personification of
everything best in the Fa’a Samoa.
Educated in Samoa and New Zealand, holder of
one of Samoa’s four royal titles and a prominent leader
for 22 years during the pre-independence era, His
Highness was already groomed to lead Samoa into
uncharted waters when he became joint head of State
with the late Tupua Tamasese Meaole, upon Samoa’s
attainment of statehood in 1962. A year later, when
Tupua Tamasese Meaole passed away, in 1963,
Malietoa Tan Tanumafili II became sole head of State,
a title he held for 44 years, until his death last Friday.
His astute and enlightened stewardship of
Samoa’s destiny for 45 years will always be
remembered for the political stability, the social
cohesion and unity, peace and progress that Samoa has
enjoyed and continues to enjoy to this day —
something that some of us have come to take for
granted.

4

Malietoa Tanumafili II was a humble man. He
was very much loved and respected by Samoans of all
walks of life. He was at home with royalty as much as
with ordinary people. He shunned the limelight but
would warm up to people irrespective of their status
and political leanings. Appropriately, the birthday of
His Highness is marked by a public holiday as a sign of
national respect.
On a few occasions, I personally witnessed His
Highness driving his golf cart on a pier unescorted.
Together with his love for golf and a tolerance for the
different faith-based churches in Samoa, all those
avenues provided for greater people-to-people
interactions and contacts between His Highness and the
average Samoan.
It is Samoa’s late head of State whose memory I
am here to mourn. Indeed, he was a true people’s
leader whose unassuming demeanour helped break
down artificial barriers between royalty and commoner,
between traditionalist and modernist, between the
mainstream churches and evangelical movements and,
in the process, really helped to lay the foundation for
the development of Samoa as a modern country.
But perhaps his most enduring legacy was his
capacity to bridge the divide between the pre- and postindependence Samoa by adapting and moulding the
best the world had to offer to the Samoan cultures and
traditions that are grounded firmly on the Christian
principles and values upon which Samoa is founded.
His clear vision was to guarantee that our identity as
Samoans would not be compromised and that it
continues to be firmly rooted in a living and dynamic
Samoan culture that is resilient to change and able to
absorb and blend the best from both worlds.
(spoke in Samoan)
“Aue, ua tagi nei le fatu male eleele” ‘Tau is ina
is pau se toa, ae toe tulai se toa’
(spoke in English)
Alas, the stones and the earth wept with profound
anguish at the loss of our beloved leader.
We are reassured by the wisdom of our
forefathers who decreed that at the fall of one great
warrior, may his successor be equal to the task that lies
ahead.
Even in Samoa’s hour of darkness, the spirit and
the works of His Highness live on. Farewell, Malietoa,

07-34389

A/61/PV.96

and in your honour, I am wearing this lei, which was
your favourite. God bless and thank you.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/61/709/Add.5)
The President: I would like to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to document A/61/709/Add.5,
in which the Secretary-General informs the President
of the General Assembly that since the issuance of his
communication contained in document A/61/709 and
Adds.1 through 4, Kyrgyzstan has made the necessary
payment to reduce its arrears below the amount
specified in Article 19 of the Charter. May I take it that
the General Assembly duly takes note of the
information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 114
Multilingualism
Report of the Secretary-General (A/61/317)
Draft resolution (A/61/L.56)
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of France to introduce draft resolution
A/61/L.56.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
It is an honour for me to present to the General
Assembly the draft resolution under agenda item 114,
on multilingualism (A/61/L.56), which delegates have
before them. This text, which in a few moments will be
adopted by consensus, is the result of negotiations that
my delegation has had the privilege of coordinating
since February.
At the outset I would like to thank the very many
delegations that took part in the meetings conducted by
France, thus showing their interest and devotion to the
principle of multilingualism. I would like to emphasize
that for the first time, before the actual
intergovernmental negotiations, we were in a position
to hold several question-and-answer sessions with the
Secretariat — whose availability I would like to pay
tribute to — especially on the Secretary-General’s
report on multilingualism. These informal exchanges
were, I think, very useful, and their use should
certainly be renewed.

07-34389

The negotiating process conducted by my
delegation was carried out in a constructive spirit, with
the support of everybody. The inclusive and ultimately
consensual nature of our discussions constituted the
cornerstone of our approach to this draft resolution.
Although it is difficult for me to dwell on one or
another aspect of the draft resolution, it seems to me
that it responds to two requirements: to ensure a global
approach to the issue of multilingualism, and to
promote an ambitious and at the same time reasonable
vision.
First of all, the text guarantees a comprehensive
approach to the question of multilingualism because
the General Assembly recalls the need to strictly
observe the rules laid down for the linguistic regime in
the United Nations with regard to both working
languages and official languages. The cross-cutting
nature of this resolution can be measured by the
yardstick of the subjects it deals with: daily activities
of the Organization, that is, conference services, public
information — and, more specifically, the website —
and human resource management, but also its external
activities, the proof of which is the positive
appreciation of the United Nations Information
Centres.
This comprehensive approach to multilingualism
is also found by the mention in the resolution of
languages other than working and official languages,
which naturally are included. Thus for the first time,
the General Assembly stresses the importance of
providing United Nations information, technical
assistance and training tools, whenever possible, in the
local languages of the beneficiary countries. Finally,
my delegation must express its satisfaction at the
mention, also for the first time in the resolution, of
languages used by persons with disabilities.
The text also defends a balanced and ambitious
view of multilingualism. It is balanced because it
shows constant budget costs. It is balanced also
because it mentions a number of initiatives and
measures already taken by the Secretariat. I am
thinking here of the launching of the United Nations
Intranet site, as well as the establishment of external
partnerships between the United Nations and
institutions of higher learning in order to increase the
number of Internet pages available, which is the case
for the Russian, Spanish and Chinese languages. The
resolution is also balanced, finally, because for the first
time mention is made of official languages of the

5

A/61/PV.96

United Nations that use non-Latin and bidirectional
scripts.
This draft resolution is also ambitious, because
the General Assembly decides to move ahead on a
number of specific issues. I have referred to some of
them already, but I would also like to mention the
proclamation of the year 2008 as International Year of
Languages, or the fact that the Assembly takes note of
the Secretary-General’s proposal regarding the
informal network of focal points responsible for
supporting the Coordinator for Multilingualism, whose
appointment the Assembly calls for.
The
adoption
of
this
resolution
on
multilingualism is not an end in itself, of course. It
constitutes an important step for the work of the United
Nations, because multilingualism is the linguistic,
cultural,
even
civilizational
equivalent
of
multilateralism. Let us not forget that the Charter of the
United Nations starts with the words: “We the peoples
of the United Nations”.
The right to use one’s language, the capacity to
communicate and thus to understand and make oneself
understood, and the preservation of a heritage that
might be hundreds or even thousands of years old must
be at the heart of the mission of the United Nations.
Two eminent nineteenth-century men of letters
summed up this issue perfectly. Stendhal said: “The
first instrument of a people’s genius is its language”,
and Goethe said: “Those who know nothing of foreign
languages know nothing of their own.”
We therefore deem it essential to mobilize so as
to give life to the principle of multilingualism within
and outside the United Nations. That is the objective of
this draft resolution.
I cannot conclude without warmly thanking the
draft’s many sponsors, who wished to show their full
support for it in a symbolic manner. A total of 113
Member States — a record for this resolution — have
agreed to sponsor the draft.
Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to take the floor in this debate on agenda item
114 on multilingualism. I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
informative report on multilingualism in the Secretariat
and for the important conclusions that it contains, in
addition to the recommendations on enshrining
multilingualism within the Secretariat.

6

I should like to take this opportunity also to thank
the coordinator of the draft resolution on
multilingualism that was submitted to the General
Assembly today and which was introduced by the
Ambassador of France. I should like to commend the
efforts of all parties that contributed to this consensus
text. Indeed, my delegation took part in the
consultations. Consensus has been reached on the draft
resolution, and we hope that we and all concerned
parties will implement it.
Tunisia is proud of its Arabic language. That is its
official language, in addition to French, which has
special status. Tunisia is proud of having made the
study of foreign languages a priority in its educational
system. We believe that multilingualism in the United
Nations, as enshrined through the use of the official
languages on an equal footing, in a non-preferential
manner, serves to enrich the work of the Organization
in the carrying out of its daily activities, in compliance
with the principles underpinning our Organization. It is
a forum for dialogue, consultation, respect, tolerance,
openness and acceptance of differences.
In addition to being a tool for dialogue and for
the effective participation of all in the work of the
Organization, each United Nations language carries
with it a certain cultural, cognitive and civilizational
baggage. Languages are vehicles for ideas, principles
and references that reflect various perspectives on the
future of humankind, without causing any alienation or
dispute among us. Thus safeguarding multilingualism
in the United Nations also means ensuring respect for
diversity as a source of wealth and enrichment.
Promoting the image of the United Nations in the
eyes of the general population involves raising
awareness of its work, its programmes and its
objectives through the balanced use of the official
languages. It is important, therefore, to ensure
conducive conditions and the necessary resources, on
an equal footing, for all United Nations languages. The
goal is to ensure respect, in actions and in words, for
the principle of linguistic equality throughout all the
activities of the Organization.
Despite the difficulties we are facing in achieving
parity among the official languages, we view this as a
priority issue. We must attach greater importance to it
and make additional efforts in that respect, especially
as regards the dissemination of official and unofficial
documents and interpretation during meetings.

07-34389

A/61/PV.96

In that respect, I should like to pay tribute to the
efforts made the Department of Public Information to
promote the principle of multilingualism and of parity
among the official languages in the work of the United
Nations in the audiovisual and electronic areas. Those
efforts have resulted in an increased interest on the part
of the public in the publications of the Organization.
For example, use of the Organization’s Arabic website
has increased by 41 per cent compared with 2004, and
use of French sites also has increased, by 33 per cent.
I am also pleased to note the work done by the
United Nations Information Centres and all the work
they are doing to disseminate information to the
general public through the use of local languages.
Lastly, I should like to reaffirm that the principle
of multilingualism is very important to the United
Nations because it is an essential pillar for interaction
among peoples. It is a tool that ensures greater
participation by all in our work. Thus we must preserve
the richness that languages bring by various means,
especially through the allocation of human resources
and through cooperation and coordination with
Member States and specialized agencies, on the basis
of a policy that takes into account the future needs of
our Organization in that area.
Mr. Vila Coma (Andorra) (spoke in French): I
am pleased to address the Assembly on agenda item
114, on multilingualism.
Andorra, because of its geographical situation
and its social and cultural diversity, has always been
very interested in this subject and understands the
specific issues involved. Andorra is once again a
sponsor of the draft resolution because we believe that
it will lead to respect for the balanced use of the
official languages of the United Nations and to the
safeguarding of languages as the foundation of cultural
diversity.
Today the General Assembly will adopt the draft
resolution on multilingualism, and we welcome this. I
should like to take this opportunity to commend the
excellent work done by the facilitator in conducting
our negotiations. In that regard, we welcome the
pivotal role of all those delegations that took part in the
discussions in order to arrive at a compromise text.
Mr. Golovinov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Multilingualism in the United Nations, as
expressed in particular through the use, in the

07-34389

Organization’s work, of the official and working
languages, forms the very basis of the universal
character of the Organization and is an important
means of achieving the fundamental purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The
experience
accumulated
over
the
Organization’s 60 years of existence makes clear that if
due attention is not paid by the United Nations to the
issue of safeguarding multilingualism in its daily work,
the harmonious integration of a growing number of
countries in the practical work of the United Nations
will prove difficult.
The promotion of parity among the six official
languages of the United Nations is essential to ensure
genuine multilingualism in the Organization. That
includes ensuring unimpeded communication among
representatives
of
Member
States
and
intergovernmental or expert bodies in all official
languages through high-quality conference services
and the achievement of linguistic parity in website
design and in the Organization’s public information
activities. In that connection, we emphasize the need to
swiftly complete the process of including all official
documents throughout the Organization’s history on
the United Nations website in all official languages.
Preserving and strengthening the principle of
multilingualism at the United Nations is also essential
in ensuring that the peoples of the world have reliable
information about the work of the Organization, thus
increasing international support for that work. Nor
must we forget that the principle of equality among
United Nations official languages means that equal
treatment must be given to all language services of the
Secretariat, viewing their resource and staffing
provisions in the light of actual workload. That will
largely determine the quality of the services that they
provide to Member States.
Russia attaches great importance to genuine
multilingualism at the United Nations and throughout
the world as a means of enhancing mutual
understanding among peoples, the exchange of
knowledge, values and positive experiences, and
mutual spiritual enrichment through a balanced
dialogue among cultures. In that connection, Russia
welcomes UNESCO’s initiative to proclaim 2008 as
the International Year of Languages.
draft

Finally, I wish to emphasize that, in our view,
resolution A/61/L.56, on multilingualism,

7

A/61/PV.96

presented today for the consideration of Member States
is another serious step on the path towards the
attainment of one of the Organization’s most important
objectives. Russia, as one of the sponsors of the draft
resolution, calls upon Member States to lend it their
unanimous support.
Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French):
Romania attaches particular importance to the biennial
adoption of a General Assembly resolution on
multilingualism. Linguistic diversity is an integral and
essential part of cultural diversity and a sine qua non
for the development of humanity in its diverse forms
and manifestations. Indeed, multilingualism is the best
way of expressing the very essence of the multilateral
nature of the United Nations.
In that connection, we welcome the fact that the
text to be put to the vote shortly reaffirms the need to
ensure that all United Nations official languages are
given equal treatment in the world Organization’s
activities. In particular, Romania welcomes the
references in draft resolution A/61/L.56 to the work
carried out in local languages by the United Nations
information centres, to the development of United
Nations websites in the six official languages and to
the proclamation of 2008 as the International Year of
Languages. Here, I wish to mention the efforts made
and the encouraging results achieved by the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management — a Department that assists you, Madam
President, in a very professional manner.
We believe that the next resolution on
multilingualism, in 2009, could offer an even more
favourable framework for the inclusion of an explicit
reference to peacekeeping operations. That proposal
was made this year by the Canadian delegation and was
supported by the francophone group and other
countries. The fifth International Day of United
Nations Peacekeepers, which will be observed shortly,
on 29 May, will be an opportunity for renewed
reflection about the effectiveness and importance of
good interaction — including with regard to linguistic
comprehension — between United Nations forces and
local populations.
I should like to warmly thank France for having
undertaken the task of coordinating the negotiations
and for having brought us, in a patient and clearsighted
manner, to a final consensus after more than three
months of debate. Indeed, the negotiations aroused

8

increased interest — sometimes even contradictory
interest — on the part of many delegations. While the
terms “flexibility” and “constructive spirit” might now
seem like leitmotifs sometimes intended to conceal
what could be perceived as a lack of progress, they
nevertheless reflect — when demonstrated by
everyone — the conditions necessary for effective and
meaningful collective action.
Finally, my delegation wishes to thank all
delegations that demonstrated flexibility and a genuine
constructive spirit throughout the negotiations. Like
my French colleague, we wish to note the impressive
record number of sponsors of the text: 113 countries.
Mr. Seye (Senegal) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank the French delegation, which
coordinated the negotiations on draft resolution
A/61/L.56, for its tireless efforts to arrive at a balanced
text on a subject of such great importance as
multilingualism. This cross-cutting topic deserves our
full attention, because multilingualism relates to the
daily activities of the United Nations, whether here or
in the field.
My delegation believes that the cross-cutting
nature of multilingualism is a sine qua non for
compliance with the principle of equal treatment of
languages in the United Nations system. Like my
colleague from Romania, I should like to express the
hope that we will see a reference to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the next resolution on this
item, because we believe that intervention on the
ground should involve the use of languages that can be
understood by the populations for whom the work of
the Organization is intended. To that end, we hope for
even greater flexibility in the future on the part of the
delegations that participated in the negotiations. Those
delegations, it must be said, demonstrated flexibility,
but — I am thinking of the future — could make more
concessions and show more understanding for the
benefit of all nations that use the daily services of the
Organization.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/61/L.56. I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to inform

07-34389

A/61/PV.96

members that, in connection with draft resolution
A/61/L.56, entitled “Multilingualism”, I wish to place
on record the following statement on financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
Under the terms of operative paragraph 4 of the
draft resolution, the General Assembly would request
the Secretary-General
“to ensure that all language services are given
equal treatment and are provided with equally
favourable working conditions and resources,
with a view to achieving maximum quality of
those services, with full respect for the
specificities of the six official languages and
taking into account their respective workloads”.
Further, under the terms of operative paragraph
27 of the draft resolution, the General Assembly would
request the Secretary-General “to submit to the General
Assembly at its sixty-third session a comprehensive
report on the full implementation of its resolutions on
multilingualism”. In that regard, any resulting resource
implications will be addressed in the report of the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its sixtythird session on the implementation of the present draft
resolution, as called for under operative paragraph 27.
The President: Before we proceed to take action
on the draft resolution, I should like to announce that,
since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become co-sponsors: Angola,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Colombia, Guyana, Iceland, Iraq,
Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Nicaragua, Peru, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Suriname, Timor-Leste, the United Arab
Emirates, Uzbekistan and Zambia.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/61/L.56.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.56?
Draft resolution A/61/L.56
(resolution 61/266).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 114?
It was so decided.

07-34389

Agenda items 7 and 106 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items: request of the reopening of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 106: Appointment of
members of the Committee on Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/562/Add.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly concluded its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 106 — Appointment of
members of the Committee on Contributions — at its
54th plenary meeting on 16 November 2006.
In order for the Assembly to consider the report
of the Fifth Committee under that sub-item, it will be
necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 106.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 106?
It was so decided.
The President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed to the consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 106 at the present meeting
to take up the report of the Fifth Committee?
It was so decided.
Introduction of the reports of the Fourth and
Fifth Committees
The President: The Assembly will now turn to
the report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) on agenda item 33 and
the report of the Fifth Committee on sub-item (b) of
agenda item 106.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of these two
Committees which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the
Committees have been made clear in the Committees
and are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that

9

A/61/PV.96

“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) and Fifth Committee, I should like
to advise representatives that we are going to proceed
to take decisions in the same manner as was done in
the Committees, unless notified otherwise in advance.
I should therefore hope that we may proceed to
adopt without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the respective Committees.
Agenda item 33
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/61/409/Add.1)
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in
paragraph 9 of its report.
I now call on the representative of Uganda for an
explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Before a vote is taken, I
thought I should take the floor just to underscore the
importance of the Secretary-General’s report and the
accompanying draft resolution on peacekeeping.
My country attaches great importance to the
peacekeeping role of the United Nations, not only
because Uganda has its forces in various peacekeeping
operations undertaken by the Organization, but also
because deploying peacekeeping operations is one of
the important roles played by the United Nations and
therefore deserves our wholehearted support.

10

Secondly, I would also draw attention to the fact
that, yesterday, the Security Council adopted a
resolution extending the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). Uganda keenly followed that
action because, among other things, the resolution
mandates MONUC to disarm rebel forces in the eastern
Congo. We commend that and we hope that MONUC,
as one of the United Nations peacekeeping operations,
will proceed to do so.
Lastly, on the issue of sexual exploitation, we
support the whole concept of zero tolerance. Indeed,
peacekeepers should be peacekeepers and not peace
abusers. In this connection, it should also be
remembered that because of poverty some of the
victims are willing victims, as it were, participating in
their sexual abuse. Therefore it is important that the
underlying factors be addressed — namely, those
stemming from poverty — as a way of helping to
redress this scourge.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision
on
the
draft
resolution
entitled
“Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate
future sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations”. The Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/267).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 33.
Agenda item 106 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/562/Add.1)
The President: In accordance with the decision
taken earlier, the General Assembly will now consider
the report of the Fifth Committee on sub-item (b) of
agenda item 106, entitled “Appointment of members of
the Committee on Contributions” (A/61/562/Add.1).
The Fifth Committee recommends in paragraph 4 of its

07-34389

A/61/PV.96

report that the General Assembly appoint Mr. Thomas
Thomma of Germany as a member of the Committee
on Contributions for a term of office beginning today,
16 May 2007, and ending on 31 December 2008.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint Mr. Thomas Thomma of Germany
as a member of the Committee on Contributions for a
term of office beginning on 16 May 2007 and ending
on 31 December 2008?

07-34389

It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 106?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

11
