120

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

sions, in conjunction with relevant United Nations specialized agencies and multilateral development institutions, might suggest ways of
improving United Nations assistance efforts and enhancing their coordination in the context of the particular economic and social
development needs of each region.
175. At the sectoral level, the relevant specialized agencies, organs
and organizations of the United N ations will con tribute from the experience of their respective sectors to the process of review and appraisal at both the global and regional levels.
176. At the global level, review and appraisal will be carried out by
the General Assembly, with the assistance, as appropriate, of a body
of universal membership, which would report through the Economic
and Social Council. The process will take into account the results
achieved at the sectoral. regional and national levcls. The Committee
for Development Planning will be invited to submit its observations
and recommendations. The Secretary-Gencral will prepare and submit
a comprehensive report and other appropriate documentation in order
to assist the process of review and appraisal.
177. Developed countries, individually or through their relevant
organizations, are invited to transmit reports of lheir development assistance efforts in the light of the commitments undertaken by them in
the lnternational Development Strategy and in relevant international
forums.
178. The process of review and appraisal should, based on an assessment as provided for in General Assembly resoldion 33/201 of
29 January 1979, ensure that the operational activities of the United
Nations system con tribute effectively to the implementation of the International Development Strategy.
179. The review and appraisal will. at all levels, take into account
the results of the global negotiations relating to international
economic co-operation for development, the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, the International
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, and of such United Nations conferences as effectively contribute to the implementation of the Strategy,
as well as the results of relevan! regional and interregional meetings.
The agreed results will be incorporated in the Strategy by the General
Assembly when and as appropriate. with a view to contributing to its
effective implementation.
180. The first review and appraisal will be carried out by the
General Assembly in 1984, on which occasion a decision as to the timing of a subsequent review or reviews will be taken.

35/57.

Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New lnternational
Economic Order, contained in its reso lu tions 3201 ( S- V 1)
and 3202 (S-VI) of I May 1974, and the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States, contained in its
resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, which
laid down the foundations of the new international
economic order,
Bearing in mind article 34 of the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and General Assembly rcsolution 3486 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, relating to
the review of the implementation of the Charter,
Concerned by the limited and partial progress in the
attainment of the aims and objectives established in the
resolutions on the new international economic order
and in the implementation of the provisions contained
in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of Sta tes
which are directed towards more just and equitable
economic relations and towards the structural changes
needed to promote the development of developing countries,
Reaffirming solemnly the determination to establish a
new international economic order,

Mindful of the great importance that the international
community attaches to the launching and successful
conclusion of the round of global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development and to
the implementation of the International Development
Strategy for the Third U nited Nations Development
Decade, 41
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the assessment of the progress made in the establishment of the new international economic order and appropriate action for the promotion of the development
of developing countries and international economic cooperation, ''
1. Reaffirms the role of the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
lnternational Economic Order and of the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States as principal
sources for international economic co-operation for
development;
2. Urges Member States, in this context, to take ali
appropriate measures for the launching and successful
conclusion of the round of global negotiations and the
implementation of the lnternational Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade;
3. Decides, in the light of the results of the negotiations on international economic co-operation for
development, to hold at its thirty-sixth session a comprehensive, in-depth review of the implementation of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, as
provided for in article 34 thereof.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December l 980
35 / 58.

Specific action related to the particular needs and
problems of land-locked developing countries

The General Assemb/y,
Reiterating the specific actions related to the particular needs of the land-locked developing countries
stated in resolutions 63 (111) of 19 May 1972," 98 (IV) of
31 May 1976"' and 123 (V) of 3 June 1979' 7 of the
United N ations Conference on Trade and Development,
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 31 / 157 of
21 December 1976, 32/191 of 19 December 1977, 33/150of
20 December 1978 and 34/ 198 of 19 December 1979 and
other resolutions of the United Nations relating to the
particular needs and problems of land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly, its related organs and the
specialized agencies, emphasizing special and urgent
measures in favour of land-locked developing countries,
Recognizing that the lack of territorial access to the
sea, aggravated by remoteness and isolation from world
markets. and the great transit, transport and transshipment costs impose serious constraints on their
socio-economic development,
'' See resolution .15/56 above. annex.
"A/S-11/5 and Corr.1 and Add. I-3.
'' See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development. Third Session, vol. l. Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.7.1.11.D.4), annex l.A.
"!bid.. Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D. IO and corrigendum). part one.
sect. A.
"!bid., Fifth Session, vol. l. Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14). part one. sect. A

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting with concern that the measures taken so far in
favour of land-locked developing countries and the assistance given fall far short of their needs.
l. Reaffirms the right of land-locked developing
countries to free access to and from the sea and their
right to freedom of transit;
2. Appeals to ali States, international organizations
and financia! institutions to implement, as a matter of
urgency and priority, the specific actions related to the
particular needs and problems of land-locked developing countries envisaged in resolutions 63 (111), 98 (IV)
and 123 (V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and in other relevant resolutions of
the United Nations;
3. Urges ali donor countries, as well as those in a
position to do so and the international organizations
concerned, to provide land-locked developing countries
with appropriate financia! and technical assistance in
the form of grants or concessional loans for the construction and improvement oftheir transport and transit
infrastructures and facilities;
4. Urges a/so the international community and multilateral and bilateral financia] institutions to intensify
efforts in raising the net flow of resources to land-locked
developing countries to help offset the adverse effects of
their disadvantageous geographical situation on their
economic development efforts, in keeping with the overall economic situation of each land-locked country;
5. Invites the transit countries to co-operate effectively with the land-locked developing countries in harmonizing transport planning and promoting other joint
ventures in the field of transport at the regional, subregional and bilateral levels;
6. Commends the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and other United Nations agencies
for their work and the assistance they have provided to
the land-locked developing countries and invites them to
continue to take appropriate and effective measures to
respond to the specific needs of those countries;
7. Further invites the international community to
give financia! support to interested transit and landlocked developing countries in the construction of alternative routes to the sea;
8. Recommends continued and intensified activities
relating to the conducting of necessary studies and
the implementation of special actions and action programmes for the land-locked developing countries, including those in the area of economic co-operation
among developing countries, as well as those that have
been e·nvisaged in the programme of work of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the
regional commissions and other programmes and
activities at the regional and subregional levels.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980
35/59.

Particular problems facing Zaire with regard to
transport, transit and access to foreign markets

The General Assembly,
Having considered the interim report of the SecretaryGeneral on the particular problems facing Zaire with
regard to transport, transit and access to foreign
markets, 4 '
"A/35/512.

121

Reca/ling resolution 110 (V) of 3 June 1979 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,4'
Recalling further its resolutions 32/ 160 of 19 December 1977, concerning the Transport and Communications Decade in A frica, and 34/ 193 of 19 December
1979, in which it requested the Secretary-General to take
the necessary steps to accelerate the implementation of
resolution 11 O (V) of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development and to report thereon to the
General Assembly,
Regretting that the measures provided for in resolution 34/193 have not been implemented,
A ware of the particular difficulties facing Zaire
beca use of the problems encountered by its foreign trade
with regard to transport, transit and access to foreign
markets,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral48 on the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 34/193 concerning the particular problems
facing Zaire with regard to transport, transit and access
to foreign markets;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts with a view to enabling the appropriate organs of
the United Nations to provide the necessary technical
assistance as soon as possible to the Government of
Zaire and to report thereon to the General Assembly at
its thirty-sixth session.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/60.

United Nations Conference on trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
lnternational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 Septem_ber 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Trade and Development Board on its eleventh special session and twentieth session 40 and on its twenty-first session; 10
2. Notes with satisfaction the adoption, on 27 June
1980, of the Agreement Establishing the Common Fund
for Commodities' t and the pledges already announced
for voluntary contributions to its second account, and
urges ali Governments to complete expeditiously the
procedures required for its signature, ratification, acceptance or approval, so that it may enter into force as
early as possible;

3. A/so notes with satisfaction the adoption, on
24 May 1980, of the United Nations Convention on lnternational Multimodal Transport ofGoods 12 and urges ali
Governments to consider signing the Convention and
taking the necessary steps to become contracting parties
to it as expeditiously as possible;
---

" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Supp/ement No. /5 (A/35, 1 15), vol_ l.
1
" !bid., vol. 11.
'' TD/IPC/CF/CONF 1 24.
'' TD/MT /CONF/16
