A /72/PV.106

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

106th plenary meeting

Friday, 13 July 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Agenda item 114 (continued)

Agenda item 7 (continued)

Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections

Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items

(d) Election of fifteen members of the Human
Rights Council

The President: I invite the attention of the General
Assembly to a letter dated 2 July 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United
Nations, circulated in document A/72/924, concerning
the vacant seat following the withdrawal of the United
States of America from the Human Rights Council. As
a vacancy has occurred in the Council, a new member
must be elected to fill the unexpired term of the United
States of America.

The President: Pursuant to resolution 60/251
of 15 March 2006, and taking into account that the
vacancy occurred from among Western European and
other States, the new member should be elected from
that region. The new member shall be elected directly
and individually, by secret ballot, by the majority of
the members of the General Assembly. Accordingly,
97 votes would constitute a majority in the General
Assembly, which has a membership of 193 States.

Before we proceed further, members will recall
that the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of sub-item (d) of agenda item 114 at its 31st plenary
meeting, on 16 October 2017. For the Assembly to
proceed with the election of one member of the Council
to fill the vacancy, it will be necessary to reopen the
consideration of the sub-item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen the consideration of sub-item (d) of
agenda item 114?
It was so decided.

I should like to inform members that the following
States from among Western European and other States
are currently represented on the Human Rights Council:
Australia, Belgium, Germany, Spain, Switzerland and
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland. The names of these six States should therefore
not appear on the ballot.
The election will be held in accordance with the
relevant rules of procedure of the General Assembly on
elections. For this election, rules 92 and 93 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly shall be applied,
on the understanding that balloting will continue until
one candidate receives the required majority, that is, the
majority of the members of the General Assembly, in
accordance with resolution 60/251, provided that, after

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-22211 (E)

*1822211*

A/72/PV.106

13/07/2018

the third inconclusive ballot, votes may be cast for any
eligible Member.

the ballot paper is checked, the name of that State does
not need to be repeated on the blank line.

If three such unrestricted ballots are inconclusive,
the next three ballots shall be restricted to the two
candidates who obtained the greatest number of votes
in the third round of the unrestricted ballots, and the
following three ballots thereafter shall be restricted,
and so on. The election shall be held by secret ballot.

The number of checked boxes and/or handwritten
names should not exceed the number of the vacant seats
to be filled, as indicated on the ballot paper. A ballot
will be declared invalid if it contains more than one
name for the one vacant seat from the region. If a ballot
paper contains the names of Member States that do not
belong to the region concerned or names of Member
States from that region that are current members of the
Council, the ballot paper remains valid but the vote for
these Member States will not be counted.

Consistent with past practice, if, due to a tie vote,
it becomes necessary to determine one candidate that
will proceed to the next round of restricted balloting,
there will be a special restricted ballot limited to those
candidates that have obtained an equal number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
these procedures?
It was so decided.
The President: I have also been informed by the
Secretariat that a document setting out the voluntary
pledges and commitments of a candidate for the seat,
in accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution 60/251,
has been issued as an official document of the seventysecond session of the General Assembly (A/72/923).
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition, ballot
papers will be given only to the representative seated
directly behind the country’s nameplate.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected.
In accordance with resolution 71/323 of 8 September
2017, the name of the State that has been communicated
to the Secretariat, at least 48 hours prior to the election
today, has been printed on the ballot paper for the one
regional group concerned. Also, an additional blank
line corresponding to the number of the vacant seat to
be filled for the regional group has been provided on the
ballot paper for inscribing another State, as necessary.
I request representatives to use only the ballot papers
that have been distributed. Members are requested to
put an “X” in the box next to the name printed on the
ballot paper or write the name of another eligible State
on the blank line. If the box next to the name printed on
2/3

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Přikrylová
(Czech Republic), Ms. Rheindrayani (Indonesia),
Ms. Bailey (Jamaica), Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal),
Ms. Lyngdorf (Sweden) and Mrs. Harqoos (United
Arab Emirates) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 10.20 a.m. and
resumed at 10.40 a.m.
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
Group E — Western European and other States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
178
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
178
Abstentions:
5
Number of members present and voting:
173
Required majority:
97
Number of votes obtained:
Iceland
France

172
1

Having obtained the required majority, Iceland
was elected a member of the Human Rights Council
for a term of office beginning on 13 July 2018 and
ending on 31 December 2019.
The President: I congratulate Iceland on having
been elected a member of the Human Rights Council.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 114.
18-22211

13/07/2018

Agenda item 55 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/72/449/Add.1)
The President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) which is before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Accordingly, statements will be
limited to explanations of vote. May I remind members
that under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“[w]hen the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee”.

A/72/PV.106

May I also remind delegations that, also in accordance
with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take a decision in the
same manner as was done in the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), unless
notified otherwise in advance.
The General Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 6 of its
report. The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution recommended by the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/304).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 55.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

18-222113/3
