.h.

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 15 AUGUST 1973

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 740) . , . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

,. ... ,..... . .. ,. ,. . .. .., . ... ,,. .,. ,. .,

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/lO983)...............................‘...,.,..,,,,,

1

Adoption of the agenda

s/w. 1740

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTIETH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
fk’sidclrt: Mr. John SCALI (United Statesof America),
fic~lt:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda(S/Agenda/l 740)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
I.’ Ttle situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated I1 August 1973 from the Permanent
k2prescntative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10983).
The tnceting wascalled to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The age&a wasadopted,
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the PermanentRepresentative of Lebanon to the United Nationsaddressed
to
the President of the Security Council (S/10983)

MEETING

15 August 1973, at 3 pm.

just beencirculatedand which containsa draft resolution
submittedby Franceandthe United Kingdom.
4. Sir DonaldMAITLAND (United Kingdom):I have the
honour on behalf of the delegationsof France and the
United Kingdom to introduce the draft resolutioncontainedin documentS/10987.
5. The preambularparagraphs
of the draft resolutionare, I
hope, self-explanatoryand non-controversial.They bring
out the view unanimouslyexpressed
by the members
of this
Council that the action we have beenconsideringconstituted a violation of Lebanesesovereigntyand territorial
integrity and an interferencewith internationalcivil aviation, contrary to the principlesof the Charterof the United
Nationsand the provisionsof internationallaw.
6. Operative paragraph1 expressesthe Council’s condemnation of the Governmentresponsiblefor the act
committed on 10 August. Paragraph
2 setsout the international instruments,the principlesand the resolutions
which have beenviolated by this action. Paragraph3 is
directedtowardsaction by the InternationalCivil Aviation
Organizationto safeguard
internationalcivil avjationagainst
acts of this kind. The purposeof paragraph4 of the draft
resolutionisto preventthe repetitionof suchactsasthat of
10August.

7. In this draft the sponsorshave soughtto reflect the
viewsexpressed
by all membersof the Council.It may not
would wish.But I shouldlike
I. The PIIESIDENT: In accordance with the decision go asfar assomedelegations
to
remind
the
Council
that
at the conclusionof his
token at the 1736th meeting, I shallnow, with the consent
of fhc Council, invite the representativesof Lebanonand statementyesterdaymorning(1737th meting] our French
colleagueexpressedthe hope, in view of the clear-cut
Israel to take places at the Council table in order to
characterof the complaint,that the Councilwould take a
pxticipate in the discussion,without the right to vote.
decisionwithout delay andunanimously.I believethat this
epitomizes
clr the irzvirution of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra statement,which my delegationfully endorses,
the
essential
duty
of
this
Council
in
face
of
the
issueWe
(Lebarton) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took placesat the
havebeenconvenedto consider.The sponsors
trust that the
,Swurify C~xuzcil table.
Council will agree that the draft resolutionfulfils that
essential
duty.
.’ . The PRESIDENT: I shall next, in accordancewith our
previous decisions, and with the consent of the Council,
invite the representatives of Iraq, Egypt and the People’s 8. The PRESIDENT: There areno more namesinscribed
Unlessany representativewishesto
Democratic Republic of Yemen to take the placesreserved Qnmy list of speakers,
speak,
I
would
propose’that
the Council proceednow to
for them at the sideof the Council chamber.
vote on the draft resolution contained in document
S/10987.As no delegationwishesto speak,the CouncilWill
.4I /he i,witution of the &esident, Mr. A. K. Al-Shaikhly
now proceedto vote on the draft resolution.
(Iruq). Mr. A. 1:. Abdel Meguid (Egypt) and Mr. A. S.
.&ftraf (ocmocratic Yemen) took the placesreservedfor
A vote wastaken by showof hands.
rf~rn al the sicleof the Councilchamber.
Thedraft resolutionwasadoptedunanimousi?.
’
3. The PRESIDENT: I wish to draw the attention of
1 See resolution
337 (1973).
members of the Council to document S/10987, which has

and political condemnation of Israel for its most recCRt
flagrant act of aggression against the sovereign State of
Lebanon and for the piratical action of the Israeli air force
against a Lebanese civil aircraft. In the statements of
practically all delegations, Israel was unmasked and cat+
gorically condemned as an aggressor blatantly violating the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
fundamental rules of international law, especiaIly those
concerning respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and the non-use of force or of the threat
of torte in international relations. Every delegation condemned this unprecedented act of State terrorism, ~~~~~~~
Israel long ago adopted as its State policy.

9. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives who have asked to be allowed to explain their votes
after the voting.
10. Mr. CHUANG
Yen (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): Having studied the draft resolution sponsored by
France and the United Kingdom, the Chinese delegation has
voted for it, but we deeIn it riecessary to make the
following statement and reservations.
11. First, the draft is inadequate in failing to put forward
effective measures for stopping Israel’s criminal acts. The
Chinese delegation maintains that the Security Cquncil
resolution should condemn Israel in stronger terms.

19. The Soviet delegation cannot but agree with those of
the representatives speaking in the Council who eInphasized
that this act of State terrorism and air piracy is the most
blatant violation of existing conventions aimed at con,bating the unlawful seizure of aircraft and protecting the
safety of international civil aviation.

12. Secondly, the Chinese delegation would like to point
out that, with regard to certain international Conventions
on civil aviation in whose formulation the People’s Kepublic of China did not take part, the Chinese Government
has yet to study them and cannot assume the obligations
thereunder at the present stage.

20. In our view, and in the view of many other members
of the Council and Members of the United Nations that
have spoken here, the Council must take effective measures
to put an end to Israel’s aggressive actions, in order to make
any repetition of acts of this kind completely impossible in
the future. The main weakness of the resolution jIIst
adopted is precisely that it makes no provision for such
measures. I shall return to this subject presently.

13. Mr. IBRAHIM
(Sudan): I wish to explain my delegation’s affirmative vote on the resolution which the
Council has just adopted. ln my statement yesterday I
stated clearly the position of my delegation that:
“Nothing short of applying sanctions against I’srael will
make Israel pause and think twice before it eInbarks on
any similar adventure, or make it learn that this Council
has political will, real authority
and self-respect.”
/ 1738th meeting, para. 24.]

21. The statements of many members of the Council and
representatives of other countries have exposed and condemned the attempts of the Israeli leaders to glorify their
policy of State terrorism and to justify their aggressive
actions against neighbouring Arab States. It should be
noted that the statements of the representative of Israel in
the Council were devoted to everything but the specific
case which the Council was convened to consider. The
Council heard no assurance from the representative of Israel
that such aggressive acts would never again be committed
by the Israeli military. Quite the contrary, the represcntative of Israel made it unmistakably clear that the Israeli
military will continue to resort to such provocations.

14. Naturally, we would have opted for a text clearly
reflecting that position. The resolution just adopted does
not fully satisfy the non-aligned countries and, naturally, it
does not fully satisfy the Arab countries. But, for the sake
of unanimity, which has its moral significance, and in order
to have a unanimously adopted resolution as a basis for
future effective steps, we accepted the draft resolution
submitted by the delegations of France and the United
Kingdom and decided not to introduce another draft
resolution.

22. Notwithstanding
all the shortcomings of the draft
resolution, the Soviet delegation voted in favour of it
because it contains a condemnation of Israel’s actions
against Lebanon. WC believe that a condemnation of Israel’s
actions by the Councii does reflect, even if perhaps
inadequately, the protest of world public opinion against
the State terrorism and air piracy practised by the ruling
circles of Israel and the Israeli military.

15. We appreciate the efforts made by the delegations of
France and the United Kingdom, and because of our
appreciation and in deference to their concern we decided
to vote for the draft resolution.
16. We hope that Israel will heed the resolutions of this
Council, that such flagrant acts will not be committed again
and that, if they are committed, this Council will live up to
its responsibility.

23. As to Soviet public opinion, it has responded with
revulsion and indignation to Israel’s act of air piracy against
the peace-loving Arab State of Lebanon and vigorously
protested against it. In particular, the newspaper Izsest&~~
in its issue of yesterday, 14 August 1973, stated the
following:

17. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translation from Russian): The Soviet delegation
would like to speak in explanation of its vote on the draft
resolution submitted by the French and the United
Kingdom delegations, which has just been unanimously
adopted,

“The piratical seizure of a Lebanese aircraft and the
new concentration of Israeli troops on the Lebanese aIld
Syrian frontiers is evidence of Israel’s intention to
continue its expansionist policy and to go on torpedoing
any political solution of the Middle East crisis.”

18. In their statements during the debate the members of
the Security Council and the representatives of other States
Members of the United Nations expressed their firm moral
2

24. The Soviet delegation feels deep concern at the fact
that during the past few days the press has published more
and nlore frequent reports concerning the concentration of
Israeli troops on the frontiers of Lebanon and Syria and
that Israeli propaganda is even more intensively whipping
up war hysteria against the neighbouring Arab States,
apparently in an attempt to create conditions for carrying
out tile next act of aggression against them. Thus, according to reports published in the Lebanese press, Israeli
troops have been concentratingduring the pastfew daysall
along the Lebanesefrontier with Israel, from the Arquba
Heights and the town of Hermon to the coastaltown of
Naqura--that is to say, for a distance of about 120
kilometres. Large mechanizedunits of Israeli troops have
beer1 moving along the mountain roads.At the sametime,
units of the Israeli army have beenconcentratingin the area
of the occupied Golan Heightsin Syria, and Israelimilitary
aircraft have been carrying out flights over the frontier
areas of Syria and Lebanon.

sponsoredby France and the United Kingdom which has
just beenadopted unanimouslyby the Council.
29. Lebanon brought a specific complaint to the Council
against violation of its territorial integrity and sovereignty
by Israel and againstthe forcible hijacking of oneof its civil
airliners from its own airspace.One can draw satisfaction
from the fact that the Council not only hasconsideredthe
complaint but hasalsoconcludedits considerationof that
complaint with the unanimousadoption of a resolution
condemning the Government of Israel for its actions and
issuinga solemnwarning. Lebanonthus hasthe weight of
the support of the Security Council, and, throughit, of the
entire world community, in its legitimate complaintagainst
a terrorist act organizedby a State.
30. The resolution goesin the right direction and hasthe
additional merit of enjoying the unanimoussupport of the
Council. However, the fact still remainsthat it doesnot go
far enough. Here wasan undisputed caseof a Statehaving
utilized the resourcesat its commandto hijack a civilian
airliner from the territory of another State. The action
involved violation of the sovereignty of another State,
interference with international civil aviation and violation
of international Conventionsto which Israelitself is a party.
The action violated the principlesof the Charterand, asthe
resolution itself states,of international law and morality.
Yet the Council could not bring itself to condemnIsraelin
stronger terms.

25. In the light of thesedisturbing reports, which cannot
fail to arouse the concern not only of my delegationbut
also of the delegationsof other countries, the resolution
adopted today seemsto usall the weaker.
26.

In its statement at the 1736th meetingof the Council,

of 13 August, the Soviet delegationadvocatedthe adoption

by the Council of effective measuresto put an end to
Israel’s aggressiveactions, This reflects the Soviet Union’s
position of principle in the matter. We cannot, therefore,
fail to express our regret at the fact that the draft
resolution does not, in essence,
provide for the adoptionof
sanctions against Israel, which hasbeen systematicallyand
deliberately violating United Nations resolutionsand the
fundamental purposesand principlesof the Charter.Wesee
in this a weaknessof the resolution; we seein this a
manifestation of the Council’s lack of determination to
adopt measuresagainst Israel that would once and for all
prevent it from taking any aggressiveaction andwould put
an end to its countlessviolations of the Charterand of the
universally recognizedrulesof international law.

31. The safeguardsprovided in the resolution against
repetition of such actions by Israel in future are also
couched in very vagueterms. The warning couldhave been
more direct and specific,in termsof taking definitive action
in the event of a repetition of such acts in future, and not
in terms of only considering taking adequate stepsor
measures,

27. In the light of these remarks,the resolutionis, in our
view, merely a half-measure,a kind of palliative. Nevertheless, the, very fact ?hat the Council has condemned
IsraeI’s actions demonstrates once again the profound
political isolation of those who are trying to imposetheir
domination in the Middle East through force andarbitrary
action, I should like to hope that the resolutionadopted
today will be a useful, if incomplete, contribution to the
Inobilization of all of world public opinion againstthe State
terrorism, arbitrariness,violence and air piracy practisedby
Israel. As for the Soviet delegation, it has always emphasized, in the consideration of the present Lebanese
cornplaint as on all other occasions,the needfor the most
vigorous condemnation of Israel’s actions and for the
adoption by the Security Council of truly effective
measures to put an end to theseaggressive
actions.We are
convinced that by taking such a position, the Security
Council will be able to make far more progresstowards
ensuring peace and security in the Middle East.
28. Mr. JAIN (India): I shouldlike to say a few wordsin
explanation of our affirmative vote on the draft resolution
3

32. The reference made in the resolution to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) is also in
general terms.My delegationfeelsthat the Security Council
could have directed (CA0 to take appropriate measures
against this clear-cut violation of Conventionsconcerning
international civil aviation. Of course,in the normalcourse,
ICAO may act, but we would have thought that after the
Security Council had examined this questionin the over-all
context of the maintenance of international peaceand
security, it shouldhave not merely calledon ICAO to take
note of the resolution it was adopting, but givenit more
concrete guidelines for further action in its own limited
technical field.
33. The solemn warning, in our view, shouldhave been
clearer and more explicit, calling on Israel to desistfrom
any and all such acts againstany Member State. Today it
involved Lebanon, but it could involve any other State
tomorrow, and there was no reason why this element
should not have been brought out very clearly in the
resolution.
34. Lastly, as regardssafeguardsfor the future, onewould
have liked to seea provision calling on Statesto refrain
from extending assistance
to Israel which would encourage
it to repeat such actionsin future.

43. My delegation is also glad that the draft resolution, as
submitted and adopted by the Council, reflects in some
measure certain wishes of the non-aligned members that
had engaged in the lengthy consultations and negotiations
on the text.

35. However, the unanimous decision of the Council is
welcome, though it rests on a minimum basis of agreement.
Let us hope that Israel will give the resolution the
consideration it deserves to avoid repetition of such
incidents in future, since they not only are against the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations but can also
endanger the lives of innocent human beings. Here is an
opportunity for Israel to respond to a call from the entire
Security Council, and we shall await with interest that
response.

44. Having stated the reasons why my delegation voted
without any reluctance for the resolution just adopted, 1
would now for the sake of the record briefly state why we
think it did not go far enough, what we would have
preferred to see. First, we had hoped that the Council could
bring itself to describe Israel’s act more clearly as one of
State terrorism, because that is what it was. Our inability to
do so does not help our collective consideration of the
problem of terrorism and measures against it. Second, we
would have preferred paragraph 3 to refer to needed
measures specifically directed against Israel. We do not
think that that would have been illogical or prejudicial or
one-sided, for the simple reason that Israel happens to be
the only State that today not only hijacks pl.mes and
commits acts of air piracy but also asserts its right to do
that again, anywhere and any time. Third, we thought that
an operative paragraph recommending to countries to
refrain from any assistance to Israel that might encourage
such acts by it, or from any assistance to Israel if it were to
repeat such acts would be beneficial and reasonable.
Fourth, acting together with the non-aligned group, we
would have preferred a stronger condemnation.

36. Mr. ANWAR SANI (Indonesia): I shall be extremely
brief, as my delegation explained its views at yesterday
afternoon’s meeting of the Council [1738th meeting].
37. The resolution just adopted does not entirely reflect
those views. My delegation would have preferred a more
strongly worded resolution in condemnation of the Israeli
action. But, apparently, the text which has been adopted
by us proved to be the minimum acceptable to Lebanon,
which brought the complaint before the Council, and the
maximum acceptable to some of the members of the
Council. Therefore, my delegation decided to vote in favour
of the draft resolution in order to achieve the unanimous
condemnation of Israel.
38. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): Before I give my
delegation’s explanation of vote, let me take this opportunity to greet Sir Donald Maitland, the new representative
of the United Kingdom. I am sure that my delegation will
continue to enjoy the excellent relations and co-operation
with the United Kingdom delegation that we enjoyed when
it was headed by his worthy predecessor, Sir Colin Crowe,
who earned such a warm place in the hearts of all of us.

45. Nothing can detract from the historic fact that the
Council acted today as it did. If that warning does not deter
Israel, then it should be clear to everyone what we are
really faced with and what we shall have to do.
46. The PRESIDENT: As no other member of the Council
wishes to explain his vote at this stage, I shall put aside nlg
gavel as President of the Council and explain my voteas
representativeof the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

39. My delegation voted for the draft resolution sponsored
by France and the United Kingdom because, in some of its
essential parts, it meets the requirements of the situation
and because it contains some of the basic elements that are
needed, eIements that the Yugoslav delegation underlined
in the concluding part of its statement on Tuesday [I 737th
meeting].

47, Our vote today is a continuation of our efforts to
extend the rule of law. The United States hasconsistently
joined other membersof this Council to expressits grave
concern over the threat to the innocent resulting from
hijacking and other unlawful or unwarranted interference
with civil aviation. Our vote in no way representsa change
in my Government’s views on the probIems and the
possibilitiesfor solution in the Middle East, nor shouldit !X
interpreted as endorsing the principle of sanctionsasa
meansof dealingwith this problem.

40. The resolution unequivocally condemns Israel; it describes the nature of Israel’s deed; it is oriented, in
paragraph 3, towards measures to be taken by ICAO to
defend the international community from such Israeli
practices; it solemnly warns Israel against any repetition of
such acts that violate the Charter, international law and the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and endanger
the safety of international civil aviation.

48. The American people feel strongly about the needfor
a just peace in the Middle East. They feel strongly about
the need to eliminate all forms of international terrorism.
whether they be by individuals, groups or Governments.
They also feel strongly about the rule of law, in the
international field as at home. That is why I have OII two
occasionsobserved in this Council [1708th and 1738th
meetings] that the cycle of violence in the Middle Eastnol
only is continuing, to the shameof us all, but hastaken01)
newer and uglier dimensions: “To the shame of all
mankind, acts of violence and terror, often striking down
innocent people, are on the verge of becoming a routine
foot-note to tbc tragic and unresolved Arab-Israeli con.
flict.”

41. Two aspects of the adoption of this resolution we view
as particularly important and favourable: first, the unanimous condemnation of Israel for such an act, the condemnation by all 1.5 members of this Council; and
secondly, the fact that the Council so resolutely rejected
Israel’s claim to have any right, any grounds, on any pretext
whatsoever, to be the law unto itself.
42. The Council has indeed voted for the sanctity and
supremacy of the Charter and international law, for the
equal obligation of aIl countries to live by them and for no
entitlement by anyone to any special place outside them.
4

49. Today we have taken an important step towards the
reaffirmation
of the rule of law in international civil
aviation. Let me repeat what I said in this chamber on
Tuesday : “National and international efforts to control
terrorism
must go forward. They must, however, go
forward within and not outside the law.” [1738th meeting,

word of explanation why Governments, including those of
States members of the Security Council, have been and still
are releasing without trial, or even after conviction, Arab
terrorists who were caught red-handed in the perpetration
of their criminal acts.

para. 62.1

57. Nothing has been said in the course of the Security
Council debate that could weaken the incontrovertible
tenet of international law and the Charter whereby the
Arab States must be held responsible for the use of their
territory by murder organizations to wage an open campaign of barbaric atrocities against innocent human beings
in various parts of the world. Nothing said here was capable
of derogating from the evident truth that by harbouring
those organizations, by supporting them politically, financially and militarily, the Arab Governments are guilty of
persistent violation of Israel’s sovereign rights under the
Charter and the cease-fire, and in particular of the right to
security from armed attack.

50, The fact that this resolution confines itself to expressing the Council’s condemnation of a specific incident
should serve as no comfort to anyone contemplating illegal
acts of violence or terrorism. Rather, it is a warning to all
members of the world community that the community will
no longer tolerate illegal interference with one of the basic
means of communication from any quarter. Should there
be further instances of international lawlessness or terror, 1
most sincerely hope that this body will again demonstrate
ah-nilar unity and determination. Nor should our vote be
read to mean any commitment to any kind of specific
measures. Terrorism, illegal violence and threats to the
innocent must stop. Humanity demands it; our conscience
demands it.
51. We, for our part, will continue to oppose such actions
whether by Governments, individuals or groups, regardless
of nationality or of motivation.
52. Yesterday, I called on this Council to unite on a
resolution that would mark a turning-point in our efforts to
eliminate international lawlessness and terrorism. Only time
can tell whether we have done so. I pray the answer will be,
“YW”.

53. Speaking as PRESIDENT I call on the representative of
Israel now that we have concluded the explanations of vote.
54. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The resolution adopted by the
Security Council is the customary one-sided text this organ
has been producing on the Middle East situation. It closes
its eyes completely to the grave menace of Arab terrorism
which necessitated Israel’s defensive action on 10 August.
55. This is not unusual for the Council which during the
entire 25 years of the Middle East conflict has been unable
to make up its mind even once that armed attacks against
Israel by Arab States or from the territory of Arab States
constitute
transgressions against the Charter of the llnited
Nations and international law. This is not exceptional for
the Council which has never, not even once, brought itself
to condemn the murder of Israeli children, men and
women.
56. In these circumstances, the precise wording of the
resolution is of lesser import than its primary significancenamely, that the United Nations is unable to cope with
international
terrorism in general and with Arab terrorism
in particular. Indeed, no member of the Security Council
has challenged that basic fact. No one has suggested that
States should abdicate their duty to combat terrorism and
leave the struggle against that scourge to the helpless organs
of the international community. No one could have
suggested that Israel should rely on the Security Council or
the General Assembly to take effective measures against the
Arab campaign of violence and bloodshed. No one had a

58. No member of the Council could plausibly show that a
State which violates the sovereign rights of a neighbouring
country could at the same time substantiate the claim that
its own rights bar the injured country from defensive
action. Not a single tenable argument has been put forward
that in this situation Israel could be denied the right to
self-defence. Nobody has questioned the well-known fact
that other States-among them, permanent members of the
Security Council-have in similar conditions exercised their
right to self-defence in the same manner as Israel,
59. It is obvious to everybody that there must be one law
for all, and that Israel will not be an exception. No member
of the Security Council has dared to challenge Israel’s
judgement that the life of a single Israeli child is more
sacred than any claim of the inviolability of territory
serving as a base for aggression. Law exists for men, not vice
versa. The criminal individual or the State violating law
cannot seek refuge behind it. Everywhere and at all times
the protection of innocent lives takes precedence over
solicitude for the alleged rights of those who endanger
human life.
60. Consequently, those who hope that the world will be
rid of the murderers of defenceless men, women and
children, those who pray that massacres such as those of
Lod, Munich, Khartoum and Athens should never happen
again, can rest assured that Israel will not fail them. The
Government of Israel will continue its struggle against Arab
terrorism with determination and unswerving firmness. It
will continue to protect the lives of its citizens. It will give
no quarter to the ruthless killers of the innocent. It will
pursue them and strike at them until mankind is free of
their bloodthirsty savagery.
61. In striving towards that goal, Israel will co-operate
with all responsible Governments and all competent international organizations which seek to ensure international
security and the safety of world communications.
62. The PRESIDENT:
Lebanon.

I call upon the representative of

63. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Allow me at the outset,
Mr. President, to express to you and to all members of the

ment of Norway yesterday, do not accept having crirnkrah
from Israel go, under government orders and with falsified
passports, to commit crimes on the territory of ether
States.

Council the appreciation of the Lebanese Government and
that of my delegation for the unanimous vote that you have
cast on the draft resolution submitted by the delegations of
France and the United Kingdom. I am particularly grateful
to those two delegations, with whose countries my country
has the friendliest ties, for having taken the initiative of
submitting the draft resolution, and I am especially grateful
to Sir Donald Maitland, who has been pariicipating in the
Council for the first time, for the statement he made in
introducing the draft resolution. Naturally, I also want to
express to all delegations our gratitude for their moral and
political support, whether in the statements they made or
in the affirmative votes they cast on the draft resolution.
To you, Mr. President, I wish to express my gratitude for
your patience and forbearance in dealing with this matter
during many long hours of consultation and debate.

i

66. This resolution speaks of the hijacking of a Lebanese
civilian airliner by the Israeli air force. This is a perfect eat
of State terrorism, conducted, as is stated in the third
prearnbular paragraph, by Israel, a State Member of the
United Nations. That act of hijacking, as I said, has aroused
public indignation all over the world, and paragraph3 of
the resolution opens the door wide for measures to be
taken against any repetition of such an act by Israel; under
that paragraph, this matter will be pursued at the proper
time in ICAO when it next meets.
67. To give the Council only one further example of the
indignation that this act of Israel has aroused around the
world, let me read out a text that has just been brought to
my attention, This is the text of a telegram sent by the
Canadian Airline Pilots’ Association to Mr. Mitchell Sharp,
Minister for External Affairs of Canada. Mr. Wright, t11e
President of that Association, stated the following in that
telegram:

64. It has been said by some of our colleagues around this
table that this resolution represents for my delegation a
minimum. In a way it does. But, on the other hand, I must
express our satisfaction at the fact that it was adopted
unanimously and that in very clear terms it has condemned
the Government of Israel “for violating Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and for the forcible diversion
and seizure by the Israeli air force of a Lebanese airliner
from Lebanon’s air space”. We have resorted to the Council
before on several occasions following attacks and acts of
aggression by the Israeli air and land forces against
Lebanon. The Council has adopted resolutions. The Council
has warned Israel before us against repetition of its acts.
The Council has stated very clearly in several resolutions
that if such acts were to be repeated the Council would
meet again in order to consider taking or to take steps or
measures against the attackers, against the aggressors. We
know that this Council has today not gone as far as
that-something
that we would have welcomed-in order to
prevent repetition in the future of Israeli aggressions against
my country. However, we are satisfied with the open moral
and political support of the Council, which, in our view,
represents the conscience of mankind; it represents international public opinion, not only on the official level but
on every other level as well. The Israeli delegation occasionally refers to what they call “enlightened public
opinion”. I take it that the unanimity of this Council and
the internation,al opinion behind it definitely represent the
enlightened public opinion of the world, and that Israel’s
public opinion is self-serving in its assumption that it alone
represents the enlightened public opinion of the world.

“The recent diversion of an Iraqi commercialflight by
Israeli military planes over Lebanon was an act of
unlawful interference with civil aviation. In accordance
with the accepted norms of international law for the
protection of aviation, the Canadian Airline Pilots
Associationrequeststhat the CanadianGovernmentobtain
immediateassurances
from the Government of the State
of Israel that it will never againparticipate in or condone
acts of interference with civil aviation. Should suchrrn
undertaking on the part of the State of Israel not IX
forthcoming, we request that Canada suspendall corn
mercial air servicesby Israeli aircraft to andfrom Canada
until suchassurances
areobtained.”
That is another expressionof enlightened opinion around
the world.
68. In paragraph4 of the resolution, the Council warns
Israel againstthe repetition of its acts againstLebanon.AsI
stated before, despite such warningsin the past Israelhas
repeatedits attacks. It is only necessaryto look at tke
supplemental information distributed in, for instance,
documents S/7930/Add.2081, 2082, 2084 and 208S-.
coveringthe period of the last few days alone, that is,since
the time Israel committed its abominable act-to seethat
the Israeli air force hasbeenconstantly violating Lebanon’s
air spaceand sovereignty. Israeli planeshave been flyirtg
over Marjayoun, Nabatiye, Tibnine, Yaroun, and we no!e
from the latest reports today that they have been flying
over Sidon and the central part of Lebanon. They have
been breaking the sound barrier and terrorizing the popu.
lation of a peaceful country. Thesekinds of acts of terrar
could continue indefinitely if the Council doesnot meetits
responsibility in the event a serious act of aggression
is
againcommitted by Israel againstLebanon.

65. We have heard from the representative of Israel that
his Government will pursue its course, What does that mean
in fact? The Council has flatly rejected the assertion of the
Israeli delegation that Israel has the right to take the law
into its own hands, and you, Mr. President, have rightly said
that Governments should act within the law, not outside of
it. We consider the statement of the Israeli representative,
as well as those emanating from Israel, as another expression of defiance of the Security Council and the law of
nations. The act committed by Israel has aroused an uproar
of indignation throughout the world. Mr. Tekoah’s outburst
in the Council cannot drown out that uproar. If the Israeli
Government, by its special laws, tries to put itself above the
law, outside the law of the United Nations, this is indeed a
grave matter. Governments, as in the case of the Govern-

69. I understandMr. Tekoah’sconcern that the life of al!
Israelichild is perhapsworth more than the integrity of 0111
air spaceor our territorial integrity. But our children wire
6

---

have died by the dozens-1 repeat, by the dozens--as a
result of Israeli air attacks are also very dear to our hearts,
as dear as any child would be to his parents or any human
being to his nation. Mr. Tekoah wants to hold us, the Arab
Governments and Lebanon, always guilty. Guilty of what?
Of having put 1.5 million Palestinians out of their homeland and kept them in exile and living in misery and squalor
for 25 years? Guilty of what? Of occupying territories in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations? Guilty of
what’? Of violating the human rights of the populations in
the occupied territories? Guilty of what? Of the fact that,
against the will of the international community, Jerusalem
is being transformed into an Israeli city?

attempts to deny the Jewish people the right to self-determination and independence go back to the days when the
Nazi collaborators, with assistance from Nazi Germany,
organized the first terror raids against Jewish villages and
murdered innocent Jewish men, women and children. This
is not a phenomenon of the last few years. And even if it
were, the present situation is the result of one thing and
one thing only: the invasion of Israel by the Arab States in
1948, in defiance of the United Nations, and 25 years of
refusal to end this state of war, to conclude peace with
Israel; 25 years of continuous Arab aggression-the use of
military forces against Israel’s sovereignty and, when that
appeared to be too risky, the dispatch of the same kind of
murder gangs that we are witnessing these days operating
from Lebanon or from Syria.

70. Mr. Tekoah protests because the Council has not taken
action when some acts of violence have taken place now
and then, here and there. I have proposed to him in the
past, right here in the Council, that he should bring a case
to the Council and take my place here as plaintiff. But he
or his Government prefers to sit on the other side of the
Council table always as the accused, as the aggressor, as the
one who has breached international law. If Israel has any
cases, let it bring them to the Council and challenge the
Council to take action.

76. The representative of Lebanon knows very well that
for years and years Israeli-Lebanese relations and the
Israeli-Lebanese frontier were examples of tranquillity
despite the fact that Palestinian refugees in large numbers
had been living in camps of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) on Lebanese soil since 1948. This is a matter of
fact, This is a fact of history.

71. I should like to conclude at this point by saying again
that the Lebanese Government and people are grateful for
the Council’s support of our case, for the clear warning
given to Israel against a repetition of its acts. We trust that
the Council’s resolutions will be respected and will no
longer be treated with contempt.

77. It was only a few years ago-when Israel succeeded in
eliminating terror within those areas held by it following
the 1967 hostilities and when the Government of Jordan
suppressed these murderous groups within its territorythat it was decided to move the bases of those groups to
Lebanon, and it was only then that terrorist outrages from
Lebanese territory began. It was not I, it was not an Israeli
leader who defined those groups as an “army of occupation” in Lebanon. It was Lebanon’s President who said
that. It was not I, it was not an Israeli representative or
leader who spoke of the way these gangs exist in freedom,
organize themselves and plot their murderous activities in
complete freedom and without any hindrance as a state
within the State. It was the President of Lebanon who, as
recently as 5 May 1973, defined in those terms the same
murderous groups that the representative of Lebanon
comes before the Security Council to defend.

72. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Israel, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
73. Mr. TEKOAI-I (Israel): It is possible that the observations made by the representative of Lebanon regarding
Israel’s not requesting a meeting of the Security Council
might make some impression in the soaks of his capital, but
he is speaking to representatives of Member States with
sufficient
memory to know that for years and years, in
every single instance when Israel did appeal to the Security
CounciI for action against armed attacks-whether
by Arab
regular armies or by Arab irregular forces or by terrorist
gangs operating from the territories of Arab States-the
result was complete helplessness on the part of the Security
Council to rise above the application of the right of veto
and automatic majorities and the fact that there are 18
Arab States Members of the United Nations, while it SO
happens that there is only one Jewish State Member of this
Organization.

78. The representative of Lebanon spoke of the death of
Lebanese children. No Lebanese children, no Israeli
children would have died or would be dying were it not for
this policy, were it not, for these actions by the Arab
Governments and were it not for the continued existence
on their territories of organizations which openly wage a
campaign of ruthless, merciless murder of children and other
guiltless persons. Indeed it is high time to put an end to
that; but the only way to do it is by terminating the
existence of this army of occupation of the state within a
State which continues to operate in freedom, with the
connivance, with the full knowledge and with the support
of the Lebanese and other Arab Governments.

74. The representative of Lebanon has once again tried tc
explain the savage acts of violence and murder of innocent
human beings by referring to the refugee situation and to
the conditions resulting from the 1967 hostilities. Now, we
have dealt with these matters and with these claims at
length time and again. It would be sufficient for the
representative
of Lebanon to glance through the records of
the Security Council in order to find all the answers to
these unfounded allegations.

79. Ambassador Ghorra spoke of world public opinion,
claiming that it is behind him, claiming that it approves
what has been going on from Beirut as a base, centre and
headquarters for barbaric atrocities in various parts of the
world. Even Lebanese public opinion is not behind the case
which he presented here, because only yesterday morning a

75. For, first of all, as I pointed out only yesterday
f 1737th meeting], Arab terror dates back 50 years. The
7

86. But there is one brief comment I shall make ia this
regard. An article in The Observer of London of 5 August
1973 speaks about the murders committed by Israeli agents
in Lillehammer, Norway. At the conclusion of that articleit
is stated that the Oslo Government has been surprised at
the reaction of some Israeli newspapers over the Norwegian
stand calling for the release of the two Israelis, and at their
statement that they were only fighting a just war. As eae
official of the Oslo Government remarked: “The words
they use have an echo of the Second World War; only tlrjs
time it is the Jewish nation which is speaking.”

Btirut newspaper AZ-Mokharir criticized the same notorious
arch-criminal George Habash for having admitted that it
had been his intention to be aboard the plane diverted by
Israel; it criticized him because, it said, “This admission
provided justification for the Israeli action”.
80. Now, when a Lebanese newspaper is capable of
understanding that if the arch-murderer George Habash was
to be aboard the Lebanese plane, allowed to travel freely by
the Lebanese Government, to go to Baghdad to plot further
murders of innocent children, in such a case Israel was
justified in trying to seize an assassin of this character, then
surely Israel’s action of 10 August-if
considered on its
merits-can be understood and can be recognized as being
justified and well-founded.

87. May I also comment on this “automatic majority” ia
the Security Council. We have the greatest respect for your
Governments, Mr. President and members of the Security
Council, and we know that you and your Governments
represent your-people and the conscience of your countries,
and that you represent, on a geographic basis, the con.
science of the world. We are satisfied with that.

81. Ambassador Ghorra spoke of the conscience of mankind, of the Security Council being the expression of the
conscience of mankind. Well, I will leave it to enlightened
public opinion, to use the words of the representative of
Lebanon, to decide whether an organ which, as I have
indicated, for 25 years has not been able, because of the
composition, structure and parliamentary balance of power,
to adopt a single resolution condemning Arab aggression
against Israel-not
in 1948, not 1949 and not ever since
then-whether
an organ which for two and a half decades
has been unable to rise above partisan views and condemn
the murder of Israeli children, represents the conscience of
mankind.

88. Mr. Tekoah wants the Palestinians to terminate their
activities. I believe the Palestinians would be very happy to
terminate all activities of this kind; but there is only one
condition on which they can do so: that is by being allowed
to return to their own homes. The Palestinians are not bad
people; they are not murderers. The Palestinians are human
beings like all of us; they have legitimate, inalienable rights,
recognized by the United Nations in many resolutions,
They have a right to their homeland and to their homes.
89. What does Mr. Tekoah want of us? Until a fevSyears
ago there had been no such activity of any kind on the part
of the Palestinian people. Does he want them to rentain
indefinitely in UNRWA camps, living on the doles handed
out to them by the United Nations?

82. If there is a conscience of mankind, it certainly does
not want to see the Habashes and the Arafats continue to
operate freely on and from Lebanese territory. If there is a
conscience of mankind, it certainly does not want to see
these murderers roam freely all over the world, using
Lebanon as their base, plotting to murder guiltless, helpless
civilians. If there is a conscience of mankind, it demands
that the Lebanese Government and other Arab Governments at long last put an end to the activities of these
criminals, and eliminate once and for all their terrorist,
barbaric organizations.

90. Peace can be served by Israel if and when Israel
decides that justice should be done to the Palestinian
people, and if and when the Israeli Government decides
that it is time to withdraw its troops from Arab territories.
91. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

83. The PRESIDENT: I call next on the representative of
Lebanon to exercise his right of reply.

1 now call on the representative of

92. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It is not my intention lc
prolong this discussion; I have only one brief observation. If
Ambassador Ghorra really has respect for members of the
Security Council and their Governments, he must UIKI~P
stand, I am sure, that the representatives around this table
know that there is no relationship whatever between his
description of the aims of the terrorist organizations headed
by criminals such as Habash and Arafat and their real
objectives.

84. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): To conclude this debate, I
shall make only a couple of remarks on what we have just
heard from the Israeli representative.
85. Ambassador Tekoah wants me to look again at the
verbatim records of meetings of the Security Council where
we have discussed many aspects of the Middle East
question. Well, we a11know what we have discussed here;
we know what has happened. But in his statements, such as
those of Monday, yesterday and today, he always goes back
and recalls nazism and the collaboration between some
Arabs and the Nazis-Haj Amin El-Husseini, and so on and
so forth; and these things have been repeated by him,
brought out of his “deep-freeze”, hundreds of times. We
know that his “deep-freeze” is full of speeches ready-made
and tailored for every occasion in this Council, so WC do
not have to go into that again.

93. Now, their real objectivesare well known: they hare
the so-called Palestinian Covenant which makes it vex
clear-they have never concealed it; they have restatedit
againand again-that their aim is to eliminatethe sovereiga
State of Israel, a Member of the United Nations, aadtu
annihilate its people. They might be ready, asthey sayia
their Covenant, to allow someIsraelisto go back to the%
countriesin which their parentsor grandparentswerebon%
but that is all. That is the objective. And it is of this
objective, and it is of organizations that Uphold
this
8

objective, and it is of gangs which fight under the banner of
this objective that we have been talking. And it remains a
fact that in the resolution now adopted, the Security
Council had not a single word to say about criminal gangs
which murder guiltless, defenceless human beings in the
name of and for the sake of liquidating a Member State of
the United Nations and butchering its people.
94. The PRESIDENT:
Lebanon.

95. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): I have only this to say: I
accept your verdict here today in the Security Council as
my final right of reply to the representative of Israel.
96. The PRESIDENT: There are no further names on the
list of speakers; the Council has thus concluded its
discussion on the matter before it.

I call on the representative of

The meetingrose at 5.10 p.m.

9

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite;
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throuyhout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
snd distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
deposit&es
du inondc entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
B : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
Les

Litho

in United

Nations,

ICAIC

IIOJ’IL,YYHTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

HB/JAHMII

OPI’AHH

PUBLICACIONES

3AI(HII[

DE LAS

UNIES
et les agences
ou sdressea-vous

Ol.S%EANHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAl[HFX

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas e&n
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S, 1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)
