S/PV.8330

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8330th meeting

Thursday, 23 August 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hunt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Seventh report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2018/770)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-26476 (E)
*1826476*

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of sympathy on the passing away of
former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan
The President: As Security Council members will
be aware, former Secretary-General Kofi Annan passed
away on 18 August. I am sure that Council members
will join me in expressing our profound sadness at the
news of his death, and in sending condolences to his
family and loved ones. As President of the Security
Council, I propose that the Council now observe a
minute of silence in his honour.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Seventh report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2018/770)
The President: In accordance with rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral, United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism;
Ms. Michéle Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
and Ms. Joana Cook, Senior Research Fellow at the
International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation and
Political Violence.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/770, which contains the seventh
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering that threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
2/24

23/08/2018

Mr. Voronkov: On behalf of the Secretary-General,
I would like to start by expressing my condolences
and solidarity with countries where terror attacks
have recently taken place. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the seventh report (S/2018/770)
of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat.
The report was prepared with the input of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, and in close collaboration
with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
and other United Nations entities and international
organizations. As requested by resolutions 2253 (2015)
and 2368 (2017), the report contains a strategic-level
threat assessment, as well as an update on the United
Nations contributions in support of Member States’
efforts to counter the threat. The report explains how
ISIL continues to present a serious challenge, especially
with regard to its transformation into a covert network,
the activities of its regional affiliates and the complex
threat posed by returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters foreign terrorist fighters and their families. It
also elaborates on how Member States and the United
Nations continue to strengthen, refine and promote
the effective use of tools and measures to address the
evolving transnational threat posed by ISIL. Allow me
to briefly touch on several key highlights of the report.
First, the report notes that, although the so-called
ISIL caliphate has suffered significant losses, it
remains a serious and significant concern. Since the
end of 2017, ISIL has been defeated in Iraq and is in
headlong retreat in the Syrian Arab Republic. Overall,
current ISIL membership in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic is estimated at more than 20,000, divided
fairly evenly between the two countries. Some ISIL
fighters are fully engaged militarily, and others are
concealed in sympathetic communities and urban areas.
ISIL has also decentralized its leadership structure to
mitigate further losses. Therefore, an ISIL core is likely
to survive in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic in the
18-26476

23/08/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

medium term owing to the ongoing conflict and complex
stabilization challenges. In addition, significant ISILaffiliated members also exist in Afghanistan, SouthEast Asia, West Africa and Libya, and to a lesser extent
in Sinai, Yemen, Somalia and the Sahel.
Secondly, the challenge posed by returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters remains complex.
The flow of foreign terrorist fighters towards ISIL
in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic has essentially
ended. However, the reverse flow — although slower
than anticipated — remains a serious challenge.
Moreover, the rising threat from ISIL’s global network,
particularly from foreign terrorist fighters, will be
multidimensional and difficult to predict. For example,
the report notes that expertise garnered in conflict
areas is one of the dangers posed by returning foreign
terrorist fighters —such as with regard to the skills
required to prepare improvised explosive devices and
weaponize drones.
Thirdly, ISIL’s evolution from a proto-State structure
into a covert network brings with it new challenges. For
instance, ISIL’s finances in the Middle East are harder
to detect and analyse now that administrative functions
to manage finances have gone underground. In the wake
of its structural changes, ISIL remains able to channel
funds across borders, often via intermediate countries,
to their final destinations. Moreover, in considering
ISIL’s activities in various parts of the world from the
Middle East, Africa — particularly North, West and
East Africa — to Europe and Central, South and SouthEast Asia, the report notes ISIL’s continuing presence
and influence, particularly through its affiliates. ISIL
has also continued attempts to expand its presence in
Afghanistan, and the terrorist threat extending from
Afghanistan into Central Asia is perceived to be
increasing. In Indonesia, Jamaah Ansharut Daulah — an
ISIL-linked local network of cells — launched a series
of deadly suicide bombings in May, while setting
the disturbing precedent of using families to launch
attacks. In Europe, there are concerns about the high
volume of commercially encrypted messages, as well
as radicalization in prisons.
The report highlights that Member States and
the international community must renew their efforts
to effectively counter the rapidly evolving and
transnational threat posed by ISIL. It also notes that the
role of the Security Council has been instrumental in
that regard, especially through the various resolutions
it has adopted over the past few years on the various

S/PV. 8330

aspects of countering terrorism, as well as on the threat
posed by ISIL. The ISIL and Al-Qaida sanctions list
also remains one of the key global instruments in
that effort.
The Secretary-General’s seventh report also
provides updates on how the United Nations system
is strengthening the coordination, coherence and
effectiveness of its counter-terrorism efforts in support
of Member States. It highlights the work being done
by various United Nations entities, in particular the
close partnership between my Office — the Office of
Counter-Terrorism — and CTED, in cooperation with
other entities such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, UNESCO, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
UN-Women. Together, the United Nations system is
striving to address critical aspects, such as countering
the financing of terrorism; organized crime; border
management and law enforcement; international
judicial cooperation; prosecution; rehabilitation and
reintegration; and countering terrorist narratives and
engaging communities. In particular, United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies have continued to focus on the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.
The United Nations capacity-building implementation
plan for countering the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, steered by the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and CTED, has been updated and streamlined to reflect
the priorities identified in resolution 2396 (2017). It
now consists of 40 projects to be implemented by 12
United Nations entities. More than 20 of the 40 projects
focus specifically on returning and relocating foreign
terrorist fighters. To counter the threat posed by ISIL
and terrorism more broadly, international cooperation,
information-sharing and capacity-building are critical.
Moreover, the increasing sophistication of methods used
by terrorists requires counter-measures, particularly
technological ones that are commensurately complex
and advanced. All those topics were discussed by
Member States at the United Nations High-level
Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of
Member States, held this past June at the initiative of
Secretary-General Guterres.
The Secretary-General remains firmly committed
to supporting Member States in the fight against
terrorism, including ISIL and its affiliates. In particular,
he welcomes the Security Council’s continued attention
to the matter, as it is only through a sustained and

18-264763/24

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

concerted multilateral response that we can address the
scourge of terrorism.
As discussed with the Permanent Mission of the
United Kingdom in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, I also avail myself of this opportunity
to brief the Council on my visit to Afghanistan last week.
I travelled to Kabul from 14 to 15 August
to participate in a conference organized by the
Afghanistan
Independent
Human
Rights
Commission to commemorate the International
Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to the Victims
of Terrorism. The Government of Afghanistan played
a leading role in establishing the annual International
Day of Remembrance on 21 August, through General
Assembly resolution 72/165. In my keynote speech at
the conference, I emphasized the need for solidarity
with victims of terrorism in Afghanistan and around
the world. I reiterated the commitment of the United
Nations to listen to the victims of terrorism, respect
their rights and provide them with support and justice.
I also met with a large group of victims from across
Afghanistan, who told me about the devastating
impact of terrorism on their lives. They asked simple
questions, which, however, were difficult to answer.
For example: despite the preventive measures taken
by the international community, why are terrorists
still able to collect money, arms and ammunition and
find new support that enables them to continue their
horrible acts? We must look into that and other critical
questions and meet the expectations of victims.
I am grateful that many Council members were
able to join the Secretary-General and me last Friday
at the launch of an exhibition to commemorate the
International Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to
the Victims of Terrorism. We must never forget the
tens of thousands of people who have been injured,
traumatized or lost their lives during terrorist attacks.
Sixty-four thousand people were killed or injured in
Afghanistant over the past nine years.
During my mission to Kabul, I also had an
opportunity to hold high-level consultations with
President Ghani, Chief Executive Abdullah, Foreign
Minister Rabbani and other Cabinet members and
senior officials of the Government of Afghanistan
responsible for countering terrorism. They told me
that counter-terrorism efforts should be considered in
the context of Afghanistan’s peace and reconciliation
process, while taking a long-term and regional
4/24

23/08/2018

perspective. They also indicated that they are strongly
in favour of the peace process. To that end, they all
proposed organizing a high-level conference in Kabul
next year, with the support of the United Nations
and regional and international partners, to develop
a regional counter-terrorism strategy with a focus on
Afghanistan. I shared that idea with the Ambassadors
of the permanent members of the Security Council and
Central Asian Ambassadors, as well as with the Deputy
Commander of NATO’s Resolute Support Mission
during my meetings with them in Kabul. Of course,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto are involved in those discussions.
They all expressed initial interest with regard to the
idea of a conference.
The Government of Afghanistan also discussed its
counter-terrorism priorities, including addressing the
evolving threat from foreign terrorist fighters, border
management and aviation security, the prevention of
violent extremism and the links between terrorism and
organized crime. I will consult further with UNAMA,
the Department of Political Affairs, CTED and other
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact entities to discuss how best to support Afghan
counter-terrorism efforts. The United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism looks forward to continuing to work
closely with the Security Council, the Government of
Afghanistan and other key regional and international
partners to ensure a safe and secure future for the
people of Afghanistan.
The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Coninsx.
Ms. Coninsx: I thank members for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the seventh report
(S/2018/770) of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/
Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat. I also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov for
providing an overview of the report, and his team for
its collaboration in preparing it, on the basis of input
from the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team.
As we have already heard, there can be no doubt
that the threat from ISIL continues to evolve and
18-26476

23/08/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

pose significant challenges to all actors involved in
countering it. Such challenges derive in particular
from, first, the ongoing transformation of ISIL into a
global covert network; secondly, the activities of its
regional affiliates throughout the world; and, thirdly,
the potential threat posed by returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters.
Approximately eight months have passed since
the Council’s adoption of resolution 2396 (2017), on
the issue of returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters. In my briefing today I wish to highlight three
key challenges associated with that threat. Since the
adoption of the first resolution on the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters — resolution 2178 (2014), which
focused on preventing fighters from travelling to
conflict zones — the emphasis has shifted to fighters
who relocate or who return to their countries of origin,
nationality or to third countries. In CTED’s engagement
with Member States, we have identified the following
trends in that regard.
First, although the number of returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters is thus far not
as high as some had feared, their unique situation
nonetheless poses a range of challenges to Member
States. States have experienced difficulties in
conducting comprehensive risk assessments of foreign
terrorist fighter returnees and their accompanying
family members, as requested by resolution 2396
(2017). The prosecution of returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters also faces various evidentiary
and jurisdictional challenges. In some cases, a
revision of the existing legal framework is required.
Prosecutors and investigators require specialized
knowledge, including in the use of special investigative
techniques that rely on modern technologies. They
must often rely on evidence gathered by the military,
or on digital evidence located on foreign servers.
Strengthening judicial cooperation and mutual legal
assistance therefore remains vital. States must also
develop tailored prosecution strategies for returning
and relocating men, women and children. Although
Member States have developed a range of rehabilitation
and reintegration strategies and programmes, there is
limited knowledge as to their effectiveness and impact.
Secondly, a significant number of foreign terrorist
fighters have already entered the criminal-justice
systems of some States, which places new demands
on prisons and raises increasing concerns about the
potential for in-prison radicalization. More work

S/PV. 8330

is needed to address issues such as prison capacity
and security, the conditions of, and treatment in,
detention, the specific needs and risks associated with
violent extremist prisoners and the development of
non-custodial alternatives.
I would also like to draw the Council’s attention
to a third trend identified by CTED in its engagement
with Member States. That new trend concerns the
potential risks posed by the forthcoming release
of imprisoned foreign terrorist fighters. States are
increasingly concerned about the potential for some
of those released fighters to re-engage in terrorist
activities and radicalization to violence. Many
States are uncertain about the effectiveness of riskassessment and monitoring tools developed for such
individuals, whether during their imprisonment or
following their release. A number of foreign terrorist
fighters have been given relatively short sentences,
for various reasons, including, in some cases, lack of
evidence of their involvement in terrorist activity in
conflict zones. In such cases, Member States may have
limited opportunities to engage at-risk individuals in
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes prior to
their release.
There is therefore the need to strengthen datacollection and information-sharing in that area,
including on lessons learned, in order to ensure that
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes are based
on sound methodologies and implemented in full
compliance with domestic law and international human
rights law. CTED will continue to support Member
States in their efforts to identify relevant good practices
in that area.
Foreign terrorist fighters are only one threat
emanating from ISIL and its associates. The complex
and evolving threat posed by terrorism requires us
to remain ever-vigilant and alert. In our country
assessment visits on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, we continue to highlight the importance
of effective implementation by Member States of the
relevant Council resolutions, including resolutions
2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017). Over the past six months,
Member States and United Nations entities have
continued to develop innovative ways to address the
threat. Allow me to highlight just a few.
We continue to support Member States in the use
of the most up-to-date technologies to secure their
borders. Resolution 2396 (2017) introduced several

18-264765/24

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

23/08/2018

new requirements in that regard, including the use of
advance passenger information and passenger name
record systems, as well as biometrics. We shall continue
to assist States to ensure that those technologies are used
effectively and responsively, in full compliance with
international law, including human rights law, and with
due regard to privacy and data-protection concerns.

assess implementation gaps, identify good practices and
deliver the necessary technical assistance to Member
States. Our unity and joint efforts are as vital now as
ever before.

One important milestone in that regard was the
recent publication of the United Nations Compendium
of Recommended Practices for the Responsible Use and
Sharing of Biometrics in Counter-Terrorism. Another
was the recent publication, pursuant to resolution
2396 (2017), of the Compendium of Good Practices
on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure against
Terrorist Attacks.

Ms. Cook: I thank the Security Council for
inviting me here today to discuss the report I recently
co-authored with Gina Vale. It is an honour for me
to present our research on the strategic, tactical and
operational engagement of women and minors by
Da’esh, an issue which we believe requires immediate
and urgent attention. While this is a critical concern
related to Da’esh in particular, it is also increasingly
reflected in other jihadist groups today.

We also continue to forge new and innovative
partnerships with the private sector, particularly in the
area of information and communications technologies.
We are cooperating with not only some of the big
names in the industry, but also small enterprises
and start-ups. That engagement is essential — for
example, with respect to gathering digital evidence in
terrorism cases. CTED, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the International Association of
Prosecutors are developing guidance for requesting and
gathering electronic evidence across borders, including
from private communications service providers,
and will publish a practical guide for Member States
in September.
The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force Working Group on Legal and Criminal Justice
Responses to Terrorism is also finalizing United
Nations guidelines to facilitate the use and admissibility
of information and evidence collected, preserved and
shared by the military.
I wish to stress that our continued engagement with
civil society, including women’s groups, is essential
to ensuring a holistic, whole-of-society approach to
countering terrorism and violent extremism. Our
dialogue with the research community, particularly
through CTED’s Global Counter-Terrorism Research
Network, continues to provide new insights and
contributes to our analysis of the latest trends
and developments.
The global fight against ISIL and its affiliates
continues. The United Nations system, including
CTED and the Office of Counter-Terrorism, continues
to strengthen its coordination and coherence in order to
6/24

The President: I thank Ms. Coninsx for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Cook.

Our research has demonstrated the scale of this
concern. For the first time, we are able to demonstrate
with evidence that across 80 countries and of the
estimated 41,490 foreign citizens that became affiliated
with Da’esh, 13 per cent are women and 12 per cent
are minors. That includes at least 730 infants born
in-theatre to foreign parents. Women and minors
therefore represent one in four recorded foreigners
to become affiliated with Da’esh. These figures are
unprecedented for a terrorist organization, and also
serve to emphasize the need to consider the broader
networks of persons affiliated with such groups beyond
only fighters.
We believe this to be a vast underestimation,
based on current gaps in data. Of the 80 countries
reviewed only 26 provide publicly reliable figures
for both women and minors. We therefore still do not
have a full understanding of the scale and scope of
this concern. Thos statistics also exclude those who
were prevented from traveling to Iraq and Syria and
local women and minors within the conflict zone who
may have become affiliated with Da’esh —whether
willingly or coercively. Women and minors are vastly
underestimated and underanalysed groups. As such,
they risk being neglected in all assessments and fullspectrum responses related to Da’esh.
Why were so many women drawn to Da’esh? By
presenting itself as an ideologically pure, State-building
project and holding and administering territory between
2014 up to late 2017, it gave women an opportunity, a
perceived stake and sense of purpose in building that
proto-State. It drew persons as diverse as schoolgirls
18-26476

23/08/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

to grandmothers from five continents. Those women
expressed feelings of discrimination, oppression and
disenfranchisement in the communities they left behind,
and believed Da’esh offered them something meaningful
through roles ranging from citizens, mothers and wives,
to public sector workers. Women within that territory
and abroad also sought and carried out more nefarious
roles and acted as police, recruiters, fundraisers and
disseminators of propaganda, mobilizing both men and
women for Da’esh.
Da’esh achieved the support of women through
targeted, gendered recruitment efforts in its multilingual
propaganda, which utilized language and imagery that
emphasized women’s rights, empowerment and a sense
of purpose and belonging offered by their caliphate. It
also exploited their personal and political grievances,
framed their participation as a religious obligation and
promised services ranging from free health care and
education to marriage arrangements, among others.
The factors that pushed individuals out of their
societies and pulled them towards Da’esh and its
ideology are diverse, complex and have to be understood
and assessed on an individual basis. We also recognize
that levels of agency and motivation differed for each
person. Some women were ideologically committed
and actively sought to support Da’esh, travelling
independently or with their children or families, while
others were subject to varying levels of coercion.
Da’esh also sought to promote the recruitment
of minors within and beyond its physical territory,
raising its “cubs” as the future fighters and ideological
guardians of its caliphate project. The group’s
propaganda has displayed systematic indoctrination
of boys and girls throughout its education system.
For boys in particular, enrolment in military training
camps was mandatory, with the aim to psychologically
and physically recondition young recruits to fight
and engage in violence. Through such efforts, Da’esh
has sought to project an image of strength, bolster its
fighting force and even weaponize minors.
Similar to women, minors are not a homogeneous
group. They experienced diverse recruitment pathways
into Da’esh and held varied roles. Those roles range
from passive citizens of the so-called caliphate and
child brides, to spies, combatants and executioners.
We therefore recommend three sub-categories of
Da’esh-affiliated minors in line with gender and age
considerations as an indicator of the various levels of

S/PV. 8330

individual agency and, therefore, accountability. These
categories are infants under 4 years of age, many of
whom were likely born inside Da’esh territory; children
aged 5 to 14, who mostly appeared to be taken by their
parents or guardians; and teenagers from ages 15 to 17,
some of whom travelled independently.
The physical fall of the so-caliphate represented a
significant turning point for the group. However, we do
not believe this to be the end of its relevance or activities,
only a period of evolution, and therefore a particularly
important time to assess the current and future status
of its affiliates, including women and minors. An
estimated 7,366 Da’esh affiliates, or 20 per cent, have
now returned to their countries of departure, or appear
to be in repatriation processes to do so. However, only
256, or 4 per cent, of total returnees are recorded as
women. In contrast, up to 1,180 — 17 per cent — of
total returnees are recorded as minors, suggesting that
some Member States have prioritized the repatriation
of minors.
The current status of the significant number of
women and minors beyond returnees also requires
immediate attention and clarification. We have
identified women and minors as detainees in Iraq and
Syria, in internally displaced persons camps, as persons
still associated with Da’esh in Iraq and Syria, as those in
third-party countries, and some who have been killed.
More concerning perhaps are the vast numbers whose
status remains unknown. We also highlight important
concerns related to the status of orphaned and stateless
minors, whose only identity may have been one
affiliated with Da’esh and who require particularly
targeted and tailored interventions.
We believe that women are poised to play an
important role in carrying forward the ideology and
legacy of Da’esh. That view is based on a number of
considerations, including the motivation of some to
pass on that ideology to their children, the nefarious and
support roles they held in Da’esh, shifting discourses
related to women’s roles within the group, and the
combat training some women received under Da’esh.
Numerous attacks — both successful and foiled — have
served to demonstrate the security risk some women
can pose.
Minors have likely been largely traumatized by
the Da’esh violence they witnessed and, in some cases,
actively conducted. There is evidence that male-child
and teenage “cubs” have already been engaged in

18-264767/24

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

suicide attacks beyond Da’esh’s immediate territory,
and the group’s propaganda continues to call for,
and inspire its soldiers of all ages to conduct, guided
and independent attacks overseas. However, we also
recognize that many women and minors are unlikely
to become security threats, and may instead seek
to disengage from the group and its ideology. Our
research has reaffirmed the critical importance of
integrating considerations related to gender and age in
assessing the range of threats posed by Da’esh and its
affiliates, while ensuring that is reflected in common
vulnerabilities and exposures, and military, criminal
justice, rehabilitation and reintegration efforts.
This moment presents both exceptional challenges
for us as an international community as well an
opportunity. We now have an evidence base that
recognizes that women and minors, as two distinct
and nuanced groups, must be accounted for in our
understanding of contemporary terrorist and violent
extremist groups. Only by having a stronger evidence
base, both qualitatively and quantitatively, will
we be able to develop more effective, holistic and
sustainable responses.
The President: I thank Ms. Cook for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Voronkov
and Ms. Coninsx for their briefings on the report of
the Secretary-General on the threat posed by Da’esh
to international peace and security (S/2018/770). We
would also like to welcome Ms. Joana Cook and thank
her for sharing the key findings of her report on Da’esh
women and minors, which shows the value of inviting
civil society and researchers to inform our discussions.
In the summer of 2014, Da’esh swept down the
Tigris and Euphrates valleys, capturing thousands of
square miles of Iraq and Syria and imposing its pitiless
rule on millions of people in an area that was once the
cradle of civilization. Over the next three years, attacks
that were directed, inspired or enabled by Da’esh
would claim more than 30,000 lives, including 181
attacks outside Iraq and Syria. The world responded
by forming a global coalition to defeat this threat, and
military action by many countries, including my own,
has driven Da’esh from almost all of its domain and
liberated millions from its oppression. But the point I
8/24

23/08/2018

wish to emphasize today is that Da’esh has not been
vanquished, and that the root causes of its emergence
have yet to be resolved.
Britain shares the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral’s report that Da’esh is responding to the loss
of territory by evolving into a covert terrorist network,
with branches as far apart as Afghanistan, Libya and
Yemen. Da’esh takes advantage of ungoverned space
and weak States. Its terrorists do not necessarily
require central direction, and they have demonstrated
their ability to strike in Europe and South-East Asia.
The report of the Secretary-General estimates that
as many as 20,000 Da’esh fighters remain in Syria and
Iraq, among them citizens of many countries. Around
900 people with links to the United Kingdom have
travelled to join the conflicts in Syria and Iraq. Around
40 per cent returned to the United Kingdom in the early
days Da’esh’s so-called caliphate, and some 20 per cent
are believed dead. The rest are still in Iraq, Syria or
elsewhere. Our response to this enduring threat should
fall into two parts.
First, we must press on with military operations
against Da’esh. British forces continue to play their
part as members of the global coalition, and the
United Kingdom leads in the vital area of strategic
communications against Da’esh. This year the British
Government has committed another £20 million to
counter-terrorism projects in countries we assess to be
most at risk from returning foreign fighters.
Secondly, we should renew our focus on prevention
by addressing the root causes of the emergence of
Da’esh, which means doing more to support peace
and reconciliation in Iraq and a lasting political
settlement in Syria. It also means responding to
specific humanitarian problems. For example, up to
20 per cent of foreign fighters globally are women and
girls. Almost 10 per cent of the 40,000 individuals who
travelled to join Da’esh were minors, many of whom
have witnessed or experienced horrific violence and
been exposed to radicalization. Some will be suffering
from post-traumatic stress disorder. We need to act to
prevent those minors from becoming the next generation
of terrorists.
The United Nations has a vital role to play in
the struggle against Da’esh, consistent with the
responsibility of the Security Council to address threats
to international peace and security. The Council made
air travel more secure by adopting resolution 2309
18-26476

23/08/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

(2016), the first-ever resolution on aviation security,
and it addressed the threat from foreign fighters in
resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017). Earlier, in
2005, the Council adopted resolution 1624 (2005),
condemning incitement and repudiating all attempts to
justify or glorify acts of terrorism. The Council should
be willing to consider further action in order to counter
the use of the Internet by terrorists for propaganda
and fundraising.
Prevention is a key pillar of the United Kingdom’s
approach to counter-terrorism. Our aim is to identify
anyone at risk of radicalization. We seek to reintegrate
them into society. Agencies and local Governments,
from health, education, social services and the
police, routinely meet to identify individuals at risk
and refer them to programmes run by specialists in
deradicalization. That approach, which focuses on
prevention rather than prosecution after a crime has
been committed, has caused more than 500 people to
turn away from terrorism in the United Kingdom. We
have learned lessons over the years and refined our
“prevent” programme. We stand ready to share our
experiences with countries that face similar problems.
Societies that are confident in their beliefs and
values and hold Governments to account are societies
that are resistent to the virus of terrorism. The key to
success is partnership among many nations. We must
not lose sight of the importance of those partnerships,
even as Da’esh loses its grip on Syria and Iraq. I look
forward to our discussion today on how we can act
together to prevent and counter the evolving threat
from Da’esh.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. Foreign Secretary, for coming to preside over
this very important briefing. Welcome you to New York.
The United States is grateful for the United
Kingdom’s unwavering commitment to the fight against
terrorism. It is a vital member of the global coalition to
defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS),
and we appreciate its continued leadership on the issue.
We also thank our briefers.
Just three years ago, ISIS was on a rampage.
These terrorists seized Iraq’s second-largest city and
threatened the capital. In northern Syria, ISIS used its
safe haven to plan attacks and radicalize new recruits.

S/PV. 8330

It was a threat that no civilized nation could ignore.
The United States stepped up to face that challenge.
We did not face it alone. We rallied a global coalition
to defeat ISIS — a partnership of like-minded States
and organizations to confront that evil. Our ranks
grew, and that global coalition now totals an incredible
77 members.
Together, we have made significant progress.
Iraq was able to declare its territory liberated from
ISIS. The coalition has driven ISIS out of much of
its former territory and Syria. However, the fight is
not over. A committed core of ISIS fighters remains
in Iraq and Syria. They are a resilient enemy, and so
we must remain vigilant. After coming so far, we do
not want to give ISIS room to regroup. Our hard work
will continue to make sure that ISIS faces an enduring
defeat. That is why we work with our partners to help
the victims to rebuild. In Iraq and Syria, our coalition
partners have been clearing rubble, defusing mines
and restoring electricity and other services. That has
allowed 150,000 Syrians to return to what used to be
the ISIS capital, Raqqa, since the city was liberated.
That work will continue for some time thanks to the
generous contributors of approximately $300 million in
new stabilizing funds.
We welcome the leadership of those partners in
stepping up to address such challenges. Our shared
contributions show the enduring strength of that global
coalition. However, sadly, defeating ISIS in Iraq and
Syria will not be the end of the story. As we have heard,
the hateful ideology of ISIS has taken root in new
corners of the world — places such as Afghanistan,
Nigeria, Libya, Somalia and the Sinai. The lesson in
that regard is that ISIS is an enemy that adapts and
one that will seek out the world’s ungoverned spaces.
We must deny ISIS a safe haven. In many of those
places that means putting real pressure on parties to
end conflicts that have dragged on for years. We need
to focus on building up State authority and extending
the reach of institutions so that ISIS does not have the
breathing room to expand and to plot new attacks.
We also cannot forget the enduring threat posed
by Al-Qaida. ISIS may have captured more headlines
in recent years but the leaders of Al-Qaida are still
plotting attacks around the world. That includes a
large remaining Al-Qaida presence in Syria, Yemen
and other parts of the world. The future of our fight
against terrorism will look different than the challenges
that came before. Our enemies no longer control large

18-264769/24

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

23/08/2018

pieces of territory, spanning multiple countries. They
hide in the shadows or in places where Governments
hide them or look the other way. Such terrorists never
cease to look for new opportunities, and so we cannot
let down our guard.

Committee Executive Directorate, to whom we
reiterate our greatest support for their important work.
We also appreciate the informative presentation by
Ms. Joana Cook of the International Centre for the
Study of Radicalisation.

We know the tools that will be critical to that fight.
The United States led the way in negotiating resolution
2396 (2017), which sets the highest standards for States
to disrupt the travel of foreign terrorist fighters. Every
Member State must implement that resolution in full
in order to break up the routes that terrorists use to get
from one battlefield to another. That means making
sure that Member States use and share the latest
technology, such as passenger name records, watchlists
and biometrics, in order to identify threats trying to
cross our borders. Screening all travellers with those
tools is an essential step.

The threat posed by terrorism and extremism has
surpassed local and regional dimensions to become
a global problem that represents one of the greatest
challenges facing the international community today,
particularly because terrorist groups and organizations
have developed capacities to coordinate their criminal
acts through various platforms, including digital ones,
as well as to recruit people remotely using different
means and narratives.

Member States need to come up with strategies to
address fighters who may try to return to their homes.
As one of our briefers mentioned today, it is not only
men, but also women and children, who may have tried
to join terrorist groups. Under resolution 2396 (2017),
every Government must focus on a comprehensive
plan to prosecute, rehabilitate and reintegrate foreign
terrorist fighters and their families.
We must also make full use of our sanctions
regimes so as to deny funding to terrorist groups and
the entities that continue to support them. Where force
is necessary, the United States will deepen its longstanding partnerships with countries fighting terrorism.
Above all, we will never hesitate to act to protect the
American people from the threat of terrorism.
Today, while we look back at the campaign against
ISIS, we must prepare for tomorrow’s challenges. We
must maintain our resolve, and we will prevail. There
is no doubt about how the story will end. The forces of
terror will never win. The fight against terror will take
different forms, but the outcome is certain. The United
States will continue to be a force in the effort against
ISIS and Al-Qa’ida until we defeat the threat.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): It is a true pleasure to have you, Sir,
preside over this Security Council meeting.
My delegation is grateful for the briefings today by
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, and by Ms. Michele
Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
10/24

In light of that, it is necessary to reiterate that
terrorism cannot, and should not, be associated with
any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Such characteristics should not be used to justify for
any reason measures to combat or to prevent terrorism.
As has been noted, a clear example of the threat
represented by terrorism can be seen in foreign terrorist
fighters, whose return to their countries of origin and
their movement across areas of conflict are a source
of concern that calls for greater action on the part
of States. The fact that since 2011 more than 30,000
combatants from approximately 100 countries have
travelled primarily to Syria and Iraq demonstrates the
magnitude of the problem, all the more so given the
increasing victories in eliminating Da’esh.
It is important to bear in mind that foreign terrorist
fighters did not emerge suddenly or spontaneously.
Rather, they are the product of a process of ideological
radicalization and, once on the ground, of military
training in handling weapons and explosive devices,
including improvised explosive devices, which,
according to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/770), and as Ms. Cook noted, has even involved
entire families, including women and children. It is
therefore necessary to realize that the most influential
factors in recruiting people are linked to their
socioeconomic situation and their vulnerability when
presented with promises of material and personal
benefits, as well as claims of ideological or sectarian
beliefs. That must of course go hand in hand with an
analysis and assessment of the structural causes of the
rise of terrorism, which include regime-change policies
and interventionism.
18-26476

23/08/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The fight against and the prevention of terrorism
must also focus on implementing measures of
development, inclusion and dialogue, as established by
pillars I and II of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. Similarly, the implementation of
resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017), which propose
parameters to deal with the problem of foreign terrorist
fighters, take on particular importance when drafting
strategies and taking decisions.
In addition, the link between terrorist groups and
transnational criminal organizations associated with
crimes such as people smuggling, trafficking in persons
and the smuggling of weapons, ammunition, oil, its byproducts and cultural and heritage assets is increasingly
evident, since by perpetrating such crimes those
organizations gather economic resources and legitimize
them through money-laundering and other mechanisms
that seek to undermine or to eliminate State control. We
must identify these networks and payment mechanisms
so as to take concrete actions to eliminate the capacity
of these criminal and terrorist organizations to avail
themselves of economic and financial resources. It is
also crucial that the international community focus
its efforts on investigating whether terrorist groups
have access to tax havens and to take joint actions to
eliminate them.
We must also strengthen States’ capacities to fight
decisively against money-laundering and the financing
of terrorism. To that end, the cooperation, joint work and
assistance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate are, of course, of paramount importance.
In that light, we reiterate that all of the efforts
deployed by the Security Council and our Organization
to counter terrorism must enjoy the greatest possible
support and participation of Member States and aim to
strengthen the capacity of States both in the domain
of prevention and in counter-terrorism efforts, in full
respect of the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of States. Likewise, accountability before the
law is vital so that those responsible for committing
such criminal acts are duly investigated, prosecuted
and punished with the greatest severity, pursuant to
international law.
In that regard, my delegation once again expresses
its strong support for the transparent and balanced
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-

S/PV. 8330

Terrorism Strategy and its four pillars. We call on the
entire international community to act decisively in
the struggle against this scourge, using all the means
provided by the Charter of the United Nations to
fulfil the commitments undertaken in the framework
of international law and the resolutions of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, wish to thank Mr. Voronkov for his informative
briefing on the seventh report of the SecretaryGeneral on the threat posed by Da’esh (S/2018/770). I
thank also Ms. Coninsx and Ms. Cook for their very
enlightening briefings. I wish specifically to commend
the outstanding work done by the International Centre
for the Study of Radicalisation through its report on the
return of women and minors affiliated with Da’esh.
The report of the Secretary-General underscores
the fact that despite the loss of its territorial foothold,
Da’esh continues to pose a grave threat, both locally and
globally. Its transformation into a global underground
network, the widespread network of foreign terrorist
fighters and the appeal of terrorist propaganda only
make the threat more resilient. In the face of an
enemy that is endlessly adapting, our responses, too,
must evolve.
I wish therefore to stress four areas where France
believes that our efforts can and must be scaled up.
I turn first to the operations of the international
coalition against Da’esh. These must continue so as to see
through to completion the struggle against the terrorist
organization in Iraq and Syria following the decisive
victories over that group, which has lost virtually all
of its territory. In order to prevent its resurgence, our
military actions are complemented by efforts on the
civilian front aimed at a lasting stabilization of the
areas liberated from Da’esh and at reconstruction where
possible, such as in Iraq, in keeping with the pledges
made at the Kuwait International Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq, held in February. It is important
that all stakeholders and the United Nations system
remain mobilized and that their efforts be translated
into tangible progress for the peoples concerned.
We must also eradicate the root causes of terrorism
through the implementation of pluralist and inclusive
political solutions in Syria and Iraq that meet the deepseated and legitimate concerns of the people. Putting an
end to impunity for the crimes perpetrated by Da’esh in
the Levant is vital to rebuilding inclusive and peaceful

18-2647611/24

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

societies. I am specifically thinking here of the grave
violations perpetrated by Da’esh against children and
of the sexual violence against and the enslavement of
more than 6,000 Yazidis. In that vein, France reiterates
its full support for the independent international
investigative mechanisms established by the United
Nations to shed light on the serious crimes committed
in Syria and Iraq and call on all States Members of the
United Nations and the system as a whole to work hand
in hand to that end.
The second area where we need to redouble our
efforts is the struggle against the financing of terrorism,
which is a top priority for France. Although the loss of
territory has significantly reduced Da’esh’s revenues, the
group has devised increasingly sophisticated adaptation
strategies. Our legal and operational frameworks must
therefore also be consistently adapted and strengthened
so as to enhance the transparency of financial flows,
the sharing of information and cooperation with the
private sector.
To that end, last April France organized an
international conference on combating financing for
Da’esh and Al-Qaida that brought together 70 States
and some 20 international organizations. It culminated
in the adoption of the Paris Agenda, which represents
an effective road map for stepping up our commitment,
and we call for the implementation of the commitments
undertaken within that framework.
Thirdly, we must continue our efforts to counter
Internet use by terrorist groups. A significant amount
of progress has been achieved and Internet companies
have mobilized, but a great deal remains to be done, as
demonstrated by the broadcasting of a nearly one-hour
statement by Omar Al-Baghdadi on Telegram on
22 August. We will continue our efforts, including at
the European level, to more effectively obstruct the
dissemination of terrorist propaganda, which fuels
radicalization, and the use of the Internet for the
financing of terrorism.
Finally, the relocation and return of foreign
terrorist fighters remains a more pervasive threat
that our countries must address. In the face of this
challenge, whose complexity was eloquently described
by Ms. Coninsx, we must step up our efforts to track,
monitor and follow up individuals who pose a risk
through the consistent sharing of information. In the
light of the diversity of the profiles concerned, close
cooperation between military, civilian and financial
12/24

23/08/2018

intelligence services and agencies and with the judicial
authorities is vital to strengthen the nexus between
intelligence and the actions of criminal justice.
Education, social services and justice are vital
to assist families. Through our national mechanism,
France emphasizes specifically caring for children at
the social, psychological and educational levels, in order
to facilitate their integration. We will therefore host in
Paris next September a regional meeting organized by
the Office of Counter-Terrorism on dealing, with full
respect for human rights, with children who accompany
foreign terrorist fighters.
I wish to stress the unifying role that the United
Nations must continue to play in the fight against
terrorism, specifically in areas where Da’esh has
established a presence or that it has infiltrated.
France will continue to provide support to United
Nations bodies in their efforts to identify needs and
the responses required as well as in the promotion of
coordination among all concerned stakeholders in the
wake of the United Nations High-level Conference
of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member
States, held here in late June.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Mr. President,
let me start by thanking you for having come to the
Security Council. It is a true honour to have you
personally presiding over our meeting today. Allow
me also to take this opportunity to thank you and your
great team here in New York for a very effective and
efficient presidency of the Council.
Turning to today’s discussion, I would like to
thank Mr. Voronkov, Ms. Coninsx and Ms. Cook for
their briefings.
In my intervention, I will focus on three issues:
first, the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and our response; secondly, the role of women
and children; and, thirdly, accountability.
First, on the threat and our response, we just heard
that the threat posed by ISIS has changed but certainly
not diminished. This calls for a coherent international
response. As ISIS changes into a covert network, we
have to invest in financial intelligence and in publicprivate partnerships to counter its financing.
As ISIS strengthens its affiliates around the world,
we have to focus on prevention and on the resilience
of local communities. And as ISIS fighters return
and relocate, we have to detect and counter the travel
18-26476

23/08/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

movements of terrorists through passenger name record
systems. We must strengthen international cooperation
in this field.
Terrorism continues to warrant our utmost attention.
We cannot give in to counter-terrorism fatigue. We have
to invest in international cooperation.
My second point focuses on the role of women and
children. The briefing by Ms. Cook today served to
underscore the importance of civil society involvement
for preventing and countering violent extremism. We
need a whole-of-society approach, and women and
youngsters are key in that regard. At the same time,
as Ms. Cook pointed out, we must acknowledge that
women with ISIS may also be perpetrators of terrorist
acts, while minors with ISIS are first and foremost
victims, but may also pose a threat. Dealing with women
and minors with ISIS therefore requires a case-by-case
approach that integrates prevention, prosecution and
rehabilitation.
With that in mind, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
and the United States work very closely together in
the framework of the Global Counterterrorism Forum
(GCTF). Together we have collected good practices
to address the challenges of returning families of
foreign terrorist fighters. Those good practices have
led to practical guidelines, which will be endorsed at
the GCTF ministerial meeting on 26 September here
in New York. As Council members may be aware, the
GCTF is co-chaired by Morocco and the Kingdom of the
Netherlands. We will make sure that those guidelines
are made available to all Member States.
That brings me to my third point: accountability.
We need to ensure that impunity for terrorism will
not prevail. One of our key priorities in the Council is
accountability. The Kingdom of the Netherlands favours
the establishment of a specialized court for international
crimes, as proposed by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq. We also continue to support efforts
by the Investigative Team in Iraq and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism (IIIM) for Syria
to collect evidence against ISIS fighters. We look
forward to the Council’s first briefing, in December, by
the Special Adviser of the Investigative Team, and call
on all Member States to cooperate with and support the
Independent Mechanism. We must unite in holding ISIS
fighters accountable for their heinous acts, in particular
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.

S/PV. 8330

In conclusion, last Friday here at the United
Nations we remembered and paid tribute to the victims
of terrorism. We heard impactful statements from the
Secretary-General and Mr. Voronkov. But we also
heard the personal stories of the families of victims
of terrorism and of survivors of attacks. We felt the
real-life sorrow behind our discussion today. If we
need any further motivation to transform our words
into deeds, let it be the brave voices of the victims and
survivors of terrorist acts who spoke here at the United
Nations: they are counting on us, and we owe it to them.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
your presence here today, Sir, thank you for convening
this meeting and commend the excellent work of the
Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom to the
United Nations in conducting its presidency of the
Council this month. We also thank Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Ms. Michèle Coninsx and Ms. Joana Cook
for their briefings.
We note with concern that the so-called Islamic
State, although weakened, nonetheless continues to
become a covert global organization with a strong
presence in Iraq and Syria and, through affiliated
organizations, other areas of the Middle East and Asia
as well as on the continent of Africa. In that context,
we would like to highlight the focus the United Nations
has placed on the counter-terrorism agenda over the
past six months, as reflected in both the sixth Biennial
Review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the successful holding of the first Highlevel Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism
Agencies of Member States, in late June.
Despite the military setbacks the international
community has inflicted on Da’esh, the terrorist
organization is seeking to maintain its influence by
using the Internet and social networks to instigate,
mobilize and direct its followers to perpetrate attacks
in their countries of origin as well as to raise funds
and attract new followers. I underscore the need to
continue strengthening policies aimed at counteracting
such manifestations of global terrorism. That includes
promoting the development of critical thinking in
the digital realm among the target audiences for such
propaganda, especially young people.
Moreover, as stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/770), the return or relocation of foreign
terrorist fighters, as well as the growing number
of “frustrated travelers”, also represent significant

18-2647613/24

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

23/08/2018

threats, albeit to a lesser extent than anticipated. We
therefore underscore the need to pursue comprehensive
criminal justice strategies that incorporate full respect
for human rights and due process. Such strategies must
also take gender into account and integrate an approach
aimed at safeguarding the rights of children, especially
when it comes to the families of returning or relocating
fighters.

subsidiary body to function in accordance with rules
guaranteeing due process.

I must draw particular attention to the role of
prisons when foreign terrorist fighters enter national
criminal justice systems: it is essential to ensure that
prisons do not serve as venues for further radicalization
and recruitment.

Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; Ms. Michèle
Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; and Ms. Joana Cook,
Senior Research Fellow at the International Centre for
the Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence, for
their valuable briefings on the threats that Da’esh poses
to international peace and security.

Da’esh financing is further cause for particular
concern, especially as the organization operates in
a covert manner and no longer tries to administer
larger territories, although it maintains some sources
of income from oil wells in eastern Syria, forced
expropriations and kidnappings. Against that backdrop,
it is crucial for Member States to bear in mind that,
in addition to strengthening financial intelligence
systems, it is important to take measures to monitor
cash used by terrorists.
In connection with this problem, we must
draw attention to the increasingly clear links
between transnational organized crime and terrorist
organizations — a reality reflected in the report,
especially the links between terrorist financing and
money laundering, as well as other sources, including
trafficking in people, drugs and weapons. In that regard,
we deem it essential to gain a deeper understanding of
these dynamics, as stressed in the Security Council
presidential statement of 8 May 2018 (S/PRST/2018/9).
We reiterate that the crimes must not go unpunished.
We must ensure accountability. To do so, the collection
of evidence in conflict zones and of digital evidence
represent a principal challenge. We therefore welcome
the progress made by the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, as well as
the operationalization of the Investigative Team into
crimes committed in Iraq.
We also welcome the appointment of the
Ombudsperson to the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, which will allow that important
14/24

Our Organization, and the Security Council in
particular, has a fundamental role to play in tackling
terrorist threats, fostering cooperation among all
Member States and among regional and subregional
organizations, and it can count on the fullest
commitment of my delegation in that regard.

I would like to focus in my statement on three
main issues: first, the threat posed by Da’esh; secondly,
technology and terrorist groups; and, thirdly, the
desired international cooperation.
First, with regard to the threat posed by Da’esh,
despite the fact that it is diminishing in Iraq and Syria,
Da’esh is still capable of threatening regional peace and
security. It is estimated at having 20,000 combatants
today, who are able to quickly adapt to the conditions in
which they operate. It has transformed from a regional
entity into a covert network, which is difficult to track
and whose financial resources difficult to trace. The
phenomenon of returning and relocating terrorist
fighters and their families poses a threat to their own
countries as well as to third countries, given the field
military expertise they have acquired. That requires
that we all adopt a comprehensive and collective
approach by taking precautionary measures to address
the phenomenon, including through exchanging
information on the matter. In that regard, we commend
the support that the United Nations is offering to
Member States in the area of capacity-building for
counter-terrorism.
Secondly, with respect to technology and terrorist
groups, social networking continues to constitute
an important resource for terrorist groups to spread
their radical ideologies. That requires us to enhance
international efforts to cooperate on adopting measures
to prevent and fight those groups that exploit technology
and communications. In that regard, we commend
18-26476

23/08/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the initiatives launched by the United Nations within
the framework of enhanced cooperation with small
technology companies and Governments with a view to
limiting the capacity of terrorists to use the Internet for
their terrorist purposes.
Thirdly, pertaining to the desired international
cooperation, the State of Kuwait would like to underscore
the importance of international cooperation to address
the threat posed by terrorist fighters, including in
the following areas: exchanging information, border
security, improving protection, dealing with the
circumstances that lead to the spread of terrorism and
preventing incitement to terrorist acts. We must also
limit the financial support that is available to terrorist
fighters, conduct and implement threat assessments of
terrorist fighters, and in addition to all that make efforts
to undertake judicial prosecutions, rehabilitation and
reintegration, in line with international law.
We also encourage bolstering international
cooperation between States and international
organizations such as INTERPOL and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, with a view
to exchanging information and expertise and
implementing joint counter-terrorism programmes.
Moreover, we encourage Member States to take
advantage of relevant programmes being offered by the
United Nations and its specialized agencies and other
relevant international organizations.
We underscore the need to hold accountable those
responsible for committing terrorist acts and violations
of human rights. In that regard, we support the
Investigative Team that was established by the Security
Council in resolution 2379 (2017) to support efforts
aimed at holding Da’esh accountable for the crimes it
perpetrated in Iraq.
In the context of the efforts made by the State of
Kuwait as a member of the coalition to fight Da’esh at
the international level, my country hosted a ministerial
meeting for the international coalition against Da’esh on
13 February, in which 70 States and four international
organizations participated to formulate strategies and
plans to combat terrorism. It was the first meeting of its
kind since Da’esh was defeated in Iraq.
The State of Kuwait condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations regardless of the motivations
behind it. Terrorism constitutes a criminal act that is
unjustifiable and must not be linked to any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnicity. Combating

S/PV. 8330

terrorism requires mobilizing all international efforts
to confront that criminal scourge by adopting measures
that guarantee respect for human rights, the rule
of law and good governance, as well as the peaceful
coexistence of religions and respect for their symbols
and sanctity, while dealing with the conditions that lead
to the spread of terrorism, stopping incitement to hatred
and rejecting all forms of extremism and violence.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Coninsx for their briefings. China
also welcomes the report of Secretary-General Guterres
(S/2018/770) on the threat posed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant to international peace and security.
China also paid close attention to the statement made
by Ms. Joana Cook, Senior Research Fellow at the
International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation and
Political Violence.
The recent successful terrorist attacks that took
place in Afghanistan and Syria resulted in tremendous
harm to the countries concerned. Terrorism is the
common enemy of humankind and affects countries
beyond their national borders. It is hard for any country
to respond to it alone. Faced with such a challenge,
and bound by a shared destiny, the international
community should effectively implement a common,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable security
concept, effectively carry out the relevant Security
Council resolutions and strengthen cooperation to
jointly respond to the threat of terrorism in the light of
its new trend and characteristics.
First, with respect to further building international
consensus on counter-terrorism, the international
community should adhere to a unified standard
and adopt a zero-tolerance and non-discriminatory
stance in resolutely combating terrorists, regardless
of location, pretext, targeted countries or the means
used. In fighting terrorism at the international level,
we should respect the sovereignty of the countries
in question, as well as the main responsibility of the
countries concerned to fight terrorism and abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and allow the United Nations, including the
Security Council, to play its leading role.
Secondly, we must make joint efforts to address the
root causes of terrorism. The international community
should push for a political settlement of regional issues,
assist Member States in achieving their economic and

18-2647615/24

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

social development and poverty reduction and alleviation
goals, refrain from linking terrorism to specific ethnic
or religious groups and promote dialogue on an equal
footing among civilizations and religions with a view to
fostering harmonious coexistence and endeavouring to
build a new type of international relations.
Thirdly, with regard to disrupting the terrorist
network of cross-border movement, terrorist
organizations have recently suffered heavy losses in
Iraq and Syria. However, terrorist fighters’ movements
and returns still pose a serious threat to the security and
stability of countries of origin, transit and destination.
The countries concerned should strengthen crossborder control and law enforcement cooperation, share
intelligence resources and strengthen capacities to
jointly deter the flow of terrorist fighters.
Fourthly, we must fight terrorist activities
conducted by terrorist organizations through the
Internet. Cyberspace and social media have become an
important means for terrorist organizations to incite
terrorist activities, recruit fighters and plan attacks. The
international community should strengthen regulations
on the Internet and block terrorist organizations from
using the Internet to spread extremist ideologies and
conduct terrorist financing. The United Nations counterterrorism bodies should strengthen coordination and
help the broader developing membership to strengthen
counter-terrorism capacity-building in cyberspace.
China is an important member in the international
fight against terrorism. In recent years, China has been
deeply involved in the work of multilateral cooperation
mechanisms, such as the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, actively taken
part in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy review and the high-level meeting of Member
States against terrorism and assisted Members in
their counter-terrorism capacity-building through the
China-United Nations Peace and Development Trust
Fund, thereby making an important contribution to the
international fight against terrorism.
China will continue participate in and promote
multilateral and bilateral counter-terrorism cooperation
and provide assistance to developing countries in terms
of counter-terrorism measures and capacity-building.
China wants to work together with all countries to
jointly address the threat of terrorism and violent
extremism in safeguarding world peace and stability.
16/24

23/08/2018

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir
Voronkov,
Executive Director Michéle Coninsx and Ms. Joana
Cook for their informative briefings. Let me also express
my gratitude to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team and the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism for the seventh report
(S/2018/770) of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/
Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat.
The efforts of those bodies in providing strategiclevel reporting and the increasing cooperation among
them with other stakeholders are most appreciated.
While acknowledging that the authorities of United
Nations Member States bear the primary responsibility
to stand up to the evolving threat posed by terrorists,
we should encourage, support and commend the
engagement of international, religious and civil society
organizations, as well as academia and the private
sector. Moreover, the fight against terrorists must be
carried out in accordance with international human
rights standards. In the long run, it requires also
addressing the root causes of terrorism, including poor
development perspectives and human rights situations.
Let me focus on four issues of the utmost importance in
countering Da’esh.
First, with regard to preventing attacks by Da’esh
and the spread of its network, although ISIL might
have lost control of territories in Iraq and Syria, it
remains a threat in both States and beyond, including
through foreign terrorist fighters, terrorist groups
and the related relocation phenomenon. Efforts must
be continued to stop the creation and expansion of
Da’esh and affiliated cells in South-East Asia, Libya,
Afghanistan, West Africa and other regions and
countries. Their members’ cowardly attacks, like the
one in May in Indonesia, must be prevented. Enhancing
border management and law enforcement is crucial in
that regard. While recognizing efforts aimed at raising
standards and strengthening cooperation within those
areas, we call for their further development.
Secondly, concerning stopping the financing of
terrorism, we have to step up efforts in cracking down
on sources and flows of funding for ISIL, including
businesses in which its members have reportedly
invested. We should also identify and address the risk
18-26476

23/08/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of abusing new payment modalities for terrorismfinancing purposes, in particular in countries in
which they remain unregulated. Member States should
strengthen their financial intelligence, use of counterterrorism financing tools and fulfil their obligation
to freeze the assets of all entities on the Da’esh and
Al-Qaida sanctions list. The assistance of the United
Nations and other relevant actors in that area is
vital. We welcome efforts to that end and encourage
their continuation.
Thirdly, with regard to ensuring accountability and
non-recurrence, given the relocation of foreign fighters
and their families, international judicial cooperation,
as well as terrorist prosecution, rehabilitation and
integration efforts, has to be redoubled. That requires
stepping up the collection, analysis and sharing of
data, including evidence, which should be conducted
in compliance with human rights and the rule of law. It
also requires the development of relevant partnerships
and strategies, including for the post-release context of
those convicted of terrorism within prison systems. The
challenges associated with their return to society must
be properly addressed. We welcome the relevant work
that has been done in that area, including the initiative
mentioned in the report, and support its development.
With regard to countering terrorist narratives
and engaging communities, although I welcome the
whole-of-Government and whole-of-society approach
to countering violent extremism adopted by United
Nations entities, I would also like to emphasize the
gender dimension. Women and girls are particularly
vulnerable to exploitation, trafficking and sexual and
gender-based violence perpetrated by terrorists, and
therefore adequate personnel and facilities need to be in
place to provide tailored responses for female victims
of terrorism, in accordance with resolution 2331 (2016).
I agree with the report’s observation that the full
inclusion and empowerment of women are crucial to the
success of programmes to prevent violent extremism
and counter-terrorism. I encourage adopting measures
promoting the systematic involvement of women and
support for women’s initiatives in that regard. The
inclusion of religious leaders and young people is also
crucial and should be encouraged.
In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President,
that Poland, a member of the global coalition against
Da’esh, will not stop in its efforts to combat ISIL’s
activities. We call on all others to do the same, and we
remain ready to cooperate to that end.

S/PV. 8330

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for convening this briefing. We
welcome Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt, whom we are
honoured to see presiding over today’s meeting. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov,
Head of the Office of Counter-Terrorism; Assistant
Secretary-General Michéle Coninsx, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED); and Ms. Joana Cook, Senior
Research Fellow at the International Centre for the
Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence, for their
insightful remarks. My delegation would like to make
the following observations and recommendations.
We see a definite changing trend in the tactics
related to terrorist acts in the world today, which can
be described as low-cost, localized terrorism. The
weakening of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) has resulted in urging its supporters throughout
the world into what can be described as autonomous
jihad in their places of residence by using any means at
their disposal during major social, political, sporting,
religious and cultural events. We see an increase in
the number of suicide attackers who use improvised
explosive devices, vehicles and drones laden with
explosives. Such tactics now widely prevail, thereby
causing serious damage, exacerbated by the return
and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters. The latter
have acquired practical skills in conducting mine and
explosive warfare and military operations in highly
concentrated urban areas. Alarmingly, members of
militants’ families, especially women and children, are
being used for the ill-intentioned ends of terrorists to
spread radical ideology and facilitate, or even carry
out, lethal terrorist acts.
As we heard today, Central Asia constitutes a
potential target of terrorist activities. As noted in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/770), the
greatest threat to the region comes from the largest
terrorist groups in the north of Afghanistan, owing to
the inflow of militants from Syria and Iraq with the
aim of transferring terrorist activities to the region
and beyond. Driven out of Iraq, they see Afghanistan
as a springboard for the creation of a world Islamic
caliphate — an expansion of the so-called Wilayat
Khorasan, comprised of foreign terrorist fighters,
former members of the Taliban, the East Turkestan
Islamic Movement and others. Therefore, international
terrorist organizations will attempt to infiltrate and
incite terrorist activity in Central Asia. That process

18-2647617/24

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

is facilitated by the dissemination of terrorist ideology
to radicalize vulnerable segments of society in
Central Asian countries, thereby leading to the spread
of various unconventional religious movements in
Islam the adherents of which are a recruiting base for
replenishing the ranks of terrorists.
Furthermore, in the light of ISIL’s weakened
position, the authority of Al-Qaida and its regional
branches is gradually growing, thereby creating
another dangerous front in the fight against terrorism.
In that context, Kazakhstan calls making every effort
to consolidate international, regional and national
counter-terrorism systems. Considerable attention
should be paid to preventing the spread of terrorism
and extremism, especially among young people, as
a priority.
At the regional level, Kazakhstan actively carries
out the Joint Plan of Action for the implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
in Central Asia, by addressing all four of its pillars.
The third phase of the regional Joint Plan of Action for
implementing the Global Counter-Terrorsim Strategy in
Central Asia was successfully launched by the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia (UNRCCA), the Office of CounterTerrorism and CTED in May in Ashgabat. Kazakhstan
was the first country to provide financial support for its
activities. We thank other donor countries — first and
foremost the Russian Federation — for their financial
contributions. One of the first events in the framework
of the Joint Plan was a regional workshop — on the
theme “Addressing conditions conducive to the spread
of violent extremism and terrorism” — organized by
the UNRCCA and the Office of Counter-Terrorism in
Astana in May.
To address present-day challenges, Kazakhstan
reiterates the steps it proposed at the High-Level
Conference of Heads of Counter Terrorism Agencies
of Member States, held in New York in June: first, the
adoption of the code of conduct to achieve a world free
of terrorism, initiated by Kazakhstan, as a multilateral
political commitment of the States Members of the
United Nations to engage in a collective fight against
terrorism through concerted efforts; second, placing
under rigorous control, and eventually halting, drug
trafficking, the illegal trade in natural resources and
cultural artefacts and the use of new technologies
and payment modalities, which are the main sources
of financing terrorism; thirdly, sharing experiences
18/24

23/08/2018

and best practices among Members States to prevent
all forms of terrorism, including countering the
financing of terrorism and identifying terrorist
threats in cyberspace, together with protecting critical
infrastructure; fourthly, enhancing the sharing of
biometric information on terrorists among regional
and international databases in order to obtain timely
information about groups and individuals with
destructive intentions; fifthly, establishing an exchange
of best practices on forensics and the suppression of
terrorist ideas on the Internet — it is equally critical
to counteract activities in cyberspace — sixth, taking
proactive measures to counter self-radicalization
and prevent the recruitment of citizens by extremist
organizations; and, seventh, ensuring sustainable
economic development to complement security efforts
in order to provide a meaningful alternative for young
people in particular.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan’s
support for the efforts of the Office of Counter-Terrorsim
to establish a global network of national counterterrorism coordinators under the auspices the United
Nations, as proposed by the Secretary-General. We are
committed to fully engaging in multilateral efforts to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President,, for convening today’s
important meeting. I would like to start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov,
Executive
Director Coninsx and Ms. Cook for their informative
briefings. We are particularly pleased to see Ms. Cook
here today, as the insights of research institutions and
civil society organizations are extremely valuable to
our understanding of how to best address the evolving
threat of terrorism. I thank her for her presentation.
Civil society is often best placed to identify the risks
of radicalization, which, if not prevented, can lead to
violent extremism and terrorism. The collaboration
between the United Nations and civil society should
therefore be further strengthened. In that regard,
we appreciate Under-Secretary-General Voronkov’s
ongoing efforts to increase cooperation between the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and civil society.
The links between terrorism and conflict are clear.
Although the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has
been pushed back considerably, it remains locally
embedded in a number of protracted conflicts — for
example, in Afghanistan and Libya. Efforts to combat
terrorism cannot therefore be viewed in isolation but
18-26476

23/08/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

must be seen within our broader efforts to resolve and
prevent conflicts and promote peace. To fully implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
sustaining peace agenda should be at the core of those
efforts. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
are a longer-term endeavour, but remain the key to
preventing violent extremism, which should be our first
priority. The SDGs are relevant to that agenda in many
aspects, not least by generating hope. Ensuring the
sustainability of the financial system, as reflected in
SDG 16, is directly related to countering the financing
of terrorism, which is decisive in the fight against
terrorism. My Minister of Justice took part in the No
Money for Terror conference, held in Paris in April,
and we have undertaken significant domestic reforms
in that area. We stand ready to take part in efforts at
all levels — global, regional and national — to further
improve the system to cut off access to financing,
through the collective efforts of the United Nations, the
Financial Action Task Force and the European Union.
Ensuring accountability should be another essential
part of our efforts to counter terrorism. We are concerned
in particular about the continued failure to prosecute in
cases of sexual and gender-based violence, including
sexual slavery, perpetrated by terrorist organizations.
The perpetrators of such horrendous crimes must be
held to account. It is not only important to deter further
such acts, but also to ensure that justice is served for the
countless number of victims of terrorism. We welcome
the fact that Tuesday marked the first International Day
of Remembrance of and Tribute to Victims of Terrorism.
We are pleased to see increased attention to both the
gender dimension and to children’s rights in the fight
against terrorism. Ms. Cook’s briefing has reminded us
that those issues deserve greater attention. For example,
it is important that we develop rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes that are tailored to children
and gender-sensitive.
Let me take this opportunity to highlight some
of our national counter-terrorism experiences that we
think could serve as an inspiration to others.
Last year, our national coordinator against violent
extremism presented a report on our efforts. A key
finding in the report was that municipalities were in need
of greater capacity and support to address the challenges
of violent extremism at the local level. Therefore, the
Swedish Centre for Preventing Violent Extremism
was established to support the municipalities in their

S/PV. 8330

work to counter and prevent violent extremism — with
knowledge, research and good examples. In addition,
municipalities have now appointed local coordinators to
help strengthen cooperation between local and national
levels and access State funding for programmes to
prevent extremism.
Another report on children’s involvement in violent
extremism, which was presented by the Ombudsman
for Children in Sweden earlier this year, showed that
there is a need to listen more to children’s experiences
to ensure their successful reintegration into society. As
a result, social services have issued recommendations
on how to deal with returnees and their families, which
are now being implemented.
Although local, national and regional efforts are
important, international cooperation also remains
central if we are to be successful in our counter-terrorism
efforts. The first-ever High-Level Conference for Heads
of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States, which
was successfully held at the end of June this year, was
very useful in facilitating such cooperation. Some of
the most valuable contributions during that Conference
came from civil society representatives. That is why we
stress the importance of having civil society present at
future meetings, without limitations.
Let me conclude by reiterating that all measures
against terrorism must be taken in compliance with
international law, including international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law. Respect for
human rights must never be ignored in the fight
against terrorism.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to express
my appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Michèle
Coninsx for their briefings on the seventh report
(S/2018/770) of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/
Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat. We found the report
very comprehensive and informative. We also thank the
Secretary-General for making counter-terrorism one of
his priorities. I would also like to thank Ms. Cook for
her contribution.
As we have been discussing in the Security
Council, military pressure has resulted in strategic
setbacks for ISIL on the main battleground, and the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/770) rightly states

18-2647619/24

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

that, starting at the end of 2017, ISIL was defeated in
Iraq and was in a headlong retreat in the Syrian Arab
Republic. As a result, the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters towards ISIL in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic has essentially come to a halt. That has
obviously damaged its global propaganda machinery
and slowed its sources of revenue. These points have
also been rightly underlined by the briefers.
Nonetheless, we feel it is only wise not to go
overboard and declare victory over terror. The threat
posed by terrorism will continue to be a big challenge
in the light of what is stated in the report and what we
have just heard from the briefings. The report rightly
states that the ongoing transformation of ISIL from a
territorial entity to a covert network, the activities of
its regional affiliates and the threat posed by returning
and relocating foreign terrorist fighters remain
huge challenges.
Obviously, returnees and relocated fighters from
the conflict zones to other regions now present a
considerable threat to international security. These
examples show that, although notable progress has been
made in defeating ISIL on the battle field, significant
challenges to countering existing threats persist. All
of those challenges require the proper implementation
of United Nations resolutions and, more important,
collaboration and cooperation at all levels among States
and non-State entities.
We also note from the report the ever-growing
threat posed by ISIL and its affiliated fighters and
sympathizers and foreign terrorist fighters in the
Middle East, Africa, Europe, Central and South Asia,
and South-East Asia. In that context, the response of the
United Nations, Member States and other stakeholders
to the evolving threats in the areas of countering
terrorist financing, ensuring border management
and law enforcement, securing international
judicial cooperation, prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration, countering terrorist narratives and
engaging communities are all very important.
Africa remains highly affected by terrorism and
violent extremism. We are seeing what is happening
in North and West Africa, the Sahel region and East
Africa, where ISIL and Al-Qaida affiliates and
sympathizers continue to pose serious threats to peace
and security. With regard to East Africa, Al-Shabaab,
an Al-Qaida affiliate, remains a potent threat to peace
and security in Somalia and the Horn of Africa. But
20/24

23/08/2018

we are also seeing the emergence of ISIL affiliates
operating in Somalia that are controlled and directed
from the central command in Puntland, as indicated
in the Secretary-General’s report. Reports by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development also
reinforce those findings and provide useful insights.
ISIL in Libya remains a threat to the country and
the wider region. Insecurity in the country creates
safe havens for terrorists, which, in turn, affects
neighbouring countries. According to the report,
and despite the lack of concrete evidence, there is a
possibility that terrorists in North Africa are directly
involved in trafficking in drugs or persons. If proved
true, this issue will indeed remain a huge concern. In
West Africa, groups such as the Islamic State in Greater
Sahara and Islamic State’s West African Province, or
Boko Haram, are active, while the threat posed by ISILrelated groups and Al-Qaida affiliates in the region
continues to be a big challenge.
We would like to reiterate that restoring peace and
stability in Libya, Mali and the Lake Chad basin is
indeed critical to denying terrorist groups safe haven.
Enhancing the capacity of countries members of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and of the Lake Chad
region will continue to be very important in countering
terrorists operating in the wider region. That is also why
it is so critical that we get the management of security
right in Somalia as we embark upon the transition
from the African Union Military Observer Mission in
Somalia to Somali security forces.
The enormous challenge we face in the fight
against terrorism should compel us to forge meaningful
cooperation at all levels. The full implementation of
existing international legal frameworks against ISIL
and foreign terrorist fighters by all Member States is
vital to strengthening international cooperation. In
that regard, we would like to reiterate that developing
countries will continue to face huge difficulties
to properly implementing those legal frameworks
because of limitations of capacity in various areas.
Shortcomings that might be observed are not, by and
large, the result of a lack of commitment but rather a
lack of the required resources and technical and other
related capacities — too many to recount here.
Therefore, in addition to forging the necessary
cooperation at all levels, the delivery of capacitybuilding and technical assistance will be critical for the
effective implementation of those legal frameworks.
18-26476

23/08/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We also agree on the need for enhanced coordination
between the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, as well as among all relevant
bodies mandated by the Security Council and the
General Assembly in their efforts to support Member
States in countering the threats posed by terrorism and
violent extremism.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to join others in congratulating
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism;
Ms. Michéle Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
and Ms. Joana Cook, Senior Research Fellow at the
International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation and
Political Violence, for their informative briefings.
My delegation notes with deep concern that,
despite the military and strategic setbacks they have
suffered, Da’esh and its associated individuals, groups,
businesses and entities continue to pose a serious
threat to world peace and security. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the determination of the United
Nations and its constant support to Member States
to meet the persistent challenge of the fight against
terrorism within the framework of a comprehensive and
coordinated approach.
According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/770), many challenges remain, including
the gradual transformation of Da’esh into a nexus of
franchises, as well as the threat posed by the return
and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters. In addition,
Da’esh and its associated groups are using new
information and communication technologies, which
further complicate the fight against terrorist group
financing, recruitment and propaganda activities.
These new challenges force States to refine and
coordinate their tools and responses to match the scale
of the scourge.
My delegation notes with concern that the actions
of Da’esh affect the entire world. In Africa, a significant
number of combatants affiliated with Da’esh remain
very active in Somalia, in the greater Sahel and in West
and North Africa, notably in Egypt and Libya, where
there are 3,000 to 4,000 foreign terrorist fighters.
Terrorist groups continue their destabilization activities
through increasingly sophisticated armed attacks. They
also have expanded their control over smuggling routes

S/PV. 8330

and hamper the free movement of goods and people in
affected areas. In Africa, for example, States already
weakened by all manner of difficulties will be forced to
allocate a significant part of their budgets to combating
their enemies in asymmetrical wars that undermine
their development efforts.
In view of that situation, Côte d’Ivoire urges
solidarity and cooperation among all actors and
advocates an improvement in national and regional
counter-terrorism capacities. In that regard, we
welcome the signing, on 23 February, of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Pact, a framework for
cooperation among the heads of United Nations entities
responsible for combating terrorism and preventing
violent extremism. My country also welcomes the
strengthening of cooperation between the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, through high-level
bilateral consultations in the regions most affected by
terrorism and violent extremism.
Such cooperation is essential and enables the
follow-up of the evaluation visits in order to ensure
that the technical assistance proposed meets the
recommendations and targets the priority needs of each
State. My delegation welcomes the unanimous adoption
by the General Assembly, on 26 June, of resolution
72/284, on the review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, with a view to defeating
terrorism through cooperation.
Lastly, my country welcomed the conclusions of
the first High-level Conference of Heads of CounterTerrorism Agencies of Member States, held on 28 and
29 June at Headquarters. The meeting provided a forum
for exchanges on strengthening multilateral cooperation,
including innovative public-private partnerships, so as
to improve the sharing of sensitive information.
The fight against terrorism is undeniably a national
and international security emergency. No matter how
well developed, the security responses proposed by
current counter-terrorism strategies will be truly
effective only if they are bolstered by bold policies
to combat poverty and youth unemployment, which
are sources of radicalization and violent extremism.
Côte d’Ivoire is therefore of the opinion that terrorist
movements leave us no choice but to pool our means of
fighting them, within the framework of coherent and
coordinated strategies for the fight.

18-2647621/24

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Let me first of all welcome the presence
of Secretary of State Hunt and the manner in which he
has been leading today’s meeting, which has brought
us together to address the threat posed by Da’esh to
international peace and security. We are grateful he
has convened this meeting owing to the importance of
the issue.
I would also like to join previous speakers in
thanking Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, and Ms. Joana Cook, Senior Research
Fellow of the International Centre for the Study of
Radicalization, for their informative briefings on the
threat posed by Da’esh.
The seventh report (S/2018/770) of the SecretaryGeneral on the threat posed by Da’esh to international
peace and security, which we are discussing at
today’s meeting, confirms that, despite its diminished
financial resources and although weakened at its core
and less active, Da’esh remains a global threat with
repercussions on all continents and subregions. The
evolution of Da’esh from a proto-State structure into
a covert and decentralized network is facilitated by
its regional affiliates and its network of thousands
of foreign terrorist fighters, including women and
children, and by a new and deplorable phenomenon of
suicide attacks involving the use of entire families.
It should be stressed that the partial defeats that
Da’esh has suffered in both Iraq and Syria must not
be allowed to mislead us. The growing presence
in Africa of foreign terrorist fighters coming from
the Middle East is helping to strengthen the resolve,
strategies and financial means of their affiliates in
North Africa, the Sahel and Sahara regions, the Lake
Chad basin and East Africa. Its mobility will also
affect the growing collaboration between it and its
affiliates with other terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab.
In Africa in particular, these circumstances, together
with unequal development among countries, poverty,
the inequitable access to opportunities, especially for
young people and women, the increased circulation of
small arms and ammunition as a result of the crisis in
Libya, and the existence of displaced persons, are the
causes of growing complexity of protracted conflicts
on the continent.
22/24

23/08/2018

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea applauds and
encourages the various efforts being made to ensure
better coordination of the United Nations system in
the fight against terrorism, the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Pact, and the continued strengthening of collaboration
between the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism, and among the Counter-Terrorism sanctions
committees, inter alia. We also appreciate the efforts
of Member States to counter terrorism to the best of
their ability, and reiterate the obligation to respect
national sovereignty, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, so as to prevent and neutralize
the structural causes that led to the formation and
expansion of Da’esh in Africa and the Middle East. In
that regard, we would like to make three suggestions
that we believe complement the ongoing global efforts
against Da’esh and terrorism.
First, we believe that it is extremely important to
eliminate safe havens and “black spots” in the fight
against terrorism, in order to limit the movement of
foreign terrorist fighters and the expansionist plans
of Da’esh and its affiliates. It is critical to identify
regions and States where, for whatever reason, the
implementation of counter-terrorism resolutions is
limited, which includes preventing violent extremism,
establishing legal structures, protecting borders,
including sea borders, and stopping the financing of
terrorism, among other priorities. In that regard, we
commend joint actions undertaken this year in Central
Asia by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and encourage similar efforts and research projects
in Africa. We would also like to highlight the Arria
Formula meeting that Equatorial Guinea, Côte d’Ivoire,
the United States, Ethiopia and the Netherlands, with
the collaboration of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, organized in June on the subject
of transnational organized crime at sea and how it is
currently taking place in different parts of the world,
which served to underscore how this phenomenon may,
in some instances, represent a threat to regional and/or
international peace and security.
Secondly, we believe it is crucial to recognize the
need to invest in addressing the root causes of conflict,
and therefore in sustainable and equitable development
and peace. In that context, a powerful counter-narrative
to the Da’esh narrative could be generated, especially
18-26476

23/08/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

through, inter alia, the empowerment of women and
youth, investment in education and the creation of labour
markets. Accordingly, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report contained in document A/72/840,
on the activities of the United Nations system in
implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which, thanks to its reaffirmation by consensus at the
sixth review of the Global Strategy in June, will enable
us to follow up on those activities and better understand
their collective impact.
Thirdly, we believe that strengthening existing
counter-terrorism partnerships, as well as coordination
among them, is key. This is a challenge we can solve
only if we are united and share information and
experiences, thereby strengthening alliances and their
effectiveness against Da’esh.
Equatorial Guinea is one of the main investors in
the Central Office of the Committee of Intelligence
and Security Services of Africa, in which the Heads of
African intelligence and security Services participate,
which assists the African Union and all its institutions
in matters of peace and security. We believe that
the importance of that forum is crucial to fostering
cooperation and brotherhood among countries against
terrorist groups, including Da’esh. In that regard, we
commend the success of the High-level Conference
of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member
States, held last June, and call for similar events to be
held in future. We also encourage support for the joint
efforts of the African Union and the United Nations in
the fight against Da’esh and terrorism in Africa.
Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reiterates the position of the African Union, which
believes that terrorism and violent extremism represent
one of the most dangerous threats to peace, security
and sustainable development in Africa and the world.
In that regard, we reaffirm our commitment to the fight
against terrorism.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful for the convening of today’s
briefing. We thank Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx for
their detailed analysis of the situation with regard to
combating the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS).
We note the active efforts of the bodies that they head
in preparing the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the issue (S/2018/770). We listened with
interest to the briefing by Ms. Cook.

S/PV. 8330

Amid the military and territorial losses, the
destruction of the economic infrastructure, the
weakening of the propaganda machine and the
demoralization of the fighters, the group’s leadership
seeks any opportunity to maintain its influence. The
global terrorist Tower of Babel has collapsed. However,
ISIS cells continue to speak with one voice and to
successfully coordinate among themselves. Following
the destruction of the hydrocarbon smuggling network,
terrorists have turned to new sources of financial and
logistical support.
There have been reported incidents of speculation
on stock markets, and the terrorists strive to invest
funds in the legal sectors of the economies of a wide
range of countries. The supporters of ISIS actively
invest in tourism, hospitality, industry, agriculture,
fish farms, pharmacology and construction companies.
The group also continues to fight for control of
drug-smuggling routes, including in Afghanistan.
Furthermore, ISIS continues to receive funds from
foreign sponsors cooperating under the cover of
philanthropic foundations, religious groups and other
non-governmental organizations.
We note with satisfaction that the starting point of
the report presented today was an acknowledgement of
the success of the Syrian army in combating terrorism.
That was evident in the intense fight against ISIS in
the suburbs of Damascus. At the same time, there has
been progress far beyond the boundaries of the Syrian
capital. With the support of the Russian armed forces,
more than 1,400 towns and cities have been liberated
from the presence of terrorists. More than 96 per cent
of the Syrian territory has now been brought under the
control of Government forces and the people’s militia
units. As a result, more than 1.5 million Syrian refugees
have already been able to return to their homes. At the
same time, we do not overlook the possibility of an
increasing number of terrorist sleeper cells in Syria.
The supporters of ISIS are doing their utmost. They
actively recruit minors, including children under the
age of 12 years, to carry out terrorist attacks. It is
entirely possible that terrorist attacks will become more
frequent, in particular in the area of Idlib. Furthermore,
there is an increasing likelihood of the threat of ISIS in
Afghanistan, where, according to various reports, there
are 4,000 to 10,000 active members of that group, a
significant number of whom are in the areas bordering
the Central Asian States.

18-2647623/24

S/PV.8330

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In parallel with the military defeat of ISIS, it is
necessary to most effectively address the issue of holding
radical elements to account. In that context, it behoves
us to raise the issue of the inadmissibility of attempts
to supplant the functions of Syrian Government’s
counter-terrorism bodies. As stated in the report of the
Secretary-General, in parallel with Government forces,
arrests of ISIS members are also being carried out by
certain armed entities. We would like to receive more
detailed information. Who specifically is undertaking
such tasks and on what basis? What is the fate of the
detainees? Are there plans to hand them over to the
authorities? We trust that we will receive answers from
the specialized Security Council committees without
having to await the issuance of the next report.
I would reiterate that, ultimately, all those who
provide direct or indirect assistance to terrorists,
not to mention the fighters themselves, must be held
to account. However, the collection, processing and
transfer of evidence to judicial bodies must be done
strictly in accordance with international law and with
full respect for the sovereignty of the States where ISIS
perpetrated the crimes. If that factor is not taken into
account, not a single initiative to investigate terrorist
crimes can claim to be legitimate. For our part, Russian
investigative bodies actively participate in such efforts
on Syrian soil with the consent of, and in cooperation
with, Damascus officials.
During the discussion of the sixth report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/80) in February (see
S/PV.8178), the Russian delegation drew attention to the
blatant breach of the arms embargo with regard to ISIS.
What remains unresolved is the question of how that
gang of thugs put together an arsenal of weapons, which
for seven years has enabled it essentially to resist the
world’s largest armies. The current report depicts the
situation as if the ISIS fighters are content with merely

24/24

23/08/2018

what happens to come their way, robbing storage sites
in the territories under their control and manufacturing
improvised explosive devices. In reality, those terrorists
are able to manufacture only a small proportion of the
weapons using an improvised method and only their
most primitive models. There is increasing evidence of
arms being provided from abroad, including through
semi-legal structures or even with the support of the
intelligence services of certain countries. We trust
that there will be a detailed discussion on ways to
address that issue during the international conference
on countering illegal arms supplies in the context
of combating international terrorism, to be held in
Moscow on 3 and 4 September.
ISIS activity has decreased, which has enabled
Al-Qaida to appear once again, with financing to
the tune of $20 million to $40 million a month. That
group is strengthening its ties with affiliated groups in
North Africa. It strives to take control of local criminal
businesses and to invest in the agro-industrial holdings
of African countries. According to available reports, as
ISIS is displaced Al-Qaida and its allies may take on
the role of countering international efforts to peacefully
resolve the conflict in Syria.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
the only way to eliminate the threat posed by ISIS,
Al-Qaida and affiliated groups is on a genuinely
collective basis. In that regard, we are studying with
interest the initiative by the Secretariat leadership
to set up a network of counter-terrorist coordinators.
We are convinced that strengthening the practical
cooperation of the specialized agencies of Member
States represents an important factor in establishing a
single United Nations-led counter-terrorism coalition
on a non-ideological basis, which is something for
which we have long called.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

18-26476
