S/PRST/2007/22

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 June 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5705th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 June 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and in particular the Security Council’s primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In this respect, the Security
Council recognizes the role that natural resources can play in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations.”
“The Security Council reaffirms that every state has the full and inherent
sovereign right to control and exploit its own natural resources in accordance
with the Charter and the principles of international law.”
“The Security Council stresses that natural resources are a crucial factor
in contributing to long-term economic growth and sustainable development.”
“The Security Council recalls resolution 1625 (2005) whereby the
Council adopted the declaration on strengthening the effectiveness of the
Security Council’s role in conflict prevention, particularly in Africa, in which
it reaffirmed its determination to take action against illegal exploitation and
trafficking of natural resources and high-value commodities in areas where it
contributes to the outbreak, escalation or continuation of armed conflict.”
“Moreover, the Security Council notes that, in specific armed conflict
situations, the exploitation, trafficking, and illicit trade of natural resources
have played a role in areas where they have contributed to the outbreak,
escalation or continuation of armed conflict. The Security Council, through its
various resolutions, has taken measures on this issue, more specifically to
prevent illegal exploitation of natural resources, especially diamonds and
timber, from fuelling armed conflicts and to encourage transparent and lawful
management of natural resources, including the clarification of the
responsibility of management of natural resources, and has established
sanctions committees and groups and panels of experts to oversee the
implementation of those measures.”
“The Security Council emphasizes the importance of improving the work
of and strengthening the contributions made by existing sanctions committees
and the various experts’ groups and panels established by the Council in
07-39405 (E) 250607

*0739405*

S/PRST/2007/22

dealing with the impact of illegal exploitation of natural resources on conflicts
in the countries under its consideration. The Security Council also recalls the
work done by the Security Council Informal Working Group on General Issues
of Sanctions (2006) and refers in this regard to its report (S/2006/997).”
“The Security Council recognizes that UN missions and peacekeeping
operations deployed in resource-endowed countries experiencing armed
conflict could play a role in helping the governments concerned, with full
respect of their sovereignty over their natural resources, to prevent the illegal
exploitation of those resources from further fuelling the conflict. The Security
Council underlines the importance of taking this dimension of conflict into
account, where appropriate, in the mandates of UN and regional peacekeeping
operations, within their capabilities, including by making provision for
assisting governments, upon their request, in preventing the illegal exploitation
of natural resources by the parties to the conflict, in particular, where
appropriate, by developing adequate observation and policing capacities to that
end.”
“The Security Council recognizes, in conflict and post-conflict situations,
the importance of cooperation, in shared responsibility, among source, transit
and destination countries in preventing and combating trafficking, illicit trade,
and illegal exploitation of natural resources. The Security Council also
emphasizes the important contribution of commodity monitoring and
certification schemes such as the Kimberley Process.”
“The Security Council acknowledges the crucial role that the
Peacebuilding Commission, together with other UN and non-UN actors, can
play, in post-conflict situations, in assisting governments, upon their request,
in ensuring that natural resources become an engine for sustainable
development. In this regard, the Security Council recognizes the role of
voluntary initiatives aiming at improving revenue transparency such as
Extractive Industries Transparancy Initiative (EITI). The Security Council also
stresses that the use, disposal and management of natural resources is a multifaceted and cross sector issue that involves various UN organizations. In this
regard, the Security Council acknowledges the valuable contribution of
various UN organizations in promoting lawful, transparent and sustainable
management and exploitation of natural resources.”
“The Security Council recognizes the need for the private sector to
contribute to the good governance and avoidance of illegal exploitation of
natural resources in countries in conflict. In this regard, the Council also notes
the important contribution voluntary principles and standards play in
encouraging multinational enterprises to adopt a responsible business conduct
such as provided for by OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and
the OECD Risk Awareness Tool for Multinational Enterprises in Weak
Governance Zones and the UN Global Compact.”
“The Security Council stresses the important role, in the context of
Security Sector Reform in post-conflict environment, of transparent and
effective national security and customs structures for the effective control and
management of natural resources by preventing the illegal access to and the
trade and exploitation of those resources.”

2

07-39405

S/PRST/2007/22

“The Security Council emphasizes that, in countries emerging from
conflict, lawful, transparent and sustainable management, -at local, national
and international level-, and exploitation of natural resources is a critical
factor in maintaining stability and in preventing a relapse into conflict. The
Council recalls in this respect that it has welcomed country specific initiatives
such as the Governance and Economic Assistance Management Program
(GEMAP) in Liberia (S/RES/1626 (2005)) and related efforts such as the
Liberia Forest Initiative.”
“The Security Council reiterates the important role of regional
organizations in the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations as well as
its relevant resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631 (2005), PRST 2006/39 and
PRST 2007/7. In this regard, the Security Council recognizes, in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations, the need for a more coordinated approach
by the United Nations, regional organizations and governments concerned, in
particular the empowerment of governments in post-conflict situations to
better manage their resources.”

07-39405

3
