V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting further the efforts made for the benefit of
the Sahel by the Office for Sahelian Relief Operations
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and by the United Nations Sahelian Office,
Recognizing the need for active measures to stimulate
new economic activities,
Taking note of the rcport of the Secretary-General
of 21 September 19 77, 48
l. Urges Member States and the relevant international institutions-in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the International
Fund for Agricultura! Development, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme and the World Health Organization-to
continue to provide effective and continuous assistance
to the Government of Cape Verde so that it may <leal
effectively with the catastrophic situation resulting from
the drought, and to ensure the supply of food, medica]
and other products to that country;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to send a special
mission to Cape Verde with a vicw to determining, in
consultation with the Government, the nature and
extent of the development aid needed in order:
(a) To expand and strengthen the economic and
social base of the country;
(b) To initiate an accelerated development programme;
3. Decides to include Cape Verde in the list of the
least developed countries;
4. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary resources for an effective programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to Cape Verde;
(b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of
resources and to co-ordinate the international programme of assistance to Cape Verde;
(e) To keep the situation in Cape Verde under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financia! institutions, and to report on the question to
the General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
1 O1 st plenary meeting
13 Deccmber 1977
32/100.

Assistance to Guinea-Bissau

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the serious economic situation
in Guinea-Bissau as a result of more than eleven years
of a war of national liberation, the return of large
numbers of refugees and the total lack of infrastructure
for development,
Recalling that Guinea-Bissau is included in the list
of the most seriously affected countries, 4 n
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on
48 A/32/219.

49 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thitty-first
Session, Supplánent No. 21 (A/31/21), annex IV.

85

the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
an<l Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations svstem to extend assistance to the newly independent ,Índ
emerging States,
Recu!ling recommendation 99 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Devclopment/'º particularly paragraph 4 thereof, in which
the Conference recommended that measures of assistance should be undertaken by the appropriate org~1!S
of the United Nations system in favour of the n~wly
independent States in Africa,
Recalling further its resolution 3339 (XXIX) of 17
December l 974, in which it invited Member States,
particularly the developed countries, to provide economic assistance to thc ncwly independent State of
Guinea-Bissau,
l. Urgently appeals to Member States and the international institutions concerned-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the international financia! institutions, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the World Food Programmeto assist the Government of Guinea-Bissau in an effective and continuous manner so as to enable it to <leal
effectively with the difficult situation resulting from thc
long liberation struggle and the return of large numbers
of refugees from neighbouring countries, and to meet
its economic development needs;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilizc the
financia!, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular the developed
countries and the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, with a view to meeting the
short-term and long-term development needs of this
newly independent country;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning at its fourteenth session, as a matter of priority, to
give favourable consideration to the question of thc
inclusion of Guinea-Bissau in the list of the least developed countries 51 and to submit its conclusions to
t~e Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fifth sess10n;
. 4. Invites in the meantime Member States, partlcularly the developed countries, and the organizations
of the United Nations system to grant Guinea-Bissau
the same benefits as those enjoyed by the least developed among the developing countries in the light of
prevailing conditions in Guinea-Bissau;
5. Requests _the Secretary-General to keep this
matter under rev1ew and to rcport to thc General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
1O1 st plenary meeting
13 December 1977

32il01.

A,isistance to Seychelles

The General A ssembly,

Having heard the statement of the representative of
Seychelles 52 concerning the serious economic and social

"º

See Proceedings of the U11ited Nations Conference 011
Trade and Deve/opment, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report anti
Annexes (Umted Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IT.D:10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
~ 1 See ~esolutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).
" 2 Otficwl Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-secontl.
Scssio11. Second Committec, 41st meeting, paras. 27-31.
