General Assembly-Tbirty-tbird Session

46

Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 25 to 30
July 1978,82
Reaffirming its conviction that concrete action in
furtherance of the objectives of the Declaration would
be a substantial contribution to the strengthening of
intemational peace and security,
Deeply concerned at the intensification of great
Power military presence, conceived in the context of
great Power rivalry, leading to an increase of tension
in the area,
Considering that the continued military presence
of the great Powers in the lndian Ocean, conceived
in the context of great Power rivalry, with the danger
of a competitive escalation of such a military presence,
gives greater urgency to the need to take practica!
steps for the early implementation of the Declaration
of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
Considering also that the creation of a zone of
peace in the lndian Ocean requires co-operation
among the regional States to ensure conditions of
peace and security within the region, as envisaged in
the Declaration, and the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the littoral and hinterland States,
Further considering that, at its tenth special session,
devoted to disarmament, it noted the proposal for
establishing the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace,
taking into account its deliberations and its relevant
resolutions, as well as the need to ensure the maintenance of peace and security in the region,33
Noting that talks were initiated between the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America regarding their military presence in the Indian
Ocean, and that the two countries have kept the
Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean informed of
the current situation conceming these talks,
Regretting, however, that the talks are suspended,
Recalling its resolution 32/86, in which it decided
that a meeting of the littoral and hinterland States
of the Indian Ocean should be convened in New York
on a suitable date,
l. Urges that the talks between the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America regarding their military presence in the Indian
Ocean be resumed without delay;
2. Renews its invitation to the great Powers and
other majar maritime users of the Indian Ocean that
have not so far seen their way to co-operating effectively with the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian
Ocean to enter with the least possible delay into consultations with the Committee regarding the implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as
a Zone of Peace;

3. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee34 and in particular section 111 concerning the
steps taken towards making the necessary preparations
for holding a meeting of the littoral and hinterland
States of the Indian Ocean;
4. Decides to convene a meeting of the littoral
and hinterland States of the lndian Ocean in New
York from 2 to 13 July 1979, as the next step
32 See A/33/206.
33 Resolution S-10/2, para.

64 (b ).

34 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/33/29 and Corr.1).

towards the convening of a conference on the lndian
Ocean for the implementation of the Declaration of
the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace as contained in
General Assembly resolution 2832 (XXVI), such
States being listed in the reports of the Ad Hoc Committee to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth,85
thirtieth,36 and thirty-third sessions,87 and decides that
other States not falling within this category, but which
have participated or have expressed their willingness
to participate in the work of the Committee, could
attend upan the invitation of the Committee;
5. Decides that the Ad Hoc Committee, performing the functions of a preparatory committee, will
make the necessary preparations for convening the
Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the
Indian Ocean and that the Committee will set up
informal working groups for this purpose when
necessary;
6. Requests the Meeting of the Littoral and
Hinterland States of the lndian Ocean to submit its
report to the General Assembly at the thirty-fourth
session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary provision for the Meeting, including the
essential background information, relevant documentation and summary records, and to continue to render
ali necessary assistance to the Ad Hoc Committee,
including the provision of summary records;
8. Renews the general mandate of the Ad Hoc
Committee as defined in the relevant resolutions;
9. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a
full report on its work.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

33/69.

World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, 2930 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972,
3183 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3260 (XXIX)
of 9 December 1974, 3469 (XXX) of 11 December
1975, 31/190 of 21 December 1976 and 32/89 of
12 December 1977,
Reiterating its conviction that all peoples of the
world have a vital interest in the success of disarmament negotiations and that all States should be in a
position to contribute to the adoption of measures
for the achievement of this goal,
Stressing anew its belief that a world disarmament
conference, adequately prepared and convened at an
appropriate time, could promote the realization of
such an aim and that the co-operation of ali nuclearweapon Powers would considerably facilitate its
attainment,
Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the World Disarmament Conference,38
3 5 /bid., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 29 (Al
9029), annex I, para. 5.
36 /bid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/10029),
para. 29.
37 /bid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/33/29
and Corr.1), para. 27.
as /bid., Supplement No. 28 (A/33/28).

111.

Recalling that, in paragraph 122 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly,39 it decided that, at the earliest appropriate
time, a world disarmament conference should be convened with universal participation and with adequate
preparation,
1. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee
on the World Disarmament Conference;
2. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to maintain
close contact with the representatives of the States
possessing nuclear weapons in order to remain currently informed of their attitudes, as well as with all
other States, and to consider any relevant comments
and observations which might be made to the Committee, especially having in mind paragraph 122 of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session;
3. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit a
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the ítem entitled "World
Disarmament Conference".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/70.

United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively lnjurious or
to Have lndiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the suffering of civilian populations
and combatants could be significantly reduced if general agreement could be attained in the prohibition
or restriction for humanitarian reasons of the use of
specific conventional weapons, including any which
may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to
have indiscriminate effects,
Mindful that positive results as regards the non-use
or restriction of use for humanitarian reasons of specific conventional weapons would serve, in addition,
as encouragement in the broader field of disarmament,
Recalling its resolution 32/152 of 19 December
1977, in which it decided to convene in 1979 a
United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects,
Reiterating the task entrusted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session to the Conference,
nam.ely, that it should consider specific categories of
such weapons, including those which had been the
subject-matter of previously conducted discussions, as
well as the appeal addressed by the Assembly at its
special session to all States to contribute towards
carrying out this task, 40
Recalling its decision to convene a Preparatory
Conference for the United Nations Conference with
the task of establishing the best possible substantive
basis for the achievem.ent at the United Nations Conference of agreements on prohibitions or restrictions
39 Resolution

S-10/2.
40 lbid., paras. 86 and 87.

47

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

of use of certain conventional weapons and of considering organizational matters relating to the holding
of the United Nations Conference,41
1. Takes note of the report of the Preparatory
Conference for the United Nations Conference on
Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscrim.inate Effects42 on its first session and of the progress made
with regard to organizational aspects;
2. Notes that a number of proposals on the
substantive work of the United Nations Conference
were introduced and views exchanged on them;
3. Reaffirms its belief that the United Nations
Conference should strive to reach agreement on specific instruments in the field of certain conventional
weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects;
4. Endorses the decision of the Preparatory Conference to hold another session from 19 March to 12
April 1979 with a view to continuing its preparatory
work in respect of both the organizational and the
substantive aspects of the United Nations Conference;
5. Reaffirms its decision that the United Nations
Conference should be held in 1979 and endorses the
recomm.endation of the Preparatory Conference that
it should be held at Geneva from 1O to 28 September
1979;

6. Invites States to participate actively in the
further work of the Preparatory Conference and in
the United Nations Conference itself and to be represented, in so far as possible, by the required legal,
military and medical expertise;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide continued assistance to the Preparatory Conference in its
work and to undertake the necessary preparations for
the holding of the United Nations Conference;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "United
Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions
of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscrim.inate Effects: report of the Conference".

84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/71.

Review of the implementation of the
recommendations and decisions adopted
by the General Assembly at its tenth
special session
A

MILITARY AND NUCLEAR COLLABORATION WITH ISRAEL

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned over the continued and rapid
Israelí military build-up,
Alarmed by the increasing evidence regarding Israelí attempts to acquire nuclear weapons,
Expressing its alarm. over the use by Israel of
cluster bom.bs against refugee camps and civilian
targets in southern Lebanon,
4 1 Resolution

32/152, paras. 3 and 4.

42 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third

Session, Supplement No. 44 (A/33/44).
