S/PV.7827

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7827th meeting

Tuesday, 6 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Barro
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2016/1011)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-41510 (E)
*1641510*

S/PV.7827

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2016/1011)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/1011, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, and Ambassador Ramlan
Bin Ibrahim, Permanent Representative of Malaysia,
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

06/12/2016

on the following three points. First, what has been
achieved so far? Secondly, what are the challenges?
Thirdly, what is the outlook for Libya in 2017?
With respect to my first point, the Presidency
Council has been operating for almost nine months
from Tripoli. Following economic talks in London and
Rome, the Presidency Council now meets regularly
with financial institutions to address Libya’s economic
troubles. Oil production has increased significantly,
tripling from August to almost 600,000 barrels a
day. I am thankful for the fact that the international
community is clear and in consensus. It supports the
Presidency Council and the Libyan Political Agreement.
In that regard, the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the United Nations have formed a
troika to work together and provide stronger support.
Ambassadors are submitting their credentials to the
Presidency Council, and Member States are looking to
return to Tripoli. Advances against terrorism have been
made in both the east and the west. The Islamic State
has shrunk from occupying the entirety of Sirte to now
just few buildings. Although it continues to be a threat,
the days of the Islamic State controlling territory in
Libya are over, while in Benghazi the Libyan National
Army continues to make progress, taking area after
area. I would like to pay tribute today once again to
all the sons of Libya who have sacrificed their lives for
this common cause. I would also like to commemorate
the many civilians who have died in the course of
these clashes.

(spoke in English)

My second point is that while these developments
are encouraging, there is much to be concerned about.
The institutions of the Libyan Political Agreement still
work far below expectations. Although the Presidency
Council resides in Tripoli, the Government of National
Accord has limited authority. Twice, proposed
Government of National Accord lists have been
rejected by the House of Representatives. Cooperation
within and between many of the institutions remains
gridlocked. Pretender Governments compete for power.
The Interim Government in Bayda exists in parallel to
the Government of National Accord. The Government
of National Salvation has also tried make a comeback in
recent weeks, creating a tense stand-off between rival
armed groups in Tripoli.

The first anniversary of the signing of the Libyan
Political Agreement on 17 December is fast approaching.
It is time to take stock. I will concentrate my remarks

The fragmented security situation allows criminal
and terrorist networks to flourish. Kidnappings,
extortion, and theft occur daily. Over the last days,

I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like
to congratulate Spain on its accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for December.
Members of the Council have before them the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (S/2016/1011).
I would like to update members on developments in
the situation.

2/7

16-41510

06/12/2016

The situation in Libya

we have seen the most violent clashes in Tripoli since
2014 between armed groups competing for power and
territory. I am very concerned and take this opportunity
to urge and call on forces engaged in the violence
there to immediately stop fighting and terrorizing the
population, and I call for wisdom to prevail.
The deadly clashes were triggered by the murder
of the religious scholar Sheikh Nader Al-Omrani,
whom I met a few months ago. We recently also saw
clashes in Sabha, in the south, where 23 persons were
killed. These events are symptoms of the lack of
security and underlying tensions among communities.
Weapon deliveries are still going on, and they appear
in violation of the weapons embargo imposed by the
Security Council and sometimes end up in the hands
of terrorist groups throughout the region. Until Libya
has a reliable and coherent security apparatus, the arms
embargo must remain in force and enforced.
The fundamentals of the Libyan economy also
need to be tackled as a matter of urgency. Although the
increase in oil production provides some relief, Libya
runs a budget deficit of around 70 per cent of gross
domestic product (GDP) — the largest budget deficit
compared to GDP in the world. Still, the Presidency
Council has challenges utilizing funds. Relations
between the Central Bank and the Presidency Council
are strained. While the some opponents of the Libyan
Political Agreement in Tripoli seem to have unrestricted
access to huge sums of money, the Presidency Council
and the Central Bank of Libya are still struggling to
find a way to disburse money.
I urge the Central Bank of Libya to save the
Government of National Accord and other institutions
by rapidly disbursing money in an orderly way and
with a minimum of bureaucracy. Access to funds is the
lifeline of the Presidency Council. Libya’s financial
reserves have shrunk from $108 billion in 2013 to a
mere $45 billion. The country will face an economic
meltdown unless something changes.
People in Libya are rightly frustrated at the slow pace
of progress. More containment is not a recipe for Libya
in 2017. As many say, the mistake was to leave Libya
alone after 2011. Six years later, we must engage more
with our Libyan partners. Together, we must work so
that root questions are firmly and decisively addressed.
The situation requires Antibiotics, not aspirin.
I am convinced that the Libyan Political Agreement
remains the one and only viable framework. It is

S/PV.7827

without alternatives. Until today, even the most
vociferous critics of the Agreement acknowledge that it
is the only workable framework. That said, the Libyan
Political Agreement has not fulfilled expectations. its
implementation has stalled. However its articles are
not set in stone. The Libyan Political Agreement even
foresees a mechanism for change, should the political
circumstances demand. Libya must move forward. I
would like to propose six points.
First, the outstanding political questions must be
tackled. I have convened the Libyan political dialogue
multiple times. In November, the Libyan political
dialogue called on the House of Representatives to
amend the Constitutional Declaration to incorporate the
Libyan Political Agreement. I conveyed this message
to the House of Representatives President, Mr. Agila
Saleh Essa Gwaider, urging him to convene a meeting
of the House of Representatives and vote, and thereafter
endorse the Government of National Accord presented
by the Presidency Council. Should this be difficult, I
asked President Gwaider to tell us why, so that we could
be helpful and address the open questions within the
House of Representatives.
This being done, the Libyan Political Agreement
will be owned by the institutions that it creates:
the House of Representative and the State Council.
All outstanding questions, including the supreme
commandership and the chain of command of the
Libyan Army, can be addressed by the process provided
for by the Libyan Political Agreement. However, a path
forward should consist of inclusive, peaceful dialogue
and never military escalation.
Secondly, the issue of armed groups in Tripoli must
be tackled urgently. In this regard, I give my full backing
to the creation of the presidential guard, which will
provide protection to State institutions and embassies.
I agree with those who say that the Presidency Council
and the Government of National Accord must not be
protected by armed groups. The vision of a presidential
guard has been transformed into a realistic plan. This
plan deserves our full support. It is not an alternative
to the building up of the Libyan Army under a unified
command. Once established, the presidential guard
will apply for exceptions from the weapons embargo to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) will convene a high-level meeting next
week, on 13 December, to remove the obstacles to the
formation of the presidential guard.

16-415103/7

S/PV.7827

The situation in Libya

Thirdly, the fight against terrorism has produced
results. I have spoke about Sirte and Benghazi. However,
the gains are not irreversible. The economic recovery of
Sirte and Benghazi in particular has to be planned and
implemented. This is a matter of priority.
Fourthly, the fundamentals of the Libyan economy
must be addressed. Deficit, inflation, the lack of
liquidity and more must be tackled to avoid economic
meltdown. The Presidency Council must have access to
funds and the capacity to disperse them. In this regard,
I will maintain my support to the current multilateral
meetings on Libyan financing, which have already led
to valuable achievements such as the appointment of
the Minister of Finance. I intend to provide technical
support to the Presidency Council to assist in building
its administrative capacity.
Fifthly, the issue of human rights and the rule of
law, including the situation of migrants, must be more
effectively and comprehensively addressed. Libya is a
human marketplace. That is a shame for a country like
Libya. It has to be addressed and it has to end. The
rule of law must also be respected. Summary justice
dispensed by armed groups must make way for due
process. Abductions, assassinations and threats against
judicial officers and social activists must cease. In this
regard, I would like to reiterate my full support to the
efforts of the International Criminal Court and applaud
the Prosecutor’s announcement that new investigations
will begin in Libya.
Sixthly and finally, I want to emphasise the
importance of UNSMIL returning to Tripoli in a
phased way once security questions are adequately
mitigated. We can be far more effective there than we
can hope to be in Tunis. UNSMIL must return to Libya;
we should do it now to support all partners in these
difficult moments. Stability can be better achieved if
the international community is on the ground and not
in exile.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like once again to thank the Security
Council for its unwavering support to the Libyan
Political Agreement. The only alternative to the Libyan
Political Agreement is chaos. The Libyan Political
Agreement must work, can work and will work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Kobler for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ibrahim.
4/7

06/12/2016

Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established by
the same resolution. The report covers the period from
15 September to 6 December 2016, during which time
the members of the Committee met once in informal
consultations and dealt with a number of issues via the
silence procedure.
At the outset, I would like to brief the Council on
the main points of the interim report of the Panel of
Experts under resolution 2278 (2016), which the Panel
submitted to the Security Council on 28 September. In
the report, the Panel described several spoiling actions
by armed groups and political actors, both in the east
and the west of Libya, that delayed or complicated
the political transition as laid out in the Libyan
Political Agreement.
On the security side, the Panel reported unabated
military activities, including the use of air assets by
different actors, in Benghazi and Darnah and in the
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) in Sirte. The Panel noted a change in control over
oil facilities, and continued clashes between armed
groups in Tripoli and along the coastal road to Tunisia.
The Panel expressed concern about the increased
presence of foreign armed groups in Libya, as well as
continued human rights violations by various factions,
in particular by ISIL, including mass killings, arbitrary
arrests and detentions and kidnappings
Concerning violations of the arms embargo, the
Panel reported on transfers of military aircraft and
vehicles and the presence of mercenaries and foreign
military forces, as well as foreign airstrikes, and also
expressed its concern with regard to diversions, both
within and emanating from Libya. The Panel assessed
that armed groups continued to finance themselves
through illegal means, including through the smuggling
of fuel. The Panel noted with concern the continued
fragmentation of Libya’s financial and oil institutions.
With regard to the assets freeze, the Panel informed
that it was investigating alleged attempts to move
large amounts of assets from other parts of Africa
back to Libya. The Panel furthermore reported on its
investigations concerning the assets of other listed
individuals and confirmed a violation of the travel ban
by a listed individual.
16-41510

06/12/2016

The situation in Libya

The Panel presented a total of 16 recommendations,
of which one was directed at the Security Council,
13 at the Committee and two at Member States. The
Committee discussed the Panel’s interim report and its
recommendations during informal consultations held
on 20 October. The Panel’s report was generally well
received. The main points emerging in the discussion
were concerns about the political transition and the
security situation; security assistance to the Government
of National Accord; arms flows into and out of Libya and
the financing of armed groups. The Committee agreed
to follow up on six recommendations. On 26 October,
the Committee issued a press release containing a brief
summary of the informal consultations.
Let me now very briefly touch on the activities
of the Committee during the reporting period, which
notably increased. On 4 October, the Committee
received an inspection report from the European
Union military operation in the Southern Central
Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR MED) Operation Sophia.
No prohibited items were found on board the inspected
vessel. In accordance with paragraph 10 of resolution
2292 (2016), the Committee informed the flag State
of the inspection on 14 October. On 25 October, the
Committee extended an invitation to the operations
commander of EUNAVFOR MED Operation Sophia
to brief the Committee, in accordance with paragraph
3 (c) of the Committee’s guidelines. The date of the
briefing is in the process of being determined.
In follow-up to a recommendation made by the
Panel of Experts in its interim report, the Committee
updated the existing entries on its sanctions list with
additional identifying information on 11 November,
and subsequently issued a corresponding press release
and note verbale to all Member States. Also in followup to recommendations contained in the Panel’s interim
report, the Committee dispatched two notes verbales to
all Member States on 15 November, covering issues
relating to the arms embargo and to funding for
investigations by the International Criminal Court.
On 21 November, following receipt of a note
verbale from the Permanent Mission of Libya to the
United Nations nominating a focal point concerning the
measures set out in resolution 2146 (2014) in relation
to attempts to illicitly export crude oil from Libya, the
Committee wrote to Libya to request the contact details
of that focal point.

S/PV.7827

During the reporting period, the Committee
also received two arms embargo exemption requests
invoking paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011),
one of which it approved. The Committee furthermore
received an assets freeze exemption request invoking
paragraph 19 (b) of resolution 1970 (2011), which is
currently on hold pending the receipt of additional
information. The Committee also responded to two
requests for guidance on the arms embargo as it relates
to non-lethal military equipment, and to one request for
guidance on the assets freeze measure as it relates to a
listed entity.
Finally, given that this is my last briefing to the
Council under paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970
(2011), I would like to thank the Committee members
for all the cooperation and support rendered over the
past two years.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Ibrahim for his briefing.
The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Special Representative Martin Kobler and
Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim for their briefings.
I also take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Ibrahim for his distinguished service at the helm of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011).
Five years after the Libyan civil war, which
destroyed the country, and one year since the signing of
the Libyan Political Agreement, we must say that — if
we are totally sincere — regrettably there has been no
major progress seen in the political transition process
or in putting together the Government of National
Accord. The support the Government has garnered
within the Libyan political system is minimal, while the
terms set for each new step — such as the presentation
of a revamped list of the members of the Cabinet to
the House of Representatives in Tobruk in order to
secure its long-delayed endorsement — continue to
undermine the chances for stabilizing the country and
putting it back on track towards normalcy. It is essential
that the Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord expand its base of support among the
population. Otherwise, it will be very difficult for it
to eventually succeed in governing the country under
relatively normal conditions.

16-415105/7

S/PV.7827

The situation in Libya

Of the few news we can highlight is the progress in
the anti-terrorist struggle, which has made it possible
to advance on positions of the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria, mostly in Sirte and Benghazi.
We continue to be concerned about the serious
humanitarian situation for the Libyan population.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, more than 1 million people
are in need of assistance. Migrants continue to face a
desperate situation given the fact that, in spite of the
measures that the Security Council has adopted, the
Mediterranean Sea continues to serve as a grave for
thousands of Libyans and other nationals who try to
cross it for a better future.
We welcome the announcement by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons of the
completion of the elimination of the remaining chemical
weapons in Libya, which have been transferred outside
of the country for subsequent destruction, in compliance
with resolution 2298 (2016), which the Council adopted
in July.
We reiterate our support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and for the
role of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
We urge them to continue their joint efforts with Prime
Minister Serraj and the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord. Their work will be key
to ensuring that the Government of National Accord
can consolidate its legitimacy throughout the country,
which is the only way by which it can urgently address
the major challenges that await it to respond to the
multiple and growing needs facing Libya, as Mr. Kobler
pointed out a few moments ago, including combating
terrorism and the serious humanitarian, economic and
security crises affecting millions of people.
Against that backdrop, we believe that it will be
important to carefully establish a new mandate for
the Mission. We also think that the strategic review
recommended by the Secretary-General, to be carried
out at the beginning of the next year, presents a good
opportunity to harmonize the presence of United
Nations in Libya with the political, operational and
security reality on the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
6/7

06/12/2016

country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, as well as to thank Mr. Martin
Kobler for his important briefing.
On behalf of the Government of National Accord,
I would like to welcome the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL). We hope that the Mission will soon be able
to return to Tripoli and be more active in the coming
months, in particular with regard to the implementation
of the Libyan Political Agreement and in strengthening
State institutions.
I would also like to thank His Excellency Ambassador
Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permanent Representative of
Malaysia, for his briefing in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, as well as for his country’s
efforts during its chairmanship from 2015 to 2016.
The Libyan Political Agreement was signed
almost a year ago, on 17 December2015. However,
the Agreement still faces very serious difficulties, in
particular the rejection by the House of Representatives
of the Government of National Accord. That has led
to paralysis in various aspects of the Agreement,
especially with respect to people’s everyday lives and
the economic and security situation. We hope that
UNSMIL will in the future continue its efforts to cope
with such challenges with a view to establishing peace
and security in the country so that the Government of
National Accord can assume tasks.
In spite of the international consensus to support
the Government of National Accord, such support is
insufficient because the success of the Government
largely depends upon the implementation of certain
aspects of the Political Agreement, starting with security
measures. It also depends upon the establishment of
an armed force to secure Tripoli in cooperation with
a police force that is equipped and capable of dealing
with potential challenges. In that framework, UNSMIL
is the guarantor of the Political Agreement and it is its
duty to make known any violations of the agreement. It
is time for UNSMIL to change its mode of operations.
It ought to be more proactive by making proposals, as
a lack of institutions and a lack of experts in different
sectors makes it almost impossible to request assistance
from UNSMIL.
With respect to assistance in fighting terrorism in
my country, we commend the huge efforts made and
the successes in Benghazi and Sirte in the fight against
16-41510

06/12/2016

The situation in Libya

groups listed as terrorists in the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Those efforts have helped lead to
the defeat of those groups. We hope that the international
community will provide more assistance in accordance
with resolution 2214 (2015).
I took note of the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/2016/1011. In spite of the delay
in its publication and the fact that we did not really have
time to examine it in detail, we can say that the report
sheds light on recent developments, in particular on
political developments, and does state that Tripoli is
under the control of armed groups. It mentions certain
aspects of security, the recovery of oil exports and
efforts of UNSMIL in other domains. Furthermore, the
report also sheds light on negative aspects, including
human rights violations, shortcomings in transitional
justice and the suffering of civilians in different regions
due to military operations and arbitrary bombing. It also
mentions the weakness of efforts to empower women
and youth and the participation of women and youth
in the transition process. All of those aspects represent
very serious challenges to the stability of Libya. It is
important to overcome the current legislative impasse so
that the Government can start to carry out its functions.
With respect to the mandate of UNSMIL proposed
for 2017, we have noted very few changes because the
efforts of UNSMIL are mainly focused on the political

S/PV.7827

sector in order to bring together the differing viewpoints
of political parties. We hope that UNSMIL will focus on
other sectors, including security and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. We
also hope that UNSMIL will help in strengthening
institutions, particularly security institutions. We
commend the setting up of a presidential guard and
we hope that it will be able to start its operations very
soon. We also hope that it will be exempt from the arms
embargo so that it can adequately perform its duties.
With respect to the Libya Sanctions Committee, we
also commend its efforts. We hope the relationship with
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) will be based on partnership
and transparency. We hope that sanctions on Libya will
be managed in a different manner, given that they were
originally imposed in the interests of the Libyan people.
Following what the representative of Uruguay has
just said — that Libyans are dying in the Mediterranean
trying to cross it — I would like to say that Libya is still
a transit country and not a country of origin.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

16-415107/7
