General Assembly-Eighth Session

50

consider that the Triounal should be continued for a
further period,
Having noted the explanatory memorandum 3 by the
Secretary-General concerning the continuation of the
functions of the Tribunal,
1. Resolves that the United Nations Tribunal in
Libya shall continue in existence ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation with the Governments concerned regarding the future of the Tribunal, to report to the General Assembly
at its tenth session.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
793 (VID). Invitation to non-member States to
become Parties to the Conventi<,n on the Po•
litical Rights of Women

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 504 E (XVI) dated 23 July 1953,
Considering that articles IV and V of the Convention on the Political Rights of Women provide, inter
alia, that the Convention shall be open for signature
and ratification or for accession on behalf of any nonmember State to which an invitation has been addressed
by the General Assembly,
Decides to request the Secretary-General to dispatch
such an invitation to each non-member State which is
or hereafter becomes a member of one or more of the
specialized agencies of the United Nations, or which
is or hereafter becomes a Party to the Statute of the
International Court of Justice.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.

vention") the League of Nations was invested with certain
duties and functions, and
Considering that it is expedient that these duties and functions should be continued by the United Nations,
Have agreed as follows:
Article I
The States Parties to the present Protocol undertake that
as between themselves they will, in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol, attribute full legal force and effect to
and duly apply the amendments to the Convention set forth
in the annex to the Protocol.
Article II
1. The present Protocol shall be open for signature or acceptance by any of the States Parties to the Convention to
which the Secretary-General has communicated for this purpose a copy of ~he Protocol.
2. States may become Parties to the present Protocol by:
(a) Signature without reservation as to acceptance;
(b) Signature with reservation as to acceptance, followed
by acceptance;
( c) Acceptance.
3. Acceptance shall be effected by the deposit of a formal
instrument with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Article III
1. The present Protocol shall come into force on the date on
which two States shall have become Parties thereto, and shall
thereafter come into force in respect of each State upon the
date on which it becomes a Party to the Protocol.
2. The amendments set forth in the annex to the present
Protocol shall come into force when twenty-three States shall
have become Parties to the Protocol, and consequently any
State becoming a Party to the Convention, after the amendments thereto have come into force, shall become a Party to
the Convention as so amended.

Article IV

In accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 102 of the Charter

794 (VID). Transfer to the United Nations of
the functions exercised by the League of Nations under the Slavery Convention of 25
September 1926

The General Assembly,
Considering Economic and Social Council resolution
475 (XV), adopted on 27 April 1953, concerning the
transfer to the United Nations of the functions exercised by the League of Nations under the Slavery
Convention of 25 September 1926,
Desirous of continuing international co-operation
relating to the elimination of slavery,
1. Approves the Protocol which accompanies the
present resolution;
2. Urges all States Parties to the Slavery Convention to sign or accept this Protocol ;
3. Recommends all other States to accede at their
earliest opportunity to the Slavery Convention as
amended by the present Protocol.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
Protocol amending the Slavery Convention
signed at Geneva on 25 September 1926
The States Parties to the present Protocol,
Considering that under the Slavery Convention signed at
Geneva on 25 September 1926 (hereinafter called "the Cons Ibid.

of the United Nations and the regulations pursuant thereto
adopted by the General Assembly, the Secretary-General of
the United Nations is authorized to effect registration of the
present Protocol and of the amendments made in the Convention by the Protocol on the respective dates of their entry into
force and to publish the Protocol and the amended text of the
Convention as soon as possible after registration.
Article V
The present Protocol, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the United Nations Secretariat. The
texts of the Convention to be amended in accordance with
the annex being authentic in the English and French languages
only, the English and French texts of the annex shall be equally
authentic, and the Chinese, Russian and Spanish texts shall be
translations. The Secretary-General shall prepare certified copies
of the Protocol, including the annex, for communication to
States Parties to the Convention, as well as to all other States
Members of the United Nations. He shall likewise prepare for
communication to States, including States not Members of the
United Nations, upon the entry into force of the amendments
as provided in article III, certified copies of the Convention as
so amended.
In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized
thereto by their respective Governments, signed the present
Protocol on the date appearing opposite their respective signatures.
Done at the Headquarters of the United Nations, ::srew York,
this. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of ........................ •
one thousand nine hundred and fifty-three.
• The above Protocol was opened for signature or acceptance at United K ations Headquarters on 7 December 1953.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee
ANNEX TO THE PROTOCOL AMENDING THE SLAVERY
CONVENTION SIGNED AT GENEVA ON 25 SEPTEMBER

1926
In article 7 "the Secretary-General of the United Nations"
shall be substituted for "the Secretary-General of the League
of Nations".
In article 8 "the International Court of Justice" shall be substituted for "the Permanent Court of International Justice",
and "the Statute of the International Court of Justice" shall
be substituted for "the Protocol of December 16th, 1920, relating
to the Permanent Court of International Justice".
In the first and second paragraphs of article 10 "the United
Nations" shall be substituted for "the League of Nations".
The last three paragraphs of article 11 shall be deleted and
the following substituted:
"The present Convention shall be open to accession by all
States, including States which are not Members of the United
Nations, to which the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall have communicated a certified copy of the Convention.
"Accession shall be effected by the deposit of a formal instrument with the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
who shall give notice thereof to all States Parties to the Convention and to all other States contemplated in the present
article, informing them of the date on which each such instrument of accession was received in deposit."
In article 12 "the United Nations" shall be substituted for
"the League of Nations".

795 (VIII). Appeal to States to accelerate their
ratifications of, or accessions to, the Conven•
tion on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, and measures designed to
ensure the widest possible diffusion of the
nature, contents and purposes of the Con•
vention

The General Assembly,
Considering its resolution 260 A (III) of 9 December 1948, by which it approved the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
and believing that the Convention represents a valuable
contribution to the development of international law,
1. Reiterates its appeal to States to accelerate their
ratifications of, or accessions to, the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take all necessary measures designed to ensure the
widest possible diffusion of the nature, contents and
purposes of the Convention.
455th plenary meeting,
3 November 1953.
796 (VIII). Publication of documents concern•
ing the drafting and application of the Charter: Preparatory work with regard to the
possible holding of a General Con£erence of
the Members of the United Nations in ac•
cordance with Article 109 of the Charter

The General Assembly,
Having regard to the provisions of Article 109 of
the Charter under which a proposal to hold a General
Conference of the Members of the United Nations for
the purpose of reviewing the Charter is to be placed
on the agenda of the tenth annual session of the General Assembly if such a conference has not been held
before that session,

51

Considering that the examination of such a proposal
will require cortsiderable preparation on the part of both
the Secretary-General and Member States,
Considering that study of the legislative history of
the Charter and of the practice followed by the various
organs of the United Nations is one of the best methods
of acquiring knowledge of the Charter and will greatly
facilitate the General Assembly's consideration, at its
tenth annual session, of the question of calling a General Conference,
Having regard to the memorandum by the Secretary-General, 4
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, publish
and circulate among the Member States during 1954,
or shortly thereafter:
(a) A systematic compilation of the documents of
the United Nations Conference on International Organization not yet published;
( b) A complete index of the documents of that Conference on the lines envisaged in part II and part III
C of the memorandum by the Secretary-General;
( c) A repertory of the practice of United Nations
organs appropriately indexed.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
797 (VIII). Arbitral procedure
The General Assembly,
Noting the draft 5 on arbitral procedure prepared by
the International Law Commission at its fifth session,
Considering that the said draft includes certain important elements with respect to the progressive development of international law on arbitral procedure,
Considering that, having regard to the importance
of the topic, the governments of Member States should
have an opportunity of making known their views on
the draft on arbitral procedure in the light of the discussion which has taken place at the current session
of the General Assembly,
1. Decides to transmit to Member States the draft
on arbitral procedure prepared by the International Law
Commission together with the observations made
thereon in the Sixth Committee at the current session of the General Assembly, with a view to the submission by governments of whatever comments they
may deem appropriate, if possible, before 1 January
1955;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate to
Member States any comments he may receive, and to
include the question in the provisional agenda of the
tenth session of the General Assembly.
468th plenary meeting,
7 Detember 1953.
798 (VIII).

Regime of the high seas

The General Assembly,
Considering that at its fourth session the General
Assembly recommended 6 that the International Law
Commission study simultaneously the regime of the high
seas and the regime of territorial waters,
See document A/C.6/343.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 9, page 9.
6 See resolution 374(IV).
4

5
