75

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

the work of its Ad Hoe Committee on Chemical Weapons
on that question and the progress achieved therein;
2. Expresses its regret and concern that an agreement
on the complete and effective prohibition of the develop­
ment, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons
and on their destruction has not yet been elaborated;
3. Urges again the Conference on Disarmament, as a
matter of high priority, to intensify, during its session in
1985, the negotiations on such a convention and to rein­
force further its efforts, inter alia, by increasing the time
during the year that the Conference on Disarmament
devotes to such negotiations, taking into account all
existing proposals and future initiatives, with a view to the
final elaboration of a convention at the earliest possible
date, and to re-establish its Ad Hoe Committee on Chemi­
cal Weapons for this purpose with the 1984 mandate;
4. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report
to the General Assembly at its fortieth session on the
results of its negotiations.

97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

D
REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE CON­
VENTION ON THE PROHIBITION OF THE DEVELOP­
MENT, PRODUCTION AND STOCKPILING OF BACTERI­
OLOGICAL (BIOLOGICAL) AND TOXIN WEAPONS AND
ON THEIR DESTRUCTION

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2826 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971 in which it commended the Convention on the Pro­
hibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling
of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, and expressed the hope for the widest
possible adherence to the Convention,
Noting that, in accordance with the provisions of article
XII of the Convention, the first Review Conference of the
Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Devel­
opment, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction
was held at Geneva from 3 to 21 March 1980,
Bearing in mind that the Review Conference decided, in
its Final Declaration, that a second Review Conference
should be held at Geneva at the request of a majority of
States parties not earlier than 1985 and, in any case, not
later than 1990, 66
Recalling its resolution 35/144 A of 12 December 1980,
in which it welcomed the Final Declaration of the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Convention,
1. Notes that, at the request of a majority of States par­
ties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Develop­
ment, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Bio­
logical) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, a
second Review Conference of the Parties to the Conven­
tion will be held in 1986, and that, following appropriate
consultations, a preparatory committee is to be established
prior to the holding of the Review Conference;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to render the neces­
sary assistance and to provide such services, including
66 See Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Prohibi­
tion of the Development. Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Bio­
logical) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, Final Document
(BWC/CONF.1/10) (Geneva, I 980), sect. II, art. XII.

summary records, as may be required for the second
Review Conference and its preparation.

97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

E
CHEMICAL AND BACTERIOLOGICAL (BIOLOGICAL)
WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3 7/98 D of 13 December 1982 ,
and particularly paragraph 7, in which it requested the
Secretary-General, with the assistance of qualified consult­
ant experts, to devise procedures for the investigation of
information concerning activities that may constitute a
violation of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in
War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on
17 June 1925,61 or of the relevant rules of customary inter­
national law and to assemble and organize systematically
documentation relating to the identification of signs and
symptoms associated with the use of agents covered by the
1925 Geneva Protocol,
Recognizing that the use of such agents in war is univer­
sally condemned,
Underlining the importance of impartially and rapidly
ascertaining, through an appropriate international proce­
dure as provided for in resolution 37/98 D, facts that may
constitute a violation of the provisions of the Geneva Pro­
tocol or of the relevant rules of customary international
law,
Recalling its resolution 38/187 C of 20 December 1983,
in which it took note of the report of the Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 37/98 D67
and requested him to complete during 1984, with the
assistance of the Group of Consultant Experts established
by him, the task entrusted to him under the terms of para­
graph 7 of resolution 37/98 D, and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-ninth session,
I . Takes note of the report by the Secretary-General,68
to which is annexed the report of the Group of Consultant
Experts established by him't:oncerning the implementation
of the provisions of paragraph 7 of resolution 37/98 D and
of resolution 38/ l 87 C;
2. Notes with satisfaction that, with the submission of
the report of the Group of Consultant Experts, the provi­
sions for the implementation of resolution 37/98 D are
completed.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

39/147. Israeli nuclear armament
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on Israeli nuclear

armament,

Recalling resolution 38/64 of 15 December 1983, in
which, inter alia, it called upon all countries of the Middle
East, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East, to agree to place all their nuclear
activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safe­
guards, and invited those countries also, pending the
67 A/38/435.
68 N39/488.

76

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region,
to declare their support for establishing such a zone and to
deposit those declarations with the Security Council,
Considering that the Israeli statements contained in a
letter dated 12 July 1984 69 continue to disregard the safe­
guards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Recalling further Security Council resolution 487 (1981)
of 19 June 1981 in which, inter alia, the Council called
upon Israel urgently to place its nuclear facilities under
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Noting with concern Israel's persistent refusal to commit
itself not to manufacture or acquire nuclear weapons,
despite repeated calls by the General Assembly, the Secur­
ity Council and the International Atomic Energy Agency,
and to place its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards,
Conscious of the grave consequences which endanger
international peace and security as a result of Israel's
development and acquisition of nuclear weapons and
Israel's collaboration with South Africa to develop nuclear
weapons and their delivery systems,
Recalling its repeated condemnation of nuclear collabo­
ration between Israel and South Africa,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
Israeli nuclear armament, 70
I. Condemns Israel's continued refusal to implement
Security Council resolution 487 (1981), unanimously
adopted by the Council on 19 June 1981, and its refusal to
renounce any possession of nuclear weapons;
2. Requests the Security Council to take urgent and
effective measures to ensure that Israel complies with the
resolution and places all its nuclear facilities under Inter­
national Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
3. Requests again the Security Council to investigate
Israel's nuclear activities and the collaboration of other
States, parties and institutions in these activities;
4. Reiterates its request to the International Atomic
Energy Agency to suspend any scientific co-operation with
Israel which could contribute to Israel's nuclear capabili­
ties;
5. Reiterates further its condemnation of the Israeli
threat, in violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
to repeat its armed attack on peaceful facilities in Iraq and
in other countries;
6. Reaffirms its condemnation of the continuing
nuclear collaboration between Israel and South Africa;
7. Requests the United Nations Institute for Disarma­
ment Research, in co-operation with the Department for
.Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat and in consultation
with the League of Arab States and the Organization of
African Unity, to prepare a report providing data and
other relevant information relating to Israeli nuclear arma­
ment and further nuclear developments taking into
account, inter a/ia, the report of the Secretary-General on
Israeli nuclear armament,7 1 and to submit it to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the nec­
essary support to the United Nations Institute for Dis­
armament Research to enable it to carry out the task
entrusted to it under the present resolution and for the
Institute to submit a report to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session;
69 A/39/349.

70 A/39/435.
71 A/37/434.

72 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thir(l•-e11(hth Session. Supple­
ment No. 42 (A/38/42). annex VI

9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Israeli nuclear arma­
ment".

102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
39/148. Review of the implementation of the recom­
mendations and decisions adopted by the
General Assembly at its tenth special ses­
sion
A
UNILATERAL NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT MEASURES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/183 J of 20 December 1983,
in which it requested the Secretary-General to prepare,
with the assistance of qualified governmental experts and
applying the methods customary in these cases, a report on
ways and means that seemed advisable for stimulating the
adoption of unilateral nuclear disarmament measures
which, without prejudice to the security of States, would
come to promote and complement bilateral and multilat­
eral negotiations in this sphere,
Recalling also the concrete proposal submitted to the
Disarmament Commission at its 1983 session to the effect
that the preparation of a study on unilateral measures
would be at present of particular value in view of the
impasse existing in both the bilateral and the multilateral
negotiations, 7 2
Recalling further the conclusion of the General Assem­
bly at its tenth special session, to the effect that unilateral
measures of arms limitation or reduction could contribute
to limiting the arms race, 73
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General 74
transmitting the study prepared by the Group of Govern­
mental Experts on Unilateral Nuclear Disarmament Mea­
sures,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the study on unilat­
eral nuclear disarmament measures; 75
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and to the Group of Governmental Experts on Unilateral
Nuclear Disarmament Measures that assisted him in the
preparation of the study;
3. Takes note of the conclusions of the study and trusts
that they may encourage nuclear-weapon States to take the
steps necessary to promote and orient adequately disarma­
ment negotiations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the
reproduction of the report as a United Nations publica­
tion 75 and, making full use of all the facilities of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, to
publicize the report in as many languages as is considered
desirable and practicable.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
73 See resolution s. I 0/2. para. 41.
74 A/39/5 I 6.
75 Ibid., annex. The study was subsequently issued under the title Unilat­
eral Nuclear Disarmament Measures (United Nations publication. Sales No.
E 85.IX 2).
