S/PV.8119

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8119th meeting

Thursday, 30 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Awad
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hoshino
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage by terrorist groups and in
situations of armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2347 (2017) (S/2017/969)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-40502 (E)
*1740502*

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage
by terrorist groups and in situations of armed
conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2347 (2017) (S/2017/969)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism;
Ms. Audrey Azoulay, Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
Mr. Jürgen Stock, Secretary General of INTERPOL;
and Mr. Alessandro Bianchi, Project Leader for Cultural
Heritage Protection of the Italian Ministry of Culture.
Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Stock are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Vienna and
Lyon, respectively.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/969, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2347 (2017).
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on this
important topic. I would also like very warmly to
welcome the presence of Ms. Azoulay at this meeting,
the new Director-General of UNESCO.
In particular in situations of armed conflict,
terrorists today are not only destroying lives and
property, but also historical sites and objects. The
goal is obvious: to undermine national identity and
international law. Because heritage constitutes a
source of identity and cohesion not only for particular
2/24

30/11/2017

communities but for the world community as a whole,
when terrorist groups target world heritage sites it is
an attack on our common historical roots and cultural
diversity. Additionally, the looting and illicit trafficking
of cultural objects lead to the financing of terrorism
and criminal networks.
The protection of cultural heritage has therefore
become a vitally important task for the international
community. Awareness of this matter has grown
considerably over the past several years. Resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015) established the link
between the illicit trafficking of cultural objects and the
financing of terrorism. Importantly, these resolutions
have put in place a worldwide moratorium on the trade
in cultural objects originating from Iraq, as of 6 August
1990, and from Syria, as of 15 March 2011.
The Security Council, in resolution 2347 (2017),
adopted in March, focused specifically on cultural
heritage, highlighting the protection of cultural
heritage as an issue of peace and security. Similarly, the
General Assembly in its resolution 70/291, on the fifth
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, expressed concern that terrorists may benefit
from transnational organized crime in some regions,
including from the trafficking of cultural property,
and condemned the destruction of cultural heritage
by terrorist groups. In resolution 70/109, the General
Assembly deplored attacks
“on religious places and shrines and cultural sites
in violation of international law, in particular
human rights and humanitarian law, including any
deliberate destruction of relics and monuments”
(General Assembly resolution 70/109, para. 3).
There is already a strong international legal
and normative framework to address these crimes.
Resolution 2347 encourages Member States to ratify
the UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property, the 1954 Hague
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in
the Event of Armed Conflict, and its two Protocols,
both of which are key instruments for the protection
of cultural property in the event of armed conflict, as
well as in peacetime, through the implementation of
administrative, legal, military and technical measures.
Other important international legal frameworks
include the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; the United Nations
17-40502

30/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Convention against Corruption; the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism; and the International Guidelines for Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses with
Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other
Related Offences.
Protecting our cultural heritage requires us to make
every effort to implement the international legal and
normative framework by strengthening international
cooperation. The all-of-United Nations approach is key
to effective action. There is a need to put a stronger
focus on investigation, cross-border cooperation and
the exchange of information, and on bringing in privateand public-sector painters, including collectors, art
dealers, auction houses and the tourism sector, to
promote supply-chain integrity and stop the illicit trade
in and sale of cultural property.
The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
through the Inter-Agency Working Group on
Countering the Financing of Terrorism of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, is supporting
Member States’ efforts to curb illicit trafficking
through advocacy and capacity-building assistance. For
example, UNESCO and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime are already working together, along
with INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization and
other partners, to assist Member States in protecting
cultural heritage and countering trafficking in cultural
property. We have also asked United Nations entities
to propose new projects and would welcome new
proposals by Member States and regional organizations
on how best we can support them in protecting their
cultural heritage.

S/PV. 8119

of resolution 2347 (2017), and the Italian presidency for
organizing this meeting.
UNESCO is proud to have supported the SecretaryGeneral in drafting his report, in close collaboration
with all partners. I wish to thank the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the sanctions
Monitoring Team, as well as the World Customs
Organization (WCO), INTERPOL, the International
Institute for the Unification of Private Law and the
International Council of Museums for their cooperation.
The adoption of resolution 2347 (2017) represents
a major breakthrough and testifies to a new awareness
of the importance of culture not only to respond to
conflicts but also to prevent radicalization and fight
violent extremism. It represents a paradigm shift in the
way the international community approaches cultural
heritage protection. The report shows that resolution
2347 (2017) has already resulted in the adoption of
strong regulations and growing efforts to document,
preserve and safeguard cultural heritage at risk. In
a very short span of time, since April, 29 Member
States have already shared information on new actions
taken to protect cultural heritage, strengthen tools,
train specialized personnel, reinforce international
cooperation and share information.

I now give the floor to Ms. Azoulay. I congratulate
her on her appointment at UNESCO and wish her every
success in her new duties.

Eight out of 15 members of the Council are
among these Member States, which demonstrates
the importance of protecting cultural heritage also
as a security imperative. Italy has launched the
Unite4heritage Task Force and developed a database of
illegally removed cultural heritage that is the largest
of its kind. France, the United Arab Emirates and their
partners are implementing the International Alliance
for the Protection of Heritage in Conflict Areas fund
initiative. Japan, France, Slovakia and the Russian
Federation have reported new improvements in their own
records of stolen objects, with national customs officers
in Canada and Russia receiving training on the import/
export control aspects of cultural property. Uruguay
reported on the creation of an international committee
against illicit trafficking within the Southern Common
Market in April, and Sweden established a wildlife and
cultural heritage crime unit within its national police.
These are positive signals of deep change, but we need
to do more.

Ms. Azoulay: I am honoured to address the
Security Council today. I wish thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his report on the implementation

Out of the 82 UNESCO World Heritage sites in the
Arab region, 17 are on the List of World Heritage in
Danger owing to armed conflict. More than 100 cultural

With the assistance of United Nations entities,
Member States are strengthening their legal frameworks
and criminal justice systems and enhancing their
collaboration to prevent and respond to terrorist attacks
on their cultural heritage. We can and must do more.
The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism stands
ready to do its part.
The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.

17-405023/24

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

heritage sites across Iraq have been damaged. All six
Syrian World Heritage sites have been severely affected,
including Palmyra and the fabled city of Aleppo, one of
the oldest cities in the world, now reduced to rubble. To
respond, we must step up efforts in several key areas,
outlined in the implementation report.
First, we must raise awareness about the resolution
to strengthen its implementation by all Member States.
Secondly, we need to facilitate data collection and
information-sharing on trafficking routes and damage
assessment. That is why, in recent months, UNESCO
has sent rapid-assessment missions to Palmyra, Nimrud,
Ashur and, most recently, Mosul to define emergency
protection measures and evaluate possible restorations.
Thirdly, we must train peacekeepers in the protection
of cultural heritage and integrate this issue into
peacekeeping mandates and missions. The successful
example of the cooperation between UNESCO and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali is a very encouraging
step forward and can be taken as an example. In all this,
I pledge today once again UNESCO’s determination to
support Member States with the necessary tools and
policy advice.
(spoke in French)
The implementation of resolution 2347 (2017)
provides UNESCO with some basic guidelines. The
first, which we must not forget, is respect for the
fundamental link between cultural diversity and human
rights. The two are linked. Recent history shows us
that the enemies of human rights are the enemies of
diversity, and this truth must guide our action. The
second guideline, which is highlighted in the report, is
to take a holistic approach to heritage protection issues.
Illicit trafficking, the destruction of sites, extremist
propaganda and the denial of history are parts of a
comprehensive strategy that the community of nations
must respond to in a holistic way.
We must do that, first, by stepping up the fight
against the trafficking that finances terrorism and
criminal activities. That is the meaning behind our work
with UNODC, the WCO and INTERPOL, and also in
cooperation with the private sector, auction houses and
antiquities dealers.
Secondly, we must ensure the protection of sites,
which represent physical and historical landmarks that
are important to the cohesion and identity of peoples
and therefore to their ability to live in peace.
4/24

30/11/2017

Thirdly — and this is fundamental — stronger
action should be taken to promotion education, the
raising of awareness and the dissemination of values
that are rooted in the history of these heritages, and
which are levers of dialogue and prevention. When
extremist propaganda claims that Palmyra must be
destroyed because it is a symbol of Roman occupation,
which would be alien to the Syrian identity, everyone
must be able to denounce these lies and to understand
the history of the Palmyrene identity and the role of
Palmyra as a crossroads of cultures. That is the role
of museums, stakeholders in education, publishers,
historians and scientists, who play a central role in
this sharing of knowledge and are at the forefront
of the struggle against hate propaganda and for the
prevention of extremism. That is why UNESCO’s
heritage-protection work is part of a broader effort to
educate people about citizenship and respect for others.
We need to speak to young people through education,
culture, media literacy and inclusive access to science.
That is how we will succeed. That role is highly
topical in the educational and cultural battle against
hatred, and I want to convey to States the complete
determination of UNESCO to fully play its role in the
United Nations system.
The results of recent months are encouraging;
that includes the ruling of the International Criminal
Court condemning the destruction of the mausoleums
of Timbuktu, which UNESCO helped to rebuild in
part with the Malian people. I also welcome the recent
ratification by France and the United Kingdom of the
Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict, as well as the ratification by the United Arab
Emirates of the 1970 Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property. We
must extend the scope of these normative instruments
even further.
We also have the opportunity, through new digital
technologies, to access new potential for knowledge,
heritage documentation and damage assessment.
Finally, this global awareness has led to the creation
of several financial and political initiatives on the
protection of heritage, and UNESCO aims to provide
the expertise in that area with its major partners, and
to be the main agent for the implementation of these
initiatives. We have the capacity to do so, we have the
tools, as well as the international legitimacy, thanks
17-40502

30/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

to the United Nations, with further reinforcement by
resolution 2347 (2017). I believe that by integrating
heritage protection into security considerations,
particularly through the mandate of peacekeeping
operations, the Security Council is investing in a global
approach that is based on heritage but that goes well
beyond that to promote social cohesion, a sense of
belonging, as well as the possibility — once peace is
restored — for economic development. I believe that is
useful work that we can do for those hit hard by conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Azoulay for her important briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: I thank you, Sir, for inviting me
to participate in this very important meeting of the
Council. I would like to thank the Security Council,
under the presidency of Italy, for its continued vigilance
and attention to the need to stop the destruction, looting,
trafficking and sale of cultural heritage by terrorists
and organized criminals.
As the Security Council and General Assembly
have recognized, we have a strong international
framework in place. I take this opportunity to urge
the international community to maintain focus on
strengthening the effective implementation of almost
universally agreed instruments, such as the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, the International Convention for the Suppression
of the Financing of Terrorism, and the United Nations
Convention against Corruption. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has worked
closely with UNESCO, INTERPOL, the International
Institute for the Unification of Private Law and other
international partners to assist Member States in
promoting comprehensive responses and stopping
looted or stolen cultural property from being trafficked
from the affected countries.
Looking ahead, we need to do more to support
countries to detect stolen cultural property with a view
to dismantling criminal networks. We must build up
international cooperation in investigating, prosecuting
and adjudicating cases related to trafficking in cultural
property. We must also work to further promote the
exchange of information on measures taken at the
national level, including relevant criminal cases. That
includes sharing such information with international
organizations engaged in this fight. The art market
and museums should pay special attention to the

S/PV. 8119

provenance of cultural items that they are considering
for acquisition, or with which they otherwise come into
contact. Governments can help them to ensure that this
care is diligently exercised.
UNODC remains fully engaged in working with
our partners to support countries to build capacities
and provide technical assistance. The UNODC-World
Customs Organization Container Control Programme
has developed advanced training to better position port
control units to detect and interdict illicitly trafficked
cultural heritage. That includes specialized knowledge
for region-specific types of cultural property and
methods to detect shipments containing such goods, as
well as criminal intelligence training and support. We
also continue to support anti-corruption and anti-money
laundering action and to provide technical assistance
to prevent and counter terrorism financing, including
through the illicit sale of antiquities.
The International Guidelines for Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to
Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related
Offences, adopted by the General Assembly in 2014,
represent a comprehensive reference for implementing
the needed crime prevention and criminal justice
responses. UNODC has developed an assistance tool
to help put the guidelines into practice. The list of key
actions outlined in the brochure entitled Protecting
Cultural Heritage — An Imperative for Humanity,
which was developed by the Governments of Italy and
Jordan with UNODC, UNESCO and INTERPOL, also
remains highly relevant. I urge all Member States to use
these expert resources.
Even as we welcome news that groups such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant are losing control
over territories, we must take the opportunity to further
strengthen efforts to better safeguard vulnerable
cultural property in various areas of conflict, as well
as pursue longer-term measures to prevent terrorists
and criminals from profiting from trafficking. Only in
that way can we protect precious cultural heritage from
being lost forever. UNODC’s research and technical
assistance capacities, reinforced by our network of field
offices, remains at your entire disposal, Sir, to support
such action.
The President: I thank Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Stock.

17-405025/24

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Stock: Allow me to also congratulate the new
Director-General of UNESCO, Ms. Audrey Azoulay.
I would like to begin my statement by thanking the
Italian presidency not only for convening this briefing
during an exceptionally full programme of work, but
also for its long-standing leadership on the protection of
cultural heritage. I am grateful for Italy’s strong support
for and recognition of INTERPOL’s work in this field,
and for the opportunity to address the Security Council
today with such distinguished fellow briefers.
Let me unequivocally state INTERPOL’s view on
this threat. The destruction and trafficking of cultural
heritage in armed conflicts are serious and transnational
crimes, affecting international peace and security, first,
through the financing of terrorist groups, as recognized
by resolution 2199 (2015), which pointed to the use of
funds raised by selling antiquities pillaged and looted
from armed conflict zones; secondly, by hindering the
processes of reconciliation and return to democratic
governance in attempting to erase and desecrate social,
cultural and economic assets; and thirdly, in causing
loss to the global community. As the 1954 Hague
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in
the Event of Armed Conflict states,
“damage to cultural property belonging to any
people whatsoever means damage to the cultural
heritage of all humankind”.
INTERPOL has been fighting those crimes on
behalf of law enforcement worldwide since 1946. In
that endeavour, we cooperate closely with partners such
as UNESCO, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the World Customs Organization, the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, the International Centre for
the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural
Property, and the International Council of Museums.
Our efforts in protecting cultural heritage focus on
the core of the INTERPOL mandate — the collection
and exchange of vital, operational information across
borders, including with law enforcement in conflict and
post-conflict zones. In that endeavour we face unique
challenges; essential criminal information on foreign
terrorist fighters, travel and identity documents,
weapons, tradecraft and trafficked property are often
dispersed across actors in those areas.
6/24

30/11/2017

Consolidating that information into a single
operational flow is INTERPOL’s primary goal.
National central bureaus in each of our 192 member
countries, including those in conflict situations, act
as gateways for criminal data exchange with the
international community. Coordinating the gathering
and sharing of information into one centralized hub
avoids intelligence gaps, prevents silos and promotes
national sovereignty and the ownership of data by the
host country. That is how the information that is shared
by law enforcement on stolen cultural artefacts is given
the visibility requested by national authorities, which is
either brought to the attention of the general public or
private entities, such as auction houses and dealers, or
entered into our global database of over 50,000 records.
Recently, INTERPOL collected information from
our national central bureaus in Baghdad and Damascus,
identifying objects of invaluable cultural value stolen
from Raqqa and Palmyra, in Syria, and Mosul, in
Iraq. At the request of the two countries, that was
immediately disseminated to law enforcement and other
stakeholders to alert them to the thefts and facilitate
the recovery of the items. In parallel, intelligence
that is received through national gateways is used to
identify trafficking routes and the methods used. That
analysis is shared with member countries, along with
best practices and training, as part of our international
operational meetings and experts forum.
Finally, we are working to enhance real-time
access to that intelligence, including through an
upgrade to our database that would enable the storage
of three-dimensional images of objects. A mobile
application is being developed to allow police officers
in the field, including in conflict zones, to take, store,
upload and immediately check pictures of suspicious
items against our records.
As we discuss today how to continue the
implementation of resolution 2347 (2017) , I would like
to offer two action items for the Council’s consideration.
First, it is imperative to exchange information
on stolen or illegally exported cultural objects on
routes, modus operandi and suspected traffickers.
That data must be shared as widely and as rapidly as
possible, while respecting the fundamental principle of
non-duplication of channels.
Secondly, we must create specialized police
units and national databases that are dedicated to the
protection of cultural property and the investigation of
17-40502

30/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

heritage-trafficking cases. Italy was the first country to
establish one of those structures within the Carabinieri
corps, as early as 1969. it is a model for the international
community to adopt in front-line jurisdictions. It
ensures coordination through a single national point
of contact, opportunities to seize stolen objects and
specialized investigative abilities in complex cases.
In closing, I wish to reiterate INTERPOL’s
commitment to working closely with our long-standing
partner organizations and the newly established Office
of Counter-Terrorism in the fight to protect cultural
heritage and prevent terrorist financing worldwide.
The President: I thank Mr. Stock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bianchi.
Mr. Bianchi: I would like to thank the Security
Council and the Italian presidency for the possibility of
sharing some reflections on the present tendencies and
conditions in the protection of cultural heritage under
threat by terrorist groups or in armed conflict.
During the past 25 years, in my capacity as Project
Leader on behalf of the Italian Ministry of Culture,
I have taken part in a number of initiatives in crisis
areas, from Bosnia and Kosovo in the early 1990s and
post-crisis Algeria, in collaboration with UNESCO,
to Iraq after the 2003 war. Some of our interventions
also require the promotion and supervision of technical
collaboration among the administrations of different
States. Given those long years of experience in the
field, we attach great importance to resolution 2347
(2017), since it updates the framework of international
action in defense of heritage at risk, on the basis of
changes that have occurred in conflict situations in
recent decades.
Today, monuments in conflict areas are in the
crosshairs of the enemy, considered to be symbols of
identity and therefore deserving of desecration and
destruction. Looting and illegal excavations are sources
of income for criminal gangs and terrorist groups.
Countless destruction has occurred over the past 25
years; churches, mosques and archaeological sites have
been violated, while looted items have helped to feed a
flourishing illegal market.
It is important to reiterate that terrorists are not
pursuing financial gains alone. They want much more.
They want to destroy the identities of peoples and to
dismantle legitimate systems with violence. We could
consider, for example, the destruction perpetrated by

S/PV. 8119

the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the centre of
Mosul, where soon after the June 2014 occupation 36 of
80 notable buildings were completely demolished. Why?
Because they were legacies of the Shia community.
Given those experiences, resolution 2347 (2017)
outlines the growing importance of three fields
of action.
The first is the collection and circulation of technical
data on monuments and archaeological sites and the
increased use of modern technology, such as satellite
remote control of the territory, for the systematic
and rational assessment of possible damages. One
example is the enquiry into the heritage of the Nineveh
governorate under occupation in Iraq that was carried
out not only through satellite photos, but also on the
basis of a valuable archaeological atlas that was drafted
by the Iraqi Administration in the 1970s.
The second is the improvement of coordination
between law enforcement and judicial bodies dedicated
to fighting international crime, preventing illegal
excavations, coordinating customs procedures and
inspecting the trade in artifacts.
The third is support for the administrations of
affected territories by facilitating the rapid recovery
of their pre-crisis capacities. More importantly, there
must be a constant and careful respect for sensitivities
and identities. Every country has its own laws and
administrative structures that are tailored to their
respective traditions. In fact, resolution 2347 (2017)
properly calls on the international community to
provide assistance to Member States in implementing
the protection of cultural heritage, while respecting the
sovereignty of all States.
The President: I thank Mr. Bianchi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I express appreciation
to the Italian presidency for convening this important
briefing, and thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov and Under-Secretary-General Yury Fedotov.
I also thank the Director-General of UNESCO,
Ms. Audrey Azoulay and congratulate her on assuming
her responsible new position, the Secretary-General
of INTERPOL, Mr. Jürgen Stock, and Mr. Alessandro
Bianchi, Project Leader of Cultural Heritage Protection
of the Italian Ministry of Culture, for their insightful

17-405027/24

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

briefings. We commend all of their efforts to protect and
restore the common cultural heritage of humankind.
We therefore welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/969) on the implementation of resolution
2347 (2017), as it enables us to comprehensively
examine the problem and assess its gravity and scale.
In order to execute global action, it is necessary that
all States realize the importance of preserving and
regenerating the cultural and historical heritage of
individual countries and for the world as a whole.
Heritage bears in itself the cultural and civilizational
codes of a nation. The destruction of heritage inevitably
leads to a society losing its very psyche, ethos and roots,
and thereby its very identity and integrity. We therefore
believe that protecting cultural heritage and fostering
pluralism is essential to fostering peace, security and
sustainable development.
Kazakhstan commends the outstanding role
of UNESCO in the protection and recovery of
cultural heritage worldwide. We strongly endorse
the implementation of UNESCO’s action for the
protection of culture and the promotion of cultural
pluralism in the event of armed conflict. Likewise,
we fully support other commendable initiatives, such
as the Unite4Heritage campaign, and call for greater
contributions to UNESCO’s Heritage Emergency Fund.
In that regard, we specially acknowledge the appeal to
protect culture and promote cultural pluralism as the
key to lasting peace, which was initiated by Italy and
for which all Member States should jointly cooperate.

30/11/2017

trafficking in cultural property. We cannot but agree
with the briefers that we need to work closely with
business associations, antiquities markets and private
dealers, and to have an inventory and documentation of
artifacts and heritage sites. Our efforts will yield results
only if we also have community awareness, education
and wider public support to end the scourge.
We thank UNESCO for the assistance to Member
States in implementing resolution 2347 (2017) at the
national, regional and subregional levels. We express
gratitude in particular for the organization, in Almaty
in June, the subregional conference on the improvement
of measures on the protection of cultural heritage in
Central Asia. That conference helped to develop better
mechanisms and cooperation at the subregional level
to address related challenges in implementing existing
international legal standards.

In order for our global measures to be strong
and effective, we propose that all multilateral legal
instruments related to cultural heritage be ratified and
harmonized by all States parties, as the smuggling
of artifacts is transnational. All Member States
also need to accede to the 1954 Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict. Likewise, they should also accede to the 1970
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of
Cultural Property.

We would like to note the indispensable work of
INTERPOL and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in facilitating international cooperation to
prevent the deliberate destruction of cultural heritage
and ensure accountability for such crimes. Our country
shares the opinion of the Secretary-General that the
main challenge facing law enforcement is the lack of
priority given to the crime by Member States — an
opinion that we must heed. We support INTERPOL’s
efforts, as described by Mr. Jürgen Stock, to create
specialized units and dedicated national databases to
combat the illicit trafficking of cultural property, as
well as the publication of brochures with statistics on
crimes against them. That will allow INTERPOL to
enhance its operations at the regional level and share
sensitive information about the channels used for
the illicit export of stolen objects. We also support
the recommendations of the Analytical Support and
Monitoring Team to Member States to actively exchange
information on seized antiquities via INTERPOL’s
database on stolen works of art and information on
seizures and investigations via the ARCHEO platform
of the World Customs Organization.

We agree with the briefers that in order to ensure
effective implementation, each country must strengthen
its institutions and mechanisms with specialized units
and adequate tools and training for customs, border
control, law enforcement and judicial authorities. In
addition, sanctions regimes should be rigourously
enforced with the stringent criminalization of illicit

As a member of the Convention Concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage
and the aforementioned Conventions of 1954 and 1970,
Kazakhstan will continue to support the efforts of
the international community aimed at protecting and
preserving cultural and natural heritage, which is the
rich legacy of all humankind.

8/24

17-40502

30/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Hoshino (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the briefers for their passion and
important insights.
Cultural heritage represents the history and identity
of a nation or State. At the same time, it embodies the
values of our common humanity. Yet, as demonstrated
in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, Libya, Mali and many
other places in the world, we are facing a cruel reality
in which cultural heritage is targeted for destruction,
looting and smuggling by terrorist groups as a tactic of
war. Japan strongly condemns such heinous acts.
For that reason, protecting cultural heritage is
more than just a cultural issue. It is an issue of peace
and security. We must not neglect the cultural aspect
when talking about peace and security. Japan therefore
commends the Italian presidency for bringing this
important topic to the Security Council again.
Japan has long attached special emphasis to
international cooperation for the protection of
cultural heritage, as demonstrated by our public,
private and academic partnership to restore Angkor
Wat in Cambodia and to safeguard the Bamiyan site
in Afghanistan, among other projects. Through those
efforts, we have come to realize that protecting cultural
heritage is a form of peacebuilding of hearts and minds.
It undoubtedly contributes to the reconstruction and
sustaining of peace in a nation or State. Based on our
own experiences, I would like to present several insights
that Japan wants to share with the Council’s members.
First, Japan reaffirms its full commitment to
promoting the deepening, universalization and
implemention of international norms. In that regard,
Japan welcomes the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017),
as it is a significant step forward in the normative
aspect. Japan is resolved to steadily implement the
obligations that derive from the resolution. Japan is a
State party to the 1954 Convention for the Protection
of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict,
the 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property, the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
and other related conventions. Under those legal
frameworks, various domestic measures have been
introduced. I would like to encourage other States that
are not yet parties to those conventions to join us in
our efforts.

S/PV. 8119

Secondly, we need to put into practice a global
criminal justice response that focuses on holding
perpetrators
accountable.
Coordination
among
the United Nations system and other international
organizations, such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL, to assist Member
States is critical to accomplishing that objective. In
that respect, Japan has carefully followed the judicial
case of Mali, in which the International Criminal
Court sentenced an individual responsible for attacking
religious buildings in Timbuktu to nine years in prison
and issued reparation orders. That is the first judgment
to clearly demonstrate that the destruction of cultural
heritage amounts to a war crime, and perpetrators
should be held accountable.
Thirdly, safeguarding cultural heritage through
capacity-building should be encouraged. The
Government of Japan established the UNESCO
Japanese Funds-in-Trust for the Preservation of the
World Cultural Heritage in 1989, in response to the
Government’s decision to set cultural contributions as
one of its priority areas for international cooperation.
We have so far contributed approximately $68 million
to the fund for 44 projects in 61 countries.
Lastly, I would like to underline the importance of
enhancing partnerships, as we need a comprehensive
and multifaceted response in terms of protecting cultural
heritage. Information-sharing and coordination among
a broad range of stakeholders, such as the tourism
sector, museums and dealers, are critically important.
To conclude, I would like to state that enhancing
respect for other cultures is a fundamental starting
point for the success of our collective actions. Japan is
fully committed to engaging and cooperating with the
United Nations and Member States to protect cultural
heritage and thwart atrocities committed by terrorists
and violent extremists, focusing on the four points I
have just stated.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to commend Italy for its
ongoing commitment to the issue of the protection of
endangered cultural heritage. France and Italy have
always shared the objective of protecting the heritage
of humankind. That objective is deeply rooted in our
common DNA and that is what led us in March to work
together to draft resolution 2347 (2017), which was
one of the deliverables of the International Conference
on Safeguarding Cultural Heritage in Conflict Areas,

17-405029/24

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

held in Abu Dhabi. As others have said, it is the first
resolution entirely devoted to the protection of heritage
in situations of conflict and that, for the first time,
covers all threats to heritage, whether or not they are
posed by terrorist groups.
Allow me also to warmly welcome Ms. Audrey
Azoulay and welcome her to the United Nations for
her first briefing to the Security Council as DirectorGeneral of UNESCO, which was especially important
and elucidating. I wish her every success in her new
duties. I would also like to thank Мr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General and head of
the Office of Counter-Terrorism; Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime; Mr. Jürgen Stock, Secretary
General of INTERPOL; and Mr. Alessandro Bianchi,
Project Leader for Cultural Heritage Protection in
the Italian Ministry of Culture, for their particularly
useful briefings.
For France, as for the United Nations, the question
of the protection of cultural heritage, given its essential
and existential dimension, is and will continue to
be a top priority. I will confine my remarks to three
main points.
First, I would like to make an observation. Despite
our efforts, cultural heritage remains highly threatened
today, particularly in situations of armed conflict.
Bamiyan, Timbuktu, Palmyra, Nineveh, Mosul and
Erbil — there is, alas, no shortage of examples of
the destruction of cultural heritage by armed groups
or terrorist groups. Beyond the issue of civilization,
heritage protection is also a security issue because illicit
trafficking in looted cultural goods finances terrorist
networks and is a factor in the development of armed
conflicts. Armed groups and terrorist organizations are
strengthened by the revenue derived from trafficking
in antiquities. Stolen cultural property from wartorn countries in turn serves to fuel conflicts. That
is why France has supported the possibility of some
peacekeeping operations providing assistance to the
authorities of the concerned countries in the protection
of cultural and historical sites.
As was recalled by the Director-General of
UNESCO, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali is already
working closely with UNESCO to support the Malian
authorities in protecting and valorizing the richness
of their tangible and intangible cultural heritage.
10/24

30/11/2017

Resolution 2347 (2017) paves the way for the possible
inclusion in the mandate of other peacekeeping
operations, at the request of the Security Council,
the provision of such support to the authorities of the
countries concerned. In that spirit, it is imperative
that the international community as a whole remain
fully mobilized.
Secondly, I will address France’s commitment.
At the European level, France has worked hard to
propose the new community instrument dedicated to
controlling the import of cultural goods, the text of
which is currently being discussed in Brussels. At the
national level, France is implementing many measures
that are in line with the objectives of resolution 2347
(2017). I will not enumerate them all, but emphasize
two particular concrete measures.
The first measure is the strengthening of French
legislation to combat illicit trafficking in cultural
property. For example, the law of 3 June 2016 on the fight
against organized crime, terrorism and their financing
creates a new criminal offense aimed at punishing the
intentional participation in the trafficking of cultural
property from areas where terrorist organizations are
established. Those provisions are supplemented and
reinforced by the law of 7 July 2016, sponsored by
the Ministry of Culture, which notably provides for
the introduction of customs control over the import of
cultural goods. The second example is the cooperation
of the French police services, in particular the central
office to combat trafficking in cultural property,
with
INTERPOL
through
information-sharing
exchanges, particularly in the context of investigations,
thanks to the organization’s integrated and secure
communication system.
At the international level, France and the United
Arab Emirates took the initiative of convening an
international conference in Abu Dhabi in late 2016, at
which we brought together States, public institutions,
private partners, scientists and major non-governmental
organizations to create an international alliance to
protect endangered cultural heritage. The Abu Dhabi
conference, as Ms. Azoulay recalled, launched two
unprecedent initiatives. The first is the creation
of a network of safe havens to house endangered
cultural property and the second is the creation of the
International Alliance for the Protection of Cultural
Heritage in Conflict Areas (ALIPH). France has
contributed the first part of its pledge, and the work on
17-40502

30/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8119

the Board of Trustees has started. UNESCO will also
sit as a non-voting member of ALIPH.

these still largely unknown problems through technical
assistance or legal and police cooperation.

All these initiatives are complementary to the
UNESCO strategy to strengthen its action in the field
of cultural heritage protection and the promotion of
cultural diversity in armed conflict, and are in line
with existing international conventions. France is
also pursuing its cooperation with UNESCO through
a number of actions at the regional level, particularly
with regard to countries whose heritage is under
threat, particularly through the training of heritage
professionals, police and customs administrators.

Lastly, the team of experts of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities is also conducting
outstanding analytical work on the use of trafficking
in cultural goods by terrorist groups. It is essential that
the Security Council continue to support and rely on
their expertise.

Finally, and this will be my last remark, I want
to stress the key role the United Nations plays in the
protection of endangered cultural heritage. Resolution
2347 (2017) is a historic step forward in our common
struggle to protect endangered heritage. In that
connection, I would like to commend the role played by
Ms. Audrey Azoulay. The resolution urged States and
the United Nations system to redouble their efforts and
ensure their consistency.
I commend the essential role played by UNESCO
in the protection of heritage and the promotion of
cultural diversity as an instrument of peace and a
moral conscience of humankind, and recall that culture
connects men and women to their history and their land
and weaves the fabric of their future community. Thanks
to UNESCO, States have committed themselves to this
by adopting major conventions on the preservation of
our common heritage. The mandate of this institution
is more relevant than ever in a world where the values
it has embodied since its establishment are being called
into question.
In addition to welcoming the recognition in
resolution 2347 (2017) of the need to prosecute those
responsible for war crimes against cultural heritage,
France hails the recent strengthening of the partnership
between UNESCO and the International Criminal
Court. It is a very positive development and it sends
a strong message to armed and terrorist groups who
are threatening cultural heritage. Moreover, its just
confirms the recent work of the Court on this subject,
in cooperation with UNESCO and France in particular.
I would also like to pay tribute to the work of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and INTERPOL, which
both play a crucial role in the prevention of the trafficking
of cultural property by raising States’ awareness of

Each of these organizations and entities has a vital
role to play. Resolution 2347 (2017) invites them and
Member States to better coordinate their work and
to ensure consistency in their approaches. It is our
collective responsibility to preserve international peace
and security and to prevent the destruction of cultural
heritage by murderous attempts to deny history and
prevent its use to finance terrorism and fuel conflicts.
France will continue to play its part in these efforts and
hopes that the Security Council remains fully engaged
on this crucial issue.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
and the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/969).
It provideds a comprehensive summary of the actions
many of us have taken to protect cultural heritage
sites since the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017) and,
perhaps more importantly, of what more we can all do
to prevent any further destruction.
In recent years, with the explosion of conflicts
across much of the Middle East and Africa, terrorists
have endeavoured to destroy not only the ways in
which we choose to live today, but also our heritage
and the records of how humankind existed in the past.
This attempt to annihilate cultures that are not their
own — whether through genocide, ethnic cleansing
or war crimes — all too often goes hand in hand with
the destruction of cultural heritage and identity. As we
have seen in Palmyra, in Nimrud and Timbuktu, these
brutal groups do not limit themselves to demolition,
but also profit in trading artefacts that should belong
to all and not to selfish individuals. With this trade,
they fund more of their activities, be they attempts to
expand their territories, inflict terror abroad or disperse
their propaganda.
That is why we particularly welcome the
International Criminal Court’s sentencing of an
individual for directing attacks against religious and

17-4050211/24

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

historic buildings in Timbuktu, as discussed in the
Secretary-General’s report, and we encourage the
Court to prosecute all individuals who contribute
towards this crime to serve as a deterrent to those who
may be inclined to similar actions in the future. We also
welcome the education and awareness-raising projects
listed in the Secretary-General’s report. I would like to
commend Italy for its leadership on cultural protection.
In addition to unified international action through legal
and judicial instruments, this kind of practical action is
essential to support those countries most at risk.
May I join others in congratulating Ms. Audrey
Azoulay on her election as Director-General of
UNESCO and in welcoming her today. We believe that
UNESCO has a meaningful role to play in this area.
We encourage the new Director-General to review
UNESCO activity with a view to focusing resources
on programmes and projects that will have the greatest
impact and the demonstrable value for money.
To secure progress, public funding needs to be
matched by investment from philanthropists and the
private sector. I commend those trusts and foundations
that are already supporting work in this area. We need
more organizations to follow their lead and work in
partnership with national Governments, multilateral
agencies and civil society to protect our shared heritage
for the benefit of humankind.
Allow me to take a few moments to discuss the
United Kingdom’s national actions in this area. Since
the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017), we have ratified
the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and
acceded to both of its Protocols. This demonstrates the
importance we place on responding forcefully to the
destruction of cultural heritage by terrorists, looters
and other malign forces.
Our enforcement agencies are continuing their
efforts to prevent elicit artefacts from entering or
leaving the United Kingdom. Considering the size of
the United Kingdom’s antiques market, we hope this
will continue to have a significant impact. We have
also established a cultural protection fund, initially of
$40 million, which is already helping to protect and
conserve heritage at risk in conflict areas and providing
the skills and expertise that are sorely needed to ensure
that our shared heritage is safe for future generations.
This will also play an important role in postconflict situations and support reconciliation between
12/24

30/11/2017

communities and nations. We know that heritage sites
that receive proper protection can produce economic,
as well as social benefits, for example through
sustainable tourism. Our cultural protection fund is
already supporting projects in Afghanistan, Lebanon,
Egypt, the Sudan, Yemen and Turkey, but we are keen
to support other projects across the Middle East and
North Africa, so we are exploring the scope to extend
the programme to other regions where cultural heritage
is at risk.
As the Secretary-General’s report makes clear,
world heritage sites and other iconic monuments and
artefacts have been subjected to wilful destruction.
We should and must do all that we can to prevent a
recurrence of such acts. Civilization, education and our
shared cultural heritage will prevail over destruction,
barbarism and the division of terrorists.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Italian
presidency for organizing today’s briefing, as well as
for championing the protection of cultural heritage in
conflict situations. We also thank all the briefers for
their respective presentations. I would also like to use
this opportunity to welcome Ms. Audrey Azoulay and
congratulate her on her recent election as the DirectorGeneral of UNESCO.
We welcome the first report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/969) on the implementation of resolution
2347 (2017) , which shows that cultural heritage on
UNESCO’s List of World Heritage in Danger in Iraq,
Libya, Syria and Yemen continues to be damaged,
looted, destroyed and illegally excavated owing to
armed conflicts. The looting and smuggling of cultural
artefacts and ongoing exploitation of cultural sites by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Syria and
Iraq, as well as by Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
in Yemen, are also of great concern. Trafficking in
cultural heritage continues to generate income for
terrorist groups, such as ISIL, to fund their activities.
It is in that context that we note with appreciation
the positive developments that have occurred before
and since the adoption of Security Council resolution
2347 (2017), involving institutional capacity-building,
legislative accountability and enforcement measures
geared towards further strengthening the protection
of cultural heritage. We also welcome the work
undertaken by UNESCO, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and the World Customs
Organization to that end.
17-40502

30/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

All parties to an armed conflict have the obligation
not to direct hostilities at cultural property, not to
use cultural properties for military purposes and to
avoid incidental damage to such property unless it is
located in the immediate proximity of military targets
or dictated by military imperative. Ensuring such
special protection of cultural heritage in armed conflict
requires a comprehensive approach that encompasses
a broad set of measures aimed at strengthening the
protective framework for cultural heritage and ensuring
accountability for properties.
We recognize that the primary responsibility for
protecting cultural heritage from damage, destruction
and looting lies with States themselves. They are also
required to take all measures necessary within the
framework of their criminal legislation to prosecute
and punish individuals, groups or entities responsible
for the destruction, looting, damage or trafficking of
cultural heritage. However, that requires enhanced
cooperation among Member States, as the report of
the Secretary-General indicates. Strengthening that
cooperation, including in the context of Security
Council resolution 2347 (2017), is important, and such
efforts could be complemented by measures at the
international and regional levels and may encompass
legislative enforcement, judicial cooperation and
temporary protection, among other things.
As affirmed in resolution 2347 (2017), United
Nations peacekeeping operations, when mandated,
could also play a critical role in assisting relevant
authorities, at their request, in protecting cultural
heritage from destruction, illicit excavation, looting
and smuggling in the context of armed conflicts. In that
regard, we take note with appreciation of the support
that UNESCO has provided to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
In our view, in addition to mandating peacekeeping
missions to assist States in protecting cultural heritage
in armed conflict, the Security Council could make
a significant contribution to protecting cultural
heritage and preventing its trafficking, theft, pillage or
misappropriation by armed groups and terrorists. In that
regard, I would like to underscore the significant role
that the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities continues to play to that end

S/PV. 8119

in providing the Committee with relevant information
regarding the illicit trade of cultural property for a
possible listing by the Committee, in accordance with
Council resolution 2347 (2017).
I would like to conclude my remarks by underscoring
the importance of continued implementation and
follow-up of the measures identified under resolution
2347 (2017) and relevant international legal frameworks
to further strengthen the protection of cultural heritage
in the context of armed conflict.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China)(spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes your initiative, Mr. President, to
convene today’s open meeting on the prevention of
the destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage by
terrorist groups and in situations of armed conflict. We
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov,
Director-General
Azoulay,
Executive
Director
Fedotov, Secretary-General Stock and Mr. Bianchi for
their briefings.
Our rich cultural heritage is the very fabric of
human civilization and the embodiment of equality,
tolerance and cultural diversity. In recent years, we
have witnessed frequent acts of destruction of precious
examples of cultural heritage by terrorist groups and
in the course of armed conflicts. Terrorist groups also
use the smuggling and trafficking of cultural heritage
as a source of financing. This not only threatens
international peace and security but also shows
contempt for the world’s cultures and civilizations.
The international community should work together to
combat such destruction by terrorist groups, and take
effective measures to block any channels they use to
smuggle or traffic cultural heritage, and protect cultural
heritage in conflict situations.
First, we should implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions in earnest and make full use of
the relevant Council mechanisms. Resolution 2347
(2017) provides a framework for cooperation on the
protection of cultural heritage. Member States bear
the primary responsibility for this task and should
work to effectively implement the provisions of the
relevant Council resolutions, improving their domestic
legislation, establishing early-warning mechanisms,
strengthening law enforcement and resolutely
combating the destruction or smuggling of cultural
heritage by terrorist groups. The Security Council and
its affiliated mechanisms should play their full part
by helping Member States to enhance their relative

17-4050213/24

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

capacities to build and block all channels through which
terrorist groups smuggle or traffick in cultural heritage
to finance terrorism.
Secondly, we should take effective measures to
protect cultural heritage in conflict zones and promote
international cooperation in that regard. Countries
in conflict situations face a more serious challenge
in protecting their cultural heritage. The countries
affected should develop security policies for the
protection of cultural heritage and participate in the
relevant international cooperation frameworks as
soon as possible. The international community should
provide constructive support, based on respect for the
sovereignty of countries in conflict situations and their
ownership of their cultural heritage. UNESCO, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL
and the World Customs Organization should leverage
their advantages by establishing databases on criminal
activities such as illegal trade, exchanging intelligence
and information and generating international synergy for
the protection of cultural heritage in conflict situations.
Thirdly, we should strengthen dialogue between
civilizations and promote stability and development in
conflict areas. Countries should collectively promote
the diversity of civilizations around the world and foster
mutual respect and consultation on a basis of equality
so as to address gaps and conflicts through exchanges
and mutual learning between civilizations. All parties
should advocate for the democratization of international
relations and, based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, assist countries in
conflict situations in promoting political processes
and realizing national reconciliation with a view to
restoring peace and stability as quickly as possible. The
international community should help affected countries
improve their sustainable development capacities
in order to enable them to fully implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, swiftly reduce
poverty and achieve common prosperity.
Cultural heritage is the shared patrimony of
humankind and terrorism is its common enemy.
China has always actively supported and participated
in international cooperation for the protection of
endangered cultural heritage. We stand ready to work
with other nations to contribute further to preventing
the destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage by
terrorist groups in situations of armed conflict.
14/24

30/11/2017

Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank you, Sir, and Italy for the initiative of holding this
meeting. I should also like to convey a special welcome
to Ms. Audrey Azoulay and congratulate her on her
election as Director-General of UNESCO. I also thank
all the briefers for their important contributions. The
perspectives they have shared with the Council have
added greatly to our discussion today.
As we have heard, the destruction, looting and
trafficking of cultural heritage by terrorist groups and
in situations of armed conflict has both immediate and
long-term consequences. We reiterate our steadfast
condemnation of these hateful and cynical practices. As
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/969) shows,
the destruction and trafficking of cultural heritage
is particularly problematic in Iraq, Syria, Yemen
and Libya, with sites in these countries permanently
damaged and where our common heritage is lost forever.
Even though Da’esh has been pushed back considerably
from territories in Iraq and Syria, the reports of
continued seizures of antiquities originating from those
areas underscore the need for our continued attention.
History has shown that cultural heritage is often
targeted in its own right. Continued preventive efforts
to protect cultural heritage are therefore essential,
including those proposed by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2017/969) on the implementation of
resolution 2347 (2017), adopted earlier this year. We
recognize UNESCO’s leading role as the standardsetting agency for cultural-heritage protection and
welcome its efforts to combat the destruction of cultural
heritage and the illicit trafficking of cultural property.
Sweden is actively supporting UNESCO’s work in
this field. We were pleased to join the States parties to
the Second Protocol to the Hague Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict after our recent ratification of it.
As clearly demonstrated here today, there are a
multitude of international and regional actors that
play an important role in the protection of cultural
heritage. A positive example of this was Pandora, a
joint INTERPOL-European Police Office operation
conducted in October and November 2016 with the
cooperation of many Member States, UNESCO and the
World Customs Organization, which resulted in a large
number of works of art and cultural goods seized, as
well as a significant number of arrests.
17-40502

30/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Sweden has been paying increased attention to
the illicit trafficking of cultural property and cultural
heritage crimes. As mentioned by Director-General
Azoulay, a special wildlife and cultural-heritage crime
unit was established within our national police force
in 2016. There is also a dedicated national coordinator
within the Swedish police authority working on
strategies and developments in the field, and we are
continuing our efforts to increase understanding of these
issues among Swedish nationals travelling to conflict
areas, as well as to train customs officers on export and
import regulations related to cultural property.
As with all forms of trafficking, it is essential
to look at the demand side of the trade. The burden
cannot be borne solely by countries affected by war
or terrorism. For that reason, we welcome the fact that
the Secretary-General’s report addresses the role of
the art and antiquities market. The Swedish National
Heritage Board has opened a dialogue with major
Swedish art and antique dealers in order to raise their
awareness of Security Council resolutions, with the aim
of strengthening the fight against the illicit trafficking
of cultural property. Revised anti-money-laundering
and counter-terrorist financing legislation also creates
stronger incentives for the private and public sectors to
work together on such issues.
Looking forward, we take note in particular of
the Secretary-General’s recommendations regarding
the training of personnel on the protection of cultural
heritage and on planning processes ahead of mandate
renewals and the establishment of new missions,
where relevant. Wé look forward to UNESCO’s
continued involvement in that regard, together with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and other relevant actors.
Where preventive efforts have failed, accountability
for attacks on cultural-heritage sites and their
destruction is essential, and the perpetrators of such
crimes must be brought to justice. As shown by the
Al Mahdi case, the International Criminal Court plays an
important role where national authorities are unwilling
or unable to properly investigate and adjudicate such
crimes. We look forward to the important work of other
investigative mechanisms, such as the International
Impartial Independent Mechanism for Syria and the
investigative team for Da’esh crimes in Iraq, in the
fight against impunity for these crimes.

S/PV. 8119

Finally, we warmly welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s call for further engagement and partnership
with civil society, communities and young people
through heritage education and other activities.
Hopefully, with a stronger connection to our common
heritage and a better understanding of it, we can
promote respect for cultural diversity and tolerance and
build inclusive societies that not only help to protect
our cultural heritage better but that are also less prone
to falling into conflict in the first place.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The delegation
of Senegal would like to warmly thank and commend
the Italian and French delegations for once again
inviting us, as they did eight months ago on 24 March
(see S/PV.7907), to contemplate and take action based
on the maxim of the German thinker Heinrich Heine
that “where they burn books, they will also ultimately
burn people”. The bloody actions of armed groups and
terrorists on the international stage have unfortunately
confirmed that tragic universal reality.
I would also like to thank and commend today’s
briefers, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism; Ms. Audrey Azoulay, Director-General of
UNESCO, whom we are very pleased to see appointed
to lead that body and wish every success in her work;
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; Mr. Jürgen Stock,
Secretary-General of INTERPOL; and Mr. Alessandro
Bianchi, Project Leader of Cultural Heritage Protection
for Italy’s Ministry of Culture. Their admirable
presentations call for determined and coordinated
action on the part of the international community to
prevent and put an end to the destruction and illicit
trafficking of cultural heritage and, where possible, to
restore or return them to their rightful owners.
Nothing has been left unsaid regarding the role
of cultural heritage in preserving peace and security,
as both tangible and intangible cultural heritage form
part of the identities of whole communities, societies,
peoples and nations for whom such heritage is a point
of reference for shared values. It is a source of cohesion
and togetherness — as a former President of Senegal,
Léopold Sédar Senghor, has said, a common will to live
together. With the adoption of its historic resolution
2347 (2017), the Security Council has fully recognized
this essential dimension of cultural heritage.

17-4050215/24

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

The proliferation of armed conflicts throughout
the world, coupled with the spread of international
terrorism and violent extremism, owing to the criminal
actions of terrorist groups whose trademark is the
destruction, looting and trafficking of property, is one
of the factors that is putting the world’s cultural heritage
in increasing danger. Organized looting and the illicit
trafficking of cultural property have become a tactic of
war for terrorist groups, which then use the proceeds
to finance their criminal activities. Senegal has been
shocked by the mass destruction and brutal sacking by
these criminal groups of sites in Afghanistan, Syria,
Iraq and Libya, not to mention the destruction in 2012
of the mausoleums in Timbuktu, city of 333 saints. As
a result, we contributed actively to the launching in
June 2012 of the Saint Petersburg Declaration, which
condemned their destruction.
It is therefore clear that the protection of world
cultural heritage in conflict situations is a major
challenge to which the international community must
respond rapidly and appropriately. The international
Conference on Safeguarding Endangered Cultural
Heritage, held in Abu Dhabi on 2 and 3 December 2016,
laid a good foundation for that response. Given the
persistence of this threat, we believe that it is essential
to take an inclusive approach in the international efforts
to adopt new strategies to tackle the destructive fury
of these terrorist groups. Within the framework of that
dynamic, as set out in paragraph 17 (j) of resolution
2347 (2017), it is important to take steps to make as
precise an inventory as possible of cultural properties
and other objects of archeological, historical, cultural
and religious importance that have been illegally
displaced, removed or transferred from conflict areas,
so as to ensure coordination with the relevant United
Nations entities and international actors for their
speedy repatriation.
We also welcome the relevance of paragraph 4 of
resolution 2347 (2017), which affirms that
“[D]irecting unlawful attacks against ... buildings
dedicated to religion, education, art, science or
charitable purposes, or historic monuments may
constitute, under certain circumstances ... a war
crime and that perpetrators of such attacks must be
brought to justice.”
The Senegalese delegation therefore once again
commends the decision of the International Criminal
Court of 27 September 2016, which for the first time in
16/24

30/11/2017

the history of humankind identified the destruction of
religious and cultural heritage as a war crime and, as a
consequence of that decision, sentenced a perpetrator
of such acts, Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi, to nine years
in prison, setting an important legal precedent that
we hope will serve as a deterrent in future. Senegal
encourages including support for safeguarding
cultural heritage in peacekeeping missions’ mandates
so as to maintain the example set by resolution 2100
(2015) — which established the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) — and subsequent related
resolutions, the latest of which is resolution 2364
(2017), which, in paragraph 22 (c), entitled “Support for
cultural preservation”, authorizes MINUSMA
“[T]o assist the Malian transitional authorities, as
appropriate and if possible, protect the cultural and
historical sites of the country against all attacks, in
collaboration with UNESCO.”
Because the protection of cultural heritage is first
and foremost the responsibility of the State where
it is located, the United Nations and other relevant
bodies must provide Governments that request it with
all the support and assistance they need to establish
national protection mechanisms. In that regard, we
welcome the establishment of an international fund
to protect endangered cultural heritage. It is equally
important to strengthen cooperation — bilateral,
subregional or regional — through joint initiatives
within the framework of the appropriate UNESCO
programmes. Similarly, enhanced cooperation among
other international organizations, such as UNESCO,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL and the World Customs Organization,
would also help to further mobilize the international
community in better coordinating the activities and
initiatives of all stakeholders.
In conclusion, based on the connection between
trafficking in cultural property and funding terrorism, I
join the Secretary-General, as he outlines in paragraph
111 of his report (S/2017/969), in calling on Member
States to consider the relevant provisions of resolutions
2199 (2015), 2253 (2015) and 2368 (2017), which
complement the implementation of resolution 2347
(2017). Lastly, the French-Italian initiative that has
brought us together today is part of the dialogue among
cultures and civilizations, which is very important to
my country and crucial to maintaining international
peace and security.
17-40502

30/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The tasks outlined in resolution 2347 (2017)
regarding the protection of cultural heritage during
conflicts, and in particular from terrorists, have not
lost their relevance. I would like to thank the briefers
for their detailed information on the work of the bodies
they head and their thorough analysis of the challenges
currently facing the international community in this
area. We join others in congratulating Ms. Azoulay on
her appointment as Director-General of UNESCO and
wishing her every success.
We support strengthening and actively involving
the expert capacity of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, including in providing States with
technical assistance for combating crimes involving
cultural property. We have great hopes for the future
work of the Office of Counter-Terrorism, which has
been entrusted with the vitally important task of
coordinating the anti-terrorist efforts of the United
Nations and partner organizations.
My delegation has studied the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/969) on the implementation
of resolution 2347 (2017) with interest. We note its
information on my country’s active efforts to combat
the destruction and illegal trafficking of cultural
treasures. Our fight against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) in the Middle East and North
Africa is coming to an end, and a key contribution to
that achievement has been the success of the Russian
aerospace forces in Syria. Nevertheless, it will take a
long time to repair the damage that the terrorists have
done to the region’s cultural heritage. Much has been
lost forever. Moreover, the revenue from trading in
artefacts continues to be one of the main sources of
funding for terrorists, despite the fact that combating
this type of illegal activity has been on the Security
Council’s agenda for some time now. With the support
of our delegation, the task of combating the financing
of terrorism through trafficking in cultural property
was set out in resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015).
However, many unresolved issues remain with regard
to their implementation.
Terrorists and the criminal groups affiliated with
them exploit every possible loophole to send cultural
property abroad. For example, Russia’s border-control
authorities were able to confiscate Ottoman-period
tiles and other Syrian artefacts that had been stolen
from territory under ISIL’s control. If they had not,

S/PV. 8119

part of Syria’s cultural property would have wound up
illegally in the hands of private collectors. According
to our information, this trade in cultural property is
carried out mainly by anonymous dealers. Cases of the
illegal acquisition of such items via the Internet have
also been documented. Unfortunately, it is difficult
to track such transactions owing in large part to the
difficulty of identifying the smuggled artefacts. A
couple of months ago there was an interesting article in
The New York Times on the methods used to smuggle
artefacts into Europe and elsewhere. In the light of
that, we once again call on all States to immediately
submit to the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities any information they have on
sources of funding for those organizations. We would
like to highlight the importance of including individuals
and organizations involved in trading cultural property
with terrorists on the sanctions list.
Demining cultural sites and objects, in accordance
with resolution 2347 (2017), is a major priority. The
resolution calls on Member States, the relevant United
Nations entities and other international bodies to
provide assistance in that area. My country was one of
the first to respond. Nowhere is the humanitarian issue
of demining and preserving historic cultural heritage
more acute today than in Syria. The specialists in the
Russian armed forces’ international anti-mine centre
are contributing to those efforts. In Palmyra alone
we have cleared more than 2,000 hectares while also
identifying and defusing more than 24,000 explosive
devices. However, our efforts to preserve Palmyra’s
cultural heritage have not been limited to that. The
fourth Saint Petersburg Cultural Forum, in November,
for example, mounted a Palmyra photo exhibit that
included a three-dimensional model of the ancient city
and high-definition relief maps provided by specialists
from the Russian Academy of Sciences.
In general, we want to highlight the importance
of involving experts in the field of cultural­
heritage conservation. A good example in that regard was
the signing, between UNESCO and the State Hermitage
Museum, of a memorandum of understanding on the
issue of the safeguarding and restoration of cultural
property in conflict areas, primarily in the Middle East.
In conclusion, we reiterate our determination to
develop cooperation with all interested parties in the
context of implementing resolution 2347 (2017). We stand

17-4050217/24

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

readily to actively share our experience in protecting
cultural property from terrorists. We are convinced that
fighting the barbarous attempts by terrorists to destroy
the memory of ancient civilizations is the common and
historic task of the global community.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefings that we heard this morning from Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; Ms. Audrey
Azoulay, Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC);
Mr. Jürgen Stock, Secretary General of INTERPOL;
and Mr. Alessandro Bianchi, Project Leader for Cultural
Heritage Protection of the Italian Ministry of Culture.
We express to them our support for their work.
Bolivia, as a country that abides by international
law and one with a diverse and abundant cultural history
and heritage, has elaborated domestic legislation and
mechanisms aimed at regulating the classification,
registration, restitution, protection, conservation,
restoration, defence, custody and safekeeping of its
cultural heritage.
It has also ratified the relevant international
treaties and conventions and shares good practices in
multilateral, regional and bilateral forums. With this
understanding, and aware of the inestimable value of
cultural heritage as a living portrayal of the identity
of peoples, we express our strong and categorical
condemnation of the plundering, trafficking, smuggling,
destruction and any related activity systematically
perpetrated by Da’esh, Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and other
terrorist and criminal groups to finance their criminal
activities through the smuggling and illegal sale of
cultural heritage property, the proceeds of which are
laundered and funnelled into tax havens with few or
no controls, especially with respect to investing in the
tertiary sector.
The tremendous economic gains made by terrorist
groups through these criminal acts have been possible
mainly due to governance gaps, the weakening of the
forces of order and security, and the absence of control
at the borders to prevent such acts. We must therefore
reiterate that these situations were caused primarily
by the implementation of policies of regime change,
interventionism and interference in the internal affairs
18/24

30/11/2017

of States. It is clear from the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/969) that, since the adoption of
resolution 2347 (2017), significant progress has been
made. However, we must continue to make further
efforts to ensure its comprehensive implementation. We
believe, therefore, that the resolution is a useful tool for
tackling the challenges involved in countering the illicit
traffic in cultural heritage and property. Cooperation
among States and various international organizations,
including UNESCO, INTERPOL and UNODC, is a
priority that must be given impetus and strengthened
by the international community.
We also believe that joint action between special
United Nations missions deployed on the ground in
areas facing internal conflict would help effectively to
strengthen their efforts and build capacity to counter
illicit trafficking in cultural heritage. We believe that
the efforts made to implement the resolution must also
focus on returning cultural sites to their pre-conflict
condition and also include mine-action efforts so as
to clear explosive remnants of war and anti-personnel
mines in such areas, given that post-conflict restoration
and rehabilitation efforts can begin only when the
security situation allows. We therefore believe that
the positive experience registered in coordinating and
carrying out joint mine action, as noted in the report of
the Secretary-General, in which Mali, along with the
United Nations Mine Action Service, began a general
programme to neutralize these threats, is something
that could be replicated in other countries.
Furthermore, those States in whose formal and
informal markets cultural heritage has been identified
and recovered must develop and adopt policies for
redress and the return of said property and take into
account the guidelines laid down in the various
international instruments on the issue.
In this vein, there is also a need to strengthen the
judicial mechanisms enabling the investigation and
prosecution of persons involved in the commission of
such crimes, and the international community needs to
lend greater support to this effort. Therefore precedents
such as the sentence handed down by the International
Criminal Court in the Al-Mahdi case, on the destruction
of historical and religious sites in Mali, is a necessary
benchmark in terms of combating impunity.
In closing, Bolivia reiterates its rejection of all acts
of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of
their motive, whenever and by whomsoever committed.
17-40502

30/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

We reiterate the need for all States to use every means
available to combat terrorism, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and other obligations
under international law. All counterterrorism efforts
made by the Security Council and the United Nations
must be fully supported by Member States, which
must seek to bring to justice those responsible for such
crimes, so that they can be duly investigated, prosecuted
and punished.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by thanking all the briefers who spoke
this morning. I would like to pay particular tribute to
Ms. Audrey Azoulay, who has been appointed the new
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization.
According to the agenda, this will be the last formal
Security Council meeting under the Italian presidency,
so allow me, Sir, to convey to you and your entire team
our congratulations on the excellent work that you have
carried out. You and your team are duly complimented.
Cultural goods are a physical manifestation of a
people’s identity, history and culture, and for this reason
they deserve to be safeguarded. Cultural artifacts
that fall within the category known as world cultural
heritage have exceptional universal value, and therefore
protecting them is a right and obligation borne by all.
We owe it to our ancestors and future generations.
The international community has recognized this
value and the need to safeguard it, and it has adopted
legal instruments such as the Hague Convention of 1954
for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict, which provides that harm done or
damage caused to cultural property belonging to any
people is an attack against the cultural heritage of the
entire human race. The 1972 Convention concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage
holds that the deterioration or disappearance of cultural
heritage represents a harmful impoverishment of the
heritage of all peoples of the world.
Uruguay attaches great relevance to efforts to
protect and preserve cultural heritage, and here we
underscore the central role and importance of the work
of UNESCO, with which Uruguay maintains close
cooperation links.
We also recognize the value of coordinating
action with other United Nations entities, international
organizations and non-governmental organizations,

S/PV. 8119

including INTERPOL, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, and the World Customs
Organization, to name just a few. We welcome the letter
of intent signed by the International Criminal Court and
UNESCO last November to formalize and strengthen
their cooperation.
Resolution 2347 (2017) provides that Member
States have the primary responsibility for protecting
their cultural heritage. It urges them to take effective
measures to prevent and counter the trafficking of
cultural property and related crimes and to cooperate
in various ways and at different levels. In that regard,
we wish to emphasize that, thanks to police and judicial
cooperation, Uruguay was recently able to seize
archaeological pieces from various sources, including
some from the city of Palmyra.
Uruguay ratified the 1954 Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict and acceded to its Second Protocol.
It also ratified the 1970 Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property.
In the area of ​​
regional cooperation, last April,
the Technical Committee to Prevent and Combat
Illicit Trafficking in Cultural Goods of the Southern
Common Market (MERCOSUR) and Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR) was established in order
to facilitate joint work on combating the trafficking and
illegal sale of cultural property and on its recovery.
At the national level, as noted in the report of the
Secretary General, Uruguay enacted Law No. 18.494
on the Control and Prevention of Money-Laundering
and the Financing of Terrorism. That law includes
auctioneers and the natural and legal persons engaged
in the purchase and sale of antiques, works of art
and precious metals and gemstones among those that
must report to the Financial Information and Analysis
Unit of the Central Bank of Uruguay on transactions
considered suspicious or unusual, in accordance with
the provisions of the law.
Also, under decree 42/017 of February of this year,
the National Committee to Prevent and Combat the
Illicit Trafficking of Cultural Property was established.
The tasks of the Committee include the drafting
of joint strategies to reduce and to combat the illicit
trafficking of cultural property, the administration
of a register of stolen or trafficked cultural property
and the development of protocols for the prevention,

17-4050219/24

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

identification, recovery and restitution of such goods.
The Committee is composed of representatives of
the Ministry of Education and Culture, the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of the Interior, the
Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Association
of Mayors, which brings together the regional governors
of Uruguay.
The Chair of the Committee is also the focal point
for cooperation among the technical committee on the
illicit trafficking of cultural property of MERCOSUR,
the working group on the illicit trafficking of cultural
heritage of UNASUR and other international areas in
which the country participates or may participate on
that issue.
In addition, with regard to the adoption of
legislative measures, the executive branch is drafting
a bill that includes aspects such as police procedures,
delivery protocols, formalities and communications
with ministries of culture of third countries, as well as
the establishment of a database on stolen, recovered or
lost objects of cultural heritage and the obligations of
pawnshops, auction houses and antique dealers.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
commitment to continuing to work to implement
resolution 2347 (2017) and our willingness to continue
to cooperate bilaterally, regionally and multilaterally
for the protection of cultural property and heritage.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to join
other speakers in thanking the Italian presidency for
convening this meeting. My thanks also go to today’s
briefers for their valuable inputs to our discussion. An
especially warm welcome goes to Ms. Azoulay, whom
I congratulate on her recent election as UNESCO
Director-General.
By adopting resolution 2347 (2017), the Security
Council drew the attention of the international
community to a growing problem of destruction of
cultural heritage and trafficking in antiquities, which
has become a feature of numerous armed conflicts
worldwide. The most vulnerable to those threats are the
countries of Syria, Iraq, Libya, Afghanistan and Yemen,
given the involvement of non-State actors such as Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida, the Taliban and
the like. In some cases, the actions of terrorists in pursuit
of easy profit can lead to the wholesale obliteration of
a country’s archaeological record. In several countries
where terrorists have suffered major territorial losses,
their ability to conduct such criminal activities in order
20/24

30/11/2017

to fund their atrocities was limited. Yet, according to
UNESCO estimates, the value of the illicit trade in
artefacts excavated or looted from protected sites and
museums is nevertheless enormous.
As outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/969), resolution 2347 (2017) is far from being
implemented in full, as States may need more time to
adjust their respective legislation. I would like to limit
the rest of my statement to the following measures on
which States can focus, apart from the universalization
of the relevant international treaties adopted under the
auspices of the United Nations or regional organizations.
First is the broader criminalization of offences
against cultural heritage and the imposition of stiff
penalties for illegal activities with regard to antiquities,
such as prison sentences or very high fines. It is
important to increase the latter so that they are not
viewed as simple business expenses for professional
smugglers. That will serve the purpose of bringing
perpetrators to justice.
The second measure is the strengthening of importexport regimes and the respective national institutional
frameworks. International coordination between
law enforcement and customs agencies will also
contribute to the effective conduct of the investigations,
prosecutions, seizures and returns of smuggled cultural
property. In addition, States must ensure broader
information-sharing on trafficking routes and the
modus operandi of criminals. There must also be active
cooperation at the bilateral and multilateral levels on
exposing and on stopping transnational organized
crime groups, which assist terrorists in exporting looted
antiquities from conflict zones. For those purposes,
liaison with UNESCO, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the World Customs Organization and
INTERPOL, as well as the utilization of their relevant
databases, are also essential.
Thirdly, close public-private partnership is
necessary to track the sale of illegally imported
artefacts. Given that the Internet has become a major
conduit for criminal activities, special attention should
be given to supervising relevant online auctions. In
that regard, the development of self-regulations by
participants in the art market is particularly welcomed.
Finally, the further monitoring by the relevant
United Nations bodies of the actual impact of resolution
2347 (2017) on preventing the destruction and smuggling
17-40502

30/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

of cultural heritage is required to assess the dynamics
in that area and to develop lasting solutions.
In conclusion, I would like to pay the highest
tribute to the Italian presidency for the excellent and
professional conduct of our business in November.
Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express my gratitude to the Italian
presidency for having convened this briefing. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
implementation of resolution 2347 (2017) (S/2017/969).
And I thank all the briefers for their valuable statements.
I would like to congratulate Ms. Azoulay on the
assumption of her new post.
The importance of resolution 2347 (2017) lies in its
reaffirmation of the protection of cultural heritage from
destruction, looting or misuse for terrorist ends. That is
a very sensitive topic, since it is closely linked to sites,
property, museums or objects that are directly related to
the history and identity of peoples and countries. Egypt
is aware of that fact. We possess invaluable cultural
heritage that garners the respect and appreciation
of all. Secondly, we enjoy a geographical location in
a continent and a region that is home to the majority
of the world’s cultural heritage. Egypt is therefore
aware of the importance and sensitivity of the topic of
protecting cultural heritage from destruction or looting
by terrorist groups in situations of armed conflict.
Despite the relatively short time since the adoption
of resolution 2347 (2017) and the publication of the
Secretary General’s report, the report nevertheless
managed to adequately take stock of the efforts made
to implement the resolution — from all legal, judicial,
legislative, institutional, procedural and operational
aspects, in addition to those related to international
cooperation and raising awareness. Aware as we are of
the importance and sensitivity of the issue of protecting
cultural heritage from the dangers of terrorism, Egypt
would like to highlight five important considerations
that must be taken into account.
First, we stress the primary role of every State
to protect its own cultural heritage. Efforts to protect
cultural heritage in armed conflicts must be aligned
with Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Respect for State sovereignty and non-interference
in the internal affairs of States are principles that
must be upheld. In that regard, we affirm that the
protection of cultural heritage, including the possibility

S/PV. 8119

of establishing safe havens for such heritage, cannot
be achieved but through the State having control over
cultural heritage within its territory. In other words,
Egypt categorically objects to any interference in the
internal affairs of any country under the pretext of
protecting cultural heritage. We refuse categorically
the transfer of cultural heritage owned by any country
to another State beyond its territories under the pretext
of protecting or preserving it in safe havens.
Secondly, we stress the need for UNESCO, in
its capacity as the specialized agency on the issue of
cultural heritage, to continue providing all types of
assistance to States, at their their request, to enable
them to protect their cultural heritage. The Security
Council must not address the topic of protecting
cultural heritage except in cases that pose a threat to
international peace and security, namely, in the context
of combating international terrorism or addressing
international conflicts that are on the agenda of
the Council.
Thirdly, States must take the necessary steps to
avoid and prevent the illicit trafficking and smuggling of
cultural objects or properties, especially from conflict
zones — and more specifically via terrorist groups.
Fourthly, States must prepare lists of their cultural
properties that were transferred from their original
sites illegally during armed conflicts. In that regard,
cooperation and coordination is needed with United
Nations entities and other relevant international actors
to ensure the secure restoration of such objects.
Fifthly, we must ensure that peacekeeping
operations include a component that assists the countries
concerned, at their request, to protect their cultural
properties from destruction, looting or similar offences.
In conclusion, while Egypt underscores that
protecting cultural heritage is a commendable goal, we
nevertheless believe that the real lesson to be learned
concerns the need for States to implement Security
Council resolutions, and for the Council itself to ensure
close follow-up in the implementation of its resolutions
and guarantee that States comply wiht their provisions.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
invitees for their briefings, and also I also thank Italy
for having organized this meeting.
Earlier this year, Iraqi soldiers discovered tunnels
dug below the remains of the tomb and osque of Jonah

17-4050221/24

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

in Mosul, which showed that militants of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) were excavating into
an ancient Assyrian palace that is at the same site. That
excavation took place, of course, after ISIS had already
destroyed the historic tomb and mosque above, in 2014.
What was the likely target of ISIS? Valuable antiquities
to loot and then traffic in global markets. I share this
story to illustrate that nefarious activity has become, in
effect, part of the business plan of ISIS.
Even after liberation from ISIS, cultural heritage
and antiquities remain under threat, as fleeing members
of ISIS will likely seek to sell artefacts that could
continue to provide a substantial revenue stream. The
ability to sell looted goods over the Internet has turned
a once cost-prohibitive market into one accessible by
anyone with a cell phone or Internet connection. The
United States has been unwavering in its commitment
to protecting and preserving cultural heritage. Our
policy is clear: the unlawful destruction of cultural
heritage and the trafficking of cultural property
are unacceptable.
We join the United Nations and Council members
in affirming that countries have a responsibility to
preserve and protect heritage of universal importance
and prevent its exploitation for terrorist purposes,
including illicit financial gain. The United States
continues robust implementation of its own domestic
tools for putting an end to the destruction of cultural
heritage and trafficking of cultural property. The
emergency import restrictions on Syrian and certain
Iraqi cultural property remain in place, and serve as a
strong disincentive to would-be traffickers.
The United States has also negotiated bilateral
agreements with 16 countries to block the illegal
importation of archaeological and ethnological material
into the United States. We urge States parties to the
UNESCO 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property whose heritage is in
jeopardy to request the same type of protection.
The cultural antiquities task force established by
the United States Department of State focuses on the
recovery and repatriation of looted cultural objects and
supports law enforcement agencies in such efforts. The
United States Federal Bureau of Investigation maintains
an national stolen art file — a computerized database
of stolen art and cultural property — and makes its
22/24

30/11/2017

information available to law enforcement agencies
around the world.
For several years, the United States Government
has provided funding to the American Schools of
Oriental Research (ASOR) to continue its important
work in Syria and northern Iraq. This year we have
expanded ASOR’s work to also include Libya. With
that funding, ASOR monitors cultural heritage sites in
those areas using satellite imagery, human intelligence
and public information in order to document evidence
of destruction and looting by ISIS and other actors.
United States funding has also enabled the Smithsonian
Institution to train Iraqi cultural heritage professionals
so that they can be prepared to implement needed
interventions when the security situation allows.
We remain fully committed to those efforts, and we
look forward to coordinating with the United Nations
and Member States and with the United Nations and
international entities, including the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities over the coming year on the
full implementation of resolution 2347 (2017).
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I commend today’s briefers for their insightful
remarks and for their strong commitment to the
protection of cultural heritage, which has increasingly
become one of the main targets of systematic and
deliberate attacks by terrorist groups and in situations
of conflict, and is also used, as we were reminded, to
finance terrorism and organized crime. Those attacks
affect people’s historical identity and undermine
important values, such as tolerance, respect for
diversity and inclusiveness, thereby hampering postconflict reconciliation and the long-term stability of the
countries affected.
The international community has recognized the
link between the destruction of cultural heritage and
violence against local populations, including through
a landmark statement of the International Criminal
Court in the case of Prosecutor v. Ahmad Al Faqi Al
Mahdi, and the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council and the UNESCO General Conference and its
Executive Board.
17-40502

30/11/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is critical to elaborate and implement
coordinated measures at the legal and operational
levels aimed at preventing and countering all forms
of trafficking in cultural property. We have made the
protection of cultural heritage and the fight against
the illicit trafficking in cultural artefacts one of our
main priorities, including during our mandate on the
Security Council, during which we have focused on the
Mediterranean, where Italy’s cultural identity is rooted
in thousands of years of exchanges and where today
instability threatens our common heritage.
In Paris, at UNESCO, we launched the idea of
the Blue Helmets for Culture. We have supported the
Unite4Heritage campaign by creating a national task
force, and promoted a specific resolution devoted to
intervention in areas of crisis. Together with Saudi
Arabia and the United States of America, we co-chaired
the Counter-ISIS Finance Working Group of the
Global Coalition agasint Da’esh, and we co-chair the
sub-working group on the fight against the smuggling
of archaeological artefacts.
In New York since 2015, we have been working
with many organizations, such as United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, UNESCO and INTERPOL,
whose heads briefed the Council today, and with
many countries, including France and Jordan, to
address different aspects of the protection of cultural
heritage, with special attention to the fight against
illicit trafficking in cultural artefacts. In particular,
that initiative concluded with the presentation of a
list of proposed key actions to be undertaken by all
the main stakeholders in response to attacks against
cultural heritage.
In September, at the high-level event on protecting
cultural heritage from terrorism and mass atrocities,
held on the margins of the general debate of the General
Assembly, the Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, Mr. Angelino Alfano,
stressed once again the fact that acts of intentional
destruction of cultural heritage are a huge obstacle to
peace since they hinder dialogue and reconciliation
by fomenting hatred among communities and
between generations.
To address the rise in destructive attacks and
serious crimes perpetrated by terrorists, France
and Italy together — and we share the same vision,
as Ambassador Delattre said earlier — we jointly

S/PV. 8119

promoted resolution 2347 (2017), as many speakers
recalled today, as an advanced legal framework for the
protection of cultural heritage and property in armed
conflicts. The resolution foresees, inter alia, promoting
the ratification and implementation of relevant
international instruments; strengthening international
cooperation; introducing operational measures to
safeguard and preserve endangered cultural heritage;
promoting cultural pluralism; introducing operational
measures to prevent and counter the trafficking of
cultural property illegally appropriated and exported
in the context of armed conflicts, notably by terrorist
groups for financing their operations; and affirming
that the mandate of United Nations peacekeeping
operations may encompass the protection of cultural
heritage from destruction.
As has already been underlined this morning, the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/969) offers the
first overview of the implementation of resolution 2347
(2017), and contains specific proposals dedicated to
future actions based on the provisions of the resolution.
The report expresses the strong commitment of the
United Nations system to acting in a more harmonious
way and to enhancing its cooperation among Member
States, which hold primary responsibility for the
protection of their community and culture.
We will continue to actively work on that
issue through the expertise of our Carabinieri and
dedicated experts like Mr. Bianchi, because Italy
believes that the preservation of cultural heritage
and the promotion and respect of cultural diversity
are key elements of reconciliation and peacebuilding
processes and in establishing a sustainable, inclusive
human development. No society can flourish without
culture. No mutual relations can be established without
respecting peoples’ history and its soul.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of November, I would like to express
the sincere appreciation of the delegation of Italy
to Council members, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives, the respective staff and the
secretariat of the Council for all the support they have
given to us. It has been a busy month, one in which we
have addressed, I think always constructively, together
with the Council members many important issues.

17-4050223/24

S/PV.8119

Maintenance of international peace and security

We could not have done so without the hard work,
support and positive contribution of every delegation,
the representatives of the secretariat and all relevant
conference service officers and interpreters.

24/24

30/11/2017

As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council, in wishing good luck to the delegation
of Japan in the month of December.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

17-40502
