Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Seeond Committee

10. Calls upon the Secretary-General to pursue the
task of collecting and disseminating available information regarding the mineral and other resources of the
sea-bed and the ocean floor beyond the limits of national
jurisdiction and teclmiques appropriate for their development and of providing the assistance which the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and
the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of N ational Jurisdiction may request for the solution of related issues;
11. Rcquests the Secretary-Gen_eral, in ~o-operation
with the United Nations Educat1onal, Sc1ent1fic and
Cultural Organization and its Intergover1:mental
Oceanographic Commission, the Food an_d Agncul~ure
Organization of the United Nations ~nd 1ts Cor~um~tee
on Fisheries, the World Meteorolog1cal Orgamzat1on,
the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency
and other organizations concerned, . to report,_ through
appropriate channels, to the Econom~c and Social Council and to the General Assembly at 1ts twenty-fifth session on the progress achieved in the implementation of
the present resolution.
1745th plenary meeting,
17 Deceniber 1968.

2415 (XXIII). Externa! financing of economic
development of the developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalnng its resolution 2170 (XXI) of 6 December
1966 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1183
(XLI) of 5 August 1966,
Recalling further its resolutions 2274 (XXII) of
4 December 1967 on the flow of externa! resources to
developing countries and 2276 (XXII) of 4 December
1967 dealing with the outflow of capital from developin~ countries and debt-servicing burdens of these
tnes,
Taking note of decisions 27 (II) on the aid volnme
target34 and 29 ( II) on improving the terms and conditions of aid and alleviating the problems of externa!
indebtedness 35 adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on 28 March 1968,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the externa! financing of economic developmeut of ihe developing countries,38
N oting with appreciation that some developed conntries have reached and even surpassed the 1 per cent
target as defined in decision 27 (II) of the United
Nations Conference 011 Trade ancl Development and that
others have announced definite time-tables for the acceleration of the flow of assistance, have set up snbsidiary targets for official flow ami have made provision
for future annual increases in official hudgetary allocations for assistance in arder to reach the target within
the time-limits accepted by them,
N oting with concern that:
(a) In recent years the flow of financia! resources
from developed to developing countries has remained

c'fn-

34 See Prnrrcdings of thc Unitrd Natio11s Cn11fcrc11cc /111
Trade and Development, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.l
and Acld.1, ReñMf m,d An11c.,·cs (lJnit~d )/ations publication,
Sales No.: E.68.II.D.14), p. 38.
SD /bid.., p. 40.
38 United Nations publication, Sales No.:
E.68.II.D.10;
O/flcial Records of thc Economic and Social Council, Fortyfifth Session, Anne:res, agenda ítem 7, documents E/4495 and
E/4512.

31

relatively stagnant and that there has been a declining
trend in the transfer of resources as a proportion of the
gross national product of developed countries,
( b) Certain advanced countries have not so f:ir bec_n
able to accept the aicl volume target as dcfined 111 dec1sio11 27 (II) of the United Nations Conferencc on
Trade and Development,
(e) In recent years there has been an increase in the
degree of tying aid to procurement from clonar countries,

( d) The reverse flow of financia I resources 011 account of clebt servicc from cleveloping to developed
countries further increased in 1966 and 1967 and it has
been estimated that, if current trends of borrowing and
repayment continue, net lending would become negative
by 1970,37
(e) Fifteen months after thc termination of the
period for which the first replenishment was intended,
the second replenishment of the International Development Association has not materializcd and that this has
impeded the efforts of planned economic development
of a number of developing countries,
(f) The inability of multilateral financia! institutions
and multilateral development programmes to attain thcir
resource target threatens to undermine their ahility to
render their tasks satisfactorily and, in certain instances,
hampers their fttnctioning in a continuing and steady
manner,
l. Endorses decision 27 (II) of the Unitecl Nations
Conference on Trade ami Development, which includes
the recommendation that each cconomically advancecl
country should endeavour to provide developing conntries annually with a financia! resources transfcr of a
mínimum net amount of 1 per cent of its gross national
product at market prices in terms of actual dislmrsemcnts, having regard to the special position of those
countries which are net importers of capital;
2. Recomniends that, as a key element of thc international development policy for the Second Unitecl
Nations Development Decade, economically advanced
countries which have not already done so should accept
1972 as the target year for the attainment of the aid
volume target, as defined in decision 27 ( II) of the
ünited Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
and take urgcnt appropriate action to achieve this objective;
3. Further rccoinmends that efforts should continue
to he made to reach agreement on a target for net
official financia! resources transfers within the 1 per cent
target;
4. Endora·cs decision 29 (II) of the Unitecl Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on improving
the terms and conditions of aid and alleviating the problcms of externa! indebtedness. and urges developed
countries to exert maxinmm efforts to implement this
decision;
5. Strongly appcals to Governments of States memhers of the International Development Association to
make the second replenishment of the Association cffective from early 1969;
Cí. Rcq11csts :Member States to giyc long-term pledges,
whencver possihle, and to considcr seriously other proposals to enable international financia! institutions, international development programmes and relevant
37 See E/4539, para. 7.

General Aaaembly-Twenty-third Seuion

32

United Nations bodies to maintain and further expand

their activities on a continuing basis.
1745th plenary meeting,
17 December 1968.

2416 (XXIII). lncrease in the production and use
of edible protein
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1257 (XLIII) of 2 August 1967 and General Assembly
resolution 2319 (XXII) of 15 December 1967 on an
increase in the production and use of edible protein,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the protein problem, 38
N oting with appreciation the comments on the Secretary-General' s report by the Advisory Committee on
the Application of Science and Technology to Development,39 by the Directors-General of the World Health
0rganization and the Food and Agriculture 0rganization of 1:he U nited N ations 40 and by the Protein
Advisory Group of the Food and Agriculture 0rganization of the United Nations, the World Health Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund, 41
Concerned at the continuing gravity and the growing
dimensions of the protein problem in the developing
countries, affecting the well-being of mankind,
Stressing the urgent need to increase public awareness, at the national and international levels, of the
damage caused by protein malnutrition and to give
wide support to the activities aimed at alleviating this
problem,
Believing that, in order to achieve positive and lasting results in solving the protein problem, sustained
and concerted national and international efforts are
required on the part of Governments, scientists, institutions and indurtry-hoth public and private-and
private foundations, in both developecl and developing
countries,
Considering the need of the developing countries to
have, in the most economical manner, access to the
latest technological advances for protein enrichment
of their foods,
Recog11izing the complexities involved in, and the
long-term nature of, the protein problem in the context of development,
Believing that further and fresh efforts are necessary
for dealing with the protein problem, the solution of
which requires an integrated approach involving economic, managerial, social and scientific considerations,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the Secretary-General's report on the protein problem;
2. Takes note also of the comments 011 this subject
made at the resumecl forty-fifth session of the Economic
and Social Council ;42
3. Considers that the momentum generated by the
report of the Advisory Committee 011 the Application of
Science and Technology to Development entitled Feeding the Expandi11g T,Vorld Population: I nl!'rnational
38 Official Records nf the Econo111ic and Social Co,mci/,
Resumed Forty-fifth Sessio11, Anne.rcs, agenda item 4, docu-

ment E/4592.
8 9 E/4592/ Add.2.
40 E/4592/ Add.3, Add.3/Corr.l, and Add.4.
41 E/4592/ Add.1.
42 See Official Records of the General Assenibly, Twent}•·
third Session, Supp/enient No. 3A (A/.7203/Add.1), chapter IV.

Action to Avert the lmpending Protein Crisis43 and by
the action taken by the Secretary-General thereafter
should be sustained and that appropriate national and
international efforts on the protein problem should
be further promoted, inter alia, by:
(a) Finding the means of marshalling the capabilities
and resources of developed countries for solving the
protein problem;
( b) Strengthening links between interestecl institutions in developed ancl developing countries and promoting the exchange of information ancl expertise in
activities aimecl at closing the protein gap;
(e) Mobilizing, in both developed ami cleveloping
countries, the support for concertecl action on the part
of Governments, scientists, institutions and industryboth public and private-ancl prívate foundations ;
( d) Increasing public awareness of the importance
of the protein content of food and the need to adopt
dietary habits based on a sufficient consumption of
protein;
(e) Identifying far each region ancl for as many
countries as possible, on the hasis of the respective
socio-economic conditions a11C! structures and the
availability of human, natura) ancl scientific resources,
critica! sectors deserving immediate and concerted efforts;
(f) Promoting co-operation among developing countries in the protein field and achieving the maximum
utilization of national ancl regional research institutions;
(g) Promoting the adoption of an integratecl approach
to the protein problern at the national leve! in the
developing countries ;
( h) Promoting interna tiona I co-operation 111 the
transfer of technology to developing countries and the
training of personnel in this fielcl ;
(i) Evolving new methods an(\ revising al1Cl improving present methods usecl at the international le.ve! ior
the collection, classification, evaluation and dissemination of information on critic:il aspects of the protein
problem;
( j) Studying, on an interdiscipli1,;. ry has is at the
national and regional levels, the applicatioH of modern
management techniques to the protein problem confrl)nting developing countries ;
4. W elco,nes the action taken by the Food ancl Agriculture 0rganization of the United Nations, the \Vorld
Health 0rganization and the United Nations Children's
Fund in expanding the scope and functions of the Protein Aclvisory Group as endorsed by the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science ancl Technology
to Development:
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with interested organizations in the U nited N ations
system and with the assistance of the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology
to Development :
(a) To propase, frorn time to time, appropriate
measures for intensifying action in the areas indicated
in paragraph 3 abovc, as well as for increasing and improving the production ami consumption of protcin
from natural and conventional sources;
. ( b) To continue his efforts aimed at increasing ptthltc awareness of and concern about protein rnalnutrition;
.¡;; Cnited

Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIII.2.
