United Nations

A/52/PV.55

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

55th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 25 November 1997, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

The meeting was called to order at 4.45 p.m.

the awareness of the necessity to guarantee balance and
objectivity in the OSCE Minsk Group mediation efforts.

Agenda item 40 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/450)

The amendment proposed by Azerbaijan is one-sided
and biased, and it imposes a compulsory framework to
which Armenia cannot agree. Being an obvious attempt
to predetermine the outcome of the Copenhagen meeting
of the OSCE Ministerial Council, this amendment in fact
rejects the language proposed by the Chairman-in-Office.

Draft resolution (A/52/L.38)
Amendment (A/52/L.39)
The President: I call on the representative of
Armenia, who wishes to make a proposal.
Mr. Abelian (Armenia): My delegation would like to
make a motion of no action under rule 74 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly on the amendment
[A/52/L.39] proposed by the delegation of Azerbaijan to
draft resolution A/52/L.38, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe”. We make this proposal for the
following reasons: the common interpretations and
definitions used by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) are based on decisions
taken by consensus among the delegations of OSCE
member States during meetings at various levels, namely
OSCE summits, and meetings of the OSCE Council of
Ministers, the OSCE Senior Council, the Committee of
Senior Officials, and so forth. They express the common
position of all Member States of OSCE and are based on

97-86587 (E)

We view this as an inappropriate move, since OSCE
is the sole mandated and authoritative body dealing with
the Nagorny Karabakh conflict. For this obvious reason,
the sponsors did not find it appropriate to include the
amendment proposed by Azerbaijan in the draft
resolution.
The delegation of Armenia fully supports the draft
resolution presented by the Chairman-in-Office this
morning. Therefore, my delegation regrets to state that
Azerbaijan has failed to take into account the arguments
I have just mentioned.
The delegation of Armenia dissociates itself from
any interpretation of language which contradicts the
decisions agreed upon by consensus in OSCE among its
members.
Having said that, I would like to make a motion of
no action, and I call upon Member States to vote in
favour of this motion.

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The President: The representative of Armenia has
moved within the terms of rule 74 of the rules of procedure
that no action be taken on the amendment contained in
document A/52/L.39. I would like to remind the Assembly
that rule 74 reads as follows:
“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition to the
proposer of the motion, two representatives may speak
in favour of, and two against, the motion, after which
the motion shall be immediately put to the vote.”
I call on the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Kouliev (Azerbaijan) (interpretation from
Russian): As was the case last year, the delegation of
Armenia has once again put forward a procedural
measure — a motion of no action — thus attempting to
deprive us of the possibility of defending our highest
national interests. The delegation of Azerbaijan is
categorically opposed to this. Azerbaijan has not made and
does not make any claims to anyone else’s territory, but
neither will it permit any kind of encroachment on its own
territory.
The Nagorny Karabakh region is an integral part of
the Azerbaijani Republic. As a United Nations Member
State, Azerbaijan must not be deprived of its legitimate
right to express its view on a question which is so
important for its own destiny. In protecting its sovereignty
and territorial integrity, Azerbaijan must not be deprived of
the opportunity to propose an amendment for consideration
by the General Assembly. At its fifty-first session, the
General Assembly rejected this procedural measure.

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
Against:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam,
Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Guyana, Indonesia,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Senegal, Singapore, Sudan, Swaziland,
Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Uzbekistan,
Yemen
Abstaining:
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kenya, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Mongolia,
Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Venezuela, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
The motion was rejected by 29 votes to 1, with 81
abstentions.

We call upon Member States, as we did last year, to
vote against the motion of no action proposed by Armenia.

The President: Since the motion of no action has
not been adopted, we shall now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/52/L.38 and the amendment contained in
document A/52/L.39.

The President: If no other delegation wishes to speak
on this issue, I shall now put to the vote the motion
submitted by the representative of Armenia that no action
be taken on the amendment contained in document
A/52/L.39, which is an amendment submitted by Azerbaijan
to the draft resolution contained in document A/52/L.38.

Since there are no speakers in explanation of vote
before the voting, we shall now proceed to take a decision
on draft resolution A/52/L.38 and on the amendment
thereto, contained in document A/52/L.39.

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Armenia

2

In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the amendment is voted on first. The Assembly shall
therefore take a decision first on the amendment
circulated in document A/52/L.39.
A recorded vote has been requested.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela, Yemen
Against:
Armenia
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, El Salvador, Estonia, Jamaica,
Latvia, Marshall Islands, Myanmar, New Zealand,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Singapore, South Africa, Togo
The amendment was adopted by 104 votes to 1, with
17 abstentions.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/52/L.38 as a whole, as
amended.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia,

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
F e d e r a t i o n , S a i n t L u c i a ,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Armenia
Draft resolution A/52/L.38, as amended, was
adopted by 126 votes to none, with 1 abstention
(resolution 52/22).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote after the vote, may I remind
representatives that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Sychou (Belarus) (interpretation from Russian):
The delegation of the Republic of Belarus, acting in a
spirit of compromise and mutual understanding, broadly
supported draft resolution A/52/L.38 and at this stage will
not insist on the adoption of our amendments to many of
its provisions. We should also like to thank those

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
delegations that expressed a readiness to sponsor those
amendments.
At the same time, we must focus the attention of the
General Assembly on the clear imbalance between several
points stressed by draft resolution L.38 regarding basic
areas for the pan-European process, and the clear slant in
favour of including in the draft resolution only the decisions
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). In this regard the delegation of Belarus does not
consider that it is advisable for the United Nations General
Assembly to be involved in issues of micro-management
with regard to the purely internal competence of regional
organizations.
In this context, we affirm our readiness to implement
the decision of the Permanent Council of the OSCE to
establish an Advisory and Monitoring Group of the OSCE
in Belarus based on mutually acceptable conditions. We
believe that it is premature for the General Assembly to
take note of this decision, given that the negotiating process
is continuing and consultations are taking place between the
Government of Belarus and the OSCE on the memorandum
on understanding to implement that decision of the
Permanent Council of the OSCE.
In future, we intend to continue to base our position
on the fact that decisions adopted regarding areas of
interaction between the United Nations and the OSCE, as
in the case of interaction between the United Nations and
all other regional organizations, can yield tangible results
only when they cover the entire range of the most
important spheres of competence of each of them and are
supported by all Member States.
Miss Lucas (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): The European Union regrets that once again it has
not been possible to adopt this resolution by consensus. The
resolution is part of a series of resolutions dealing with
cooperation between the United Nations and various
international or regional organizations. The European Union
would also have preferred the focus of our discussion to
have been on strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and on the coordination of their
activities. With regard to the substance of the question
addressed in the amendment introduced by the Republic of
Azerbaijan, the European Union can only repeat its earlier
comment, made in the general debate: the principles that
should lead to a settlement respecting the dignity and
interests of the parties to the conflict in Nagorny Karabakh
are well-known; they are clearly defined in the framework

4

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
of the OSCE. We appeal to the parties to pursue their
negotiations in the framework of the Minsk Process. The
States members of the European Union, as co-sponsors of
the draft resolution introduced by the Chairman-in-Office
of the OSCE, would have preferred reaching a consensus
on maintaining paragraph 16 as it was. The amendment
proposed by Azerbaijan, however, reverts to the language
adopted last year by the General Assembly. The European
Union therefore joined with the Co-Chairmen of the
Minsk Conference by voting in favour of A/52/L.39.
Mr. Abelian (Armenia): My delegation voted
against the amendment proposed by the delegation of
Azerbaijan and abstained on the resolution as a whole for
the following reasons. The initial proposal put forward by
the Chairman-in-Office was very balanced and was
dictated by the need to create a more favourable
environment for the peace process on the eve of the
Copenhagen ministerial meeting. The United Nations
should not have second-guessed the language proposed by
the Chairman-in-Office, since the OSCE is the sole
mandated and authoritative body dealing with the
Nagorny Karabakh conflict.
We are surprised that the States members of the
OSCE, including the members of the European Union,
voted in favour of the Azerbaijani amendment, given that
they earlier sponsored the proposed draft. In this respect
we are particularly disappointed by the decision of the
Co-Chairmen of the Minsk Group to support this
amendment. The position of the Minsk Group
Co-Chairmen countries to vote in favour of the
Azerbaijani amendment undermines and dismisses the
initial proposal of the OSCE Chairman-in-Office.
We are convinced that any attempt to predetermine
the final status of Nagorny Karabakh will continue to
have a negative effect on the peace process, as did the
Lisbon Declaration, not only making the commencement
of negotiations on Nagorny Karabakh difficult, but also
making the signing of an interim agreement between the
parties to the conflict highly unlikely. However, Armenia
remains committed to the peace process and will continue
to be constructively engaged in negotiations to reach a
peaceful resolution to the conflict based on goodwill and
mutual compromise.
Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): My delegation
wholeheartedly supported this resolution. This support
emanated from the belief that the regional organization
should truly be given support by the United Nations. This
is in the spirit of the Charter itself, which advocates, for

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
both regional and subregional organizations, the resolution
of existing conflicts and also the economic problems which
normally beset our subregions.
Furthermore, my delegation humbly implores the
group affected by the resolution to endeavour to sit around
a regional conference table to resolve any problems. I say
to those concerned: “Quarrelling with your brother,
misunderstanding the language of your brother, has no
place nowadays”. Therefore, I humbly request that in future
before they come to the Assembly they try to overcome any
difficulty and not interrupt as we take action on such draft
resolutions.

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 40?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 23
Multilingualism
Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/577)
Draft resolution (A/52/L.35)

Let us turn the weapons of the cold war into a
machinery for development, a mechanism for creating
sacred vows on peace and security, so that any future draft
resolution can be adopted by consensus, like the one on
relations between the Organization of African Unity and the
United Nations. I urge my friends, my brothers and sisters,
to bury their hatchets and learn to love one another, so that
they do not waste time and energy which they need for
sustainable economic development.

Mr. Thiébaud (France) (interpretation from
French): Since the adoption of the United Nations
Charter, Article 111 of which states that the texts in the
various languages are equally authentic, we have
continually tried to maintain parity in the official
languages and working languages of the various bodies.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote. I call on the representative of Estonia,
who wishes to speak in exercise of the right of reply.

It is this use of several languages, on the basis of
equality, that we call multilingualism, and that we wish
today to continue to support.

Mr. Velliste (Estonia): I should like to clarify the
Estonian Government's position on a matter raised this
morning by the representative of the Russian Federation.

Equal treatment by the United Nations of the official
languages and working languages is a major factor in
harmonious international life, enriched by the promotion
of the diversity of cultures.

Estonia has consistently supported cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), in a wide range of matters.
In this regard, I would specifically like to clarify that
the OSCE agenda does not contain an issue of human rights
in Estonia. However, the Estonian Government has
developed close relations with the OSCE High
Commissioner on National Minorities in addressing
problems caused by the collapse of the Soviet empire and
directly resulting from Soviet occupation. These concern
activities of integrating an alien population into Estonian
society. It is widely believed that Estonia has succeeded in
making good progress towards this end.
Finally, I wish to recall that, by a consensual decision,
the General Assembly at its fifty-first session welcomed the
fruitful cooperation of the Government of Estonia with the
OSCE.

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of France to introduce draft resolution A/52/L.35.

We need a great deal of determination to follow the
rule — respect for the principle of equality of languages.
The purpose of resolution 50/11, adopted by the General
Assembly in 1995, was to ensure that respect.
The efforts which have been made should be
acknowledged, and we gladly recognize them, particularly
given the Secretary-General's personal dedication to
multilingualism. However, these efforts must be pursued
and intensified. We hope that measures will be taken, as
indicated in paragraph 2 of the report, to support the
study of official languages and
“to ensure that languages learned can be used in the
working environment and to promote respect for the
Organization's linguistic and cultural diversity”.

5

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Any circular or other instruction aimed at the full
implementation of the principles recalled in resolution 50/11
would be useful in this respect.
Similarly, we would hope to see implementation of the
idea expressed in paragraph 9 of the report, that to promote
multilingualism the Secretariat encourage staff members to
make equal use of the working languages in their official
communications. It seems to us that such encouragement
would be more convincing when it concerned promotion
prospects.
The full implementation of resolution 50/11 requires
specific results for all the subjects mentioned in it, whether
knowledge of official languages as a factor in promotion;
equality of working languages within the Secretariat; the
training or recruitment of specialists guaranteeing the
proper and timely translation of documents into the
different official languages, in order to ensure simultaneous
distribution; the availability of data banks in the different
official languages; and the teaching, at all levels, of the
official languages and the working languages of the
Secretariat.

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
the agenda of that session and later to the adoption of
resolution 50/11.
My country felt that the commemoration of the
fiftieth anniversary of our Organization gave us the ideal
opportunity to reaffirm the universality on which the
United Nations is based, and, as a corollary, to confirm
the principle of multilingualism, the expression and
fundamental instrument of dialogue between Member
States. For Spain, which has established language
pluralism as one of the guiding principles of its own
society, support for and strengthening the use of the
various official languages in our work and deliberations
is of the utmost importance.
For its part, the General Assembly, in adopting
resolution 50/11 by a large majority, recognized the need
strictly to apply the language regime established with
respect both to the working languages of the Secretariat
and to the six official languages and working languages
of the General Assembly, its Committees and
subcommittees, the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council.

That is why we are requesting the Secretary-General
to report to us again at the fifty-fourth session on his
continued efforts, and their results, to implement all the
principles set out in resolution 50/11.

At this session, we are again discussing
multilingualism, in the light of the report [A/52/577]
submitted by the Secretary-General to Member States
pursuant to paragraph 10 of resolution 50/11.

I have described the purpose of the draft resolution,
whose subject, as demonstrated by the list of sponsors is
one to which many Member States attach importance. They
give it their deepest attention, reflecting their commitment
to the diversity of cultures for which the United Nations
provides a forum.

This debate could not be more timely. If the fiftysecond session of the General Assembly, which has
already been dubbed the “reform Assembly”, is to provide
an opportunity for all Member States to try to prepare our
Organization for the challenges of the next millennium, so
that it can shoulder its responsibilities more efficiently,
we should register our continued interest in carrying on
studying in depth the proper implementation of the
language regime of our Organization. We must be
particularly aware that the existing language regime
strengthens the relevance of the role of the Organization,
not only because it allows for richer contributions to our
deliberations, but also because it enables our respective
publics to identify with our tasks.

The adoption of the draft resolution will help us in this
respect. The delegation of France commends the draft
resolution to all delegations and thanks them for their
support, which we hope and expect will be unanimous.
Mr. Young (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines), VicePresident, took the Chair.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish): It
gives particular satisfaction to the delegation of Spain today
to speak on this agenda item, entitled “Multilingualism”.
I wish to recall that during the fiftieth session, Spain,
together with the other member States of the IberoAmerican Conference, played a particularly active role in
the efforts which led first to the inclusion of this item on

6

My delegation therefore wishes to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report, which
we have studied carefully. In the various aspects covered
it seeks to respond to many of the issues raised in
resolution 50/11. However, as a whole, it gives only a
static analysis of the present situation. My delegation's
assessment of the report confirms our view that
implementation of the existing language regime calls for

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997

a more detailed analysis and the continued attention of
Member States and the Secretariat.

means to provide incentives for the use of these resources
by all.

Questions such as the recruitment of staff who have a
command of and can use the working languages, training in
the official and working languages, the translation of
documents and the timely strengthening of interpretation
services require an appropriate follow-up in order to meet
the demand on such an important matter.

(spoke in English)

That is why the delegation of Spain became one of the
sponsors of the draft resolution that has just been
introduced by the representative of France. My delegation
is confident that it will enjoy the full support of the General
Assembly.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the conviction
of the delegation of Spain as to the importance of the
current language regime as a way of putting the universal
character of our Organization into practice.
Mr. Minoves-Triquell (Andorra) (interpretation from
French): Andorra is a fervent advocate of multilingualism.
The official language of my country is Catalan, which has
been our language since time immemorial. However, the
people of Andorra also have a good grasp of French and
Spanish, the languages spoken in neighbouring States. This
openness to other languages is not only economic openness,
which allows our tradespeople to understand the requests of
tourists, but also a also great cultural openness that we want
to preserve. In our schools Catalan is insisted upon, but
lessons are also given in French, Spanish and English. The
preservation and advancement of our own language and
culture do not preclude other languages and cultures.
(spoke in Spanish)
Andorra's special features make it natural for us to be
one of the sponsors of draft resolution A/52/L.35 on
multilingualism, which was introduced by France. I fully
agree with what Mr. Thiébaud said this afternoon. United
Nations promotion policy should take more account of the
linguistic skills of staff members. If we want the United
Nations to be a faithful reflection of the world's diversity,
use of the official languages should be widespread. We
should not penalize talented people for not knowing
languages, but there is also a need to reward properly those
staff members who make the effort to acquire fluency in
various languages. We are pleased in his report of 6
November that the Secretary-General points out that
languages are taught at duty stations. We should find the

The initiative to encourage multilingualism at the
United Nations must not be read as an expression by one
or a few particular languages of a fear of losing ground
in an increasingly unilingual world. Precisely because the
world is more and more the ground for one lingua franca,
we must endeavour to make people appreciate the wealth
hidden in different languages, and the United Nations
must be the first flag-bearer in this effort. An
Organization that comprises 185 States cannot allow itself
to slip into the convenience of using only one language.
(spoke in Catalan; English text furnished by the
delegation)
The unity of action of our Organization must come
from a convergence of diversity, never from uniformity.
Without fear, we must make greater use of the languages
at our disposal. Since our admission to the Organization
in 1993, the Head of Government of Andorra has made
all of his statements in the general debate in Catalan, our
language, not with the goal of promoting nationalism, but
in the desire to highlight the natural diversity of the
cultures that can be found in this forum. This has always
been done while providing a translation of the text, at
very modest cost. Our message has been conveyed
equally well. Andorra would like to encourage the other
States to express themselves in their own language during
the general debate. In this way we shall be aware of that
great wealth of nations, their languages, as vehicles for
the expression of human potentialities — without fear,
and without hidden ideological intentions, but with the
simplicity of a country that presents what is its own. We
therefore advocate multilingualism at the United Nations,
at the level of the working languages, the level of the
official languages and, when possible, the level of all the
languages of States.
Mr. Kaabachi (Tunisia) (interpretation from
French): Tunisia is pleased to speak today on an item
which it strongly supported for inclusion in the agenda of
the General Assembly two years ago. It will be recalled
that this item first appeared on the agenda at the time
when the international community was solemnly
commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of the
establishment of the United Nations.

7

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The statements made during the discussion on the
agenda item on multilingualism on that occasion, and the
resolution adopted then, clearly affirm the multilingual
character of the United Nations. By returning to this
question today, we pay tribute to the founding fathers of
our Organization. The United Nations symbolizes the
concrete expression of respect for and acceptance of others
in all their diversity.
In reaffirming the multilingual character of the United
Nations, we respect not only the spirit and the letter of the
Charter but, above all, we take a positive step to counter
totalitarian ideologies. The principles of the Organization,
we should recall, stress, respect and call for the
safeguarding of difference. Such respect for differences
among individuals, which is at the very root of any
democratic society, should be the fundamental principle of
relations among States. Democracy, the practice of which,
within our countries, is rightly considered to be both an
obligation and a virtue, is no less important in international
relations.
As we take up the subject of multilingualism, a
committee of the whole of the General Assembly, under
agenda item 157, is scrutinizing the reform of the
Organization. As the title of the Secretary-General's
report — “Renewing the United Nations: a programme for
reform” — indicates, that scrutiny is taking place from the
perspective of renewal. The consideration of that question
affords us an excellent opportunity for further reflection on
the question of multilingualism in the United Nations,
which is one of the important elements to be retained
within the framework of this reform. This reminder of the
importance of linguistic diversity in the United Nations is,
in Tunisia's view, one of the main factors to be addressed
in any overall reflection intended to contribute to the
renewal of the United Nations and to imbue it with a new
dynamism.
While the process of reflection on the future of the
United Nations is far from being completed, and indeed is
growing in scope and breadth, Tunisia hopes that the
question of multilingualism will continue to arouse the
interest it deserves in order to remain an important element
of any draft which may be prepared or agreed with a view
to increasing the efficiency and reach of the Organization.
Such reaffirmation of the international community's
interest in recognizing and consolidating linguistic diversity
should at the same time be accompanied by concrete acts
and daily gestures to ensure a harmonious, mutually
beneficial and fruitful coexistence among all cultures.

8

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
We believe that the principle of respect for the use
of all official languages of the United Nations should be
a simple fact, and should be put into practice in all
meetings held by the Organization. No reason, however
valid, should in our view be the pretext for a
discriminatory usage that did not respect the wishes of
Member States and disregarded the principles underlying
the linguistic balance consecrated by the Organization's
founding fathers.
In this context, we take note of the SecretaryGeneral's report, contained in document A/52/577, on the
question of multilingualism. We do not wish to comment
on the content of the paragraphs dealing with the use of
official languages in the Secretariat at the present stage,
given that the relevant document was not available far
enough in advance to allow us to study it closely. The
paragraphs concerned, however, could be considered by
the appropriate bodies, among them the Fifth Committee.
My country's delegation will not fail to make its
contribution in that context, so that the resolution on
multilingualism is implemented in a satisfactory and
effective way.
The paragraphs of the Secretary-General's report
which I would like to comment on very briefly are those
having to do with the work we carry out at the United
Nations every day as delegations of Member States. The
report considers the simultaneous distribution of
documents to be satisfactory, but we would like, in this
regard, to ask the Secretariat to respect the rules and
decisions taken in this area. It should be recalled, in this
connection, that during the current session documentation
has rarely been available on time in the various working
languages. The increasingly widespread use of a single
language during this session has diminished our ability to
work and to react quickly in the framework of
negotiations and consultations, both formal and informal.
To use the Secretary-General's formula, reform is not an
event. Neither, in our view, is it an abstract formula.
Reform should mean, above all, improvement in our
working conditions so as to ensure greater participation,
efficiency, transparency, and democracy. If we do not
have documents in all the working languages at our
disposal, our participation will frequently be lessened or
non-existent.
Thus we hope that the reform to be undertaken will
be accompanied by an improvement in the use of the
official languages of the United Nations so that everyday
practice in our work corresponded to the wishes of

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Member States and the rules they have established,
particularly where respect for multilingualism is concerned.
We hope that by adopting a resolution on
multilingualism in the General Assembly, the Member
States will once again reaffirm their commitment to
diversity and to the richness of cultures and civilizations,
which are the fundamental guarantors of their authenticity
but also of universality in the global village which our
planet earth has become today.
Mr. Albin (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish):
The Secretariat has prepared the report contained in
document A/52/577 for the consideration of this agenda
item. That report contains a very brief summary of the
practices current in the various areas in which, in one way
or another, the official and working languages play a part
in the Organization's work.
Unfortunately, the report does not analyse the
difficulties and problems encountered in the implementation
of current arrangements, nor are specific recommendations
made to provide a better service to delegations. In all
sincerity, I must say that it appears that the Secretariat is
satisfied with the current state of affairs. Apparently, the
importance it attaches to multilingualism does not compare
to the priority a vast majority of Member States attach to
it.

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
purpose. The priority we attach to multilingualism is not
the result of an obsession; it is rooted in the deep
conviction that if the Organization — its essence, its
practices and its methods — reflect the potential that
every culture offers, we will have a more efficient and
more effective United Nations.
(spoke in English)
The importance of this item deserves deeper
consideration. We therefore hope that the Secretariat can
prepare a more analytical and more comprehensive report.
(spoke in French)
For the reasons I have given, the delegation of
Mexico will vote in favour of draft resolution A/52/L.35.
Mr. Amehou (Benin) (interpretation from French):
I am pleased to speak on behalf of the delegation of
Benin on this agenda item, “Multilingualism”.
Two years ago, in 1995, the General Assembly
ended its debate on this agenda item with the adoption of
resolution 50/11, in which the Assembly, inter alia,
requested the Secretary-General to ensure the strict
implementation of the resolutions establishing language
arrangements for both the official languages and the
working languages of the Secretariat.

(spoke in French)
The official languages are a privileged and essential
instrument of communication. We are convinced that their
use is vital to dialogue, negotiation and understanding
between Members of the United Nations.
In the second half of the twentieth century the major
political, ideological and economic contradictions in society
have been discussed and very often resolved within this
Organization.
(spoke in Spanish)
The community of nations has had a permanent,
civilized forum for settling differences. The progress we
have made has resulted from a genuine recognition of our
shared destiny as human beings as well as — and this is
equally important — an acceptance of our diversity.
For Mexico, the very strength of the United Nations
lies in plurality and the excellent opportunities it offers for
promoting understanding, convergence and unity of

The Secretary-General has undertaken many
initiatives, ranging from the teaching of the official
languages of the Organization and the working languages
of the Secretariat to library services and data banks,
including the use of working languages within the
Secretariat, interpretation services for various meetings
and the recruitment and training of translators.
My delegation commends those efforts by the
Secretary-General, which are aimed at making the world
Organization truly pluricultural. Indeed, plurality is a
characteristic of any community, and it must be
recognized and accepted as a manifestation of freedom.
Today, when science, technology, communication
and computing are working profound changes both in the
structure of knowledge and in individual and collective
expectations, it is of prime importance that we bear in
mind that the universal culture of the third millennium
will depend on the contribution of all cultures. With that
in mind, Benin has again joined many other delegations

9

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997

in sponsoring this year's draft resolution on multilingualism,
draft resolution A/52/L.35.

this privileged instrument of the work of our Organization
its full weight.

Our aim is to restore respect for the principle of the
equality of the official languages of the Organization and
the working languages of the Secretariat — in short, to
ensure that the principle of the diversity of languages and
cultures within the United Nations system is acknowledged
and complied with. For language has an impact far beyond
mere communication. It validates cultural heritage and past
intellectual experience. Language as a tool for thought is
both the means and the end of culture.

The time has come for our Assembly to reach a
decision along these lines, based on the SecretaryGeneral's proposals for the renewal of the Organization,
and to ensure that all aspects of the question are covered.

That is why we believe that, at a time when new
avenues for international cooperation and social progress
are being laid out, it is important that all those involved be
able to contribute to the development and establishment of
the principles that will underpin international relations. This
change can be dynamic and produce significant results only
if the force behind it is respectful of cultural identity and its
elements, protects pluralism and draws sustenance from the
wealth inherent in that diversity. Only thus can its great
ideals enjoy the broadest possible support.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.

The United Nations is the only universal forum for
dialogue, consultation and negotiation. It should be our
ambition to encourage strict respect for the right to make
ourselves understood and to understand others, for proper
understanding of the questions under discussion is the
guarantee of an ever broader and more productive
participation.
I should like to highlight the importance we attach to
this draft resolution by emphasizing that today the
protagonists in international life are growing in number and
diversity. It is therefore urgent that we act to promote an
ever broader democratization in international life.
We believe that the potential for self-expression and
participation contributes to that democratization, with the
taking into account of the points of view and concerns of
the silent: those who are reduced to silence or those who
remain silent because they cannot participate actively in
debates or make proper use of the documentation available
to them.
For all those reasons, my delegation appreciates the
work done by the Secretary-General in implementation of
resolution 50/11. Nothing is perfect; by its very nature, any
human endeavour is capable of improvement. Benin
therefore calls for renewed efforts by the Secretariat to give

10

In conclusion, I would like to express the hope that,
in the light of all that I have said, and everything that
previous speakers have said, the Assembly will adopt
draft resolution A/52/L.35 by consensus.

Before proceeding to take action on draft resolution
A/52/L.35, I should like to announce that since its
introduction the following countries have become
sponsors: Afghanistan, Argentina, Belarus, Cameroon,
China, Djibouti, Germany, Greece, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Haiti, Honduras, Kazakhstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Mauritania, Peru, Turkmenistan and Venezuela.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/52/L.35?
Draft resolution A/52/L.35 was adopted (resolution
52/23)
The Acting President: Before calling on speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind members that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Watanabe (Japan): My delegation reluctantly
joined the consensus on the draft resolution, for the
following reason.
Two years ago, on 2 November 1995, when
resolution 50/11 was adopted, my delegation voted against
it, since operative paragraph 3 penalizes staff members
whose mother tongue is not one of the official languages
of the United Nations. This is a discriminatory measure
against those countries whose mother tongue is not one of
the six official languages, and Japan considers that
paragraph unacceptable. Therefore, my delegation reserves
the right to intervene, if necessary, at any future stage
regarding this resolution on multilingualism.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Although my delegation respects the idea of
multilingualism in the United Nations, it would request the
Secretary-General to treat equally in matters of recruitment
or promotion those United Nations staff whose mother
tongue is not one of the official languages of the United
Nations.
Mr. Chinvanno (Thailand): My delegation wishes to
make it clear that while we joined the consensus on draft
resolution A/52/L.35 under this agenda item,
“Multilingualism”, we continue to have strong reservations
regarding operative paragraph 3 of resolution 50/11, which
my delegation voted against in 1995. In our view, this
paragraph has grave implications for personnel matters. In
practical terms, requiring a command of two of the six
official languages would place at a serious disadvantage
personnel and potential recruits whose mother tongue is not
one of the six official languages of the Organization.

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
tribal language — may also be seen to be fighting to find
its way to the United Nations. One would like to feel that
this is the United Nations — with the emphasis on
“United”. We own the United Nations, as Member States.
Therefore, those who piloted the resolution adopted today
should know that they have acted unfairly, especially
since it was not put to a vote, as was the case in the past.
Nonetheless, my delegation is willing to change its
original position, with the hope that opportunities will be
made available.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 23?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 27

Thailand wishes to reaffirm its commitment to
multilingualism at the United Nations and to support the
idea that the United Nations should promote cultural
diversity. But Thailand believes that the promotion of
cultural diversity has as its central ideal the concepts of
tolerance and understanding, which, in the context of this
agenda item, should be extended to those cultures that as a
result of forces of history are not associated with the six
official languages of this Organization.
Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): Like the preceding
speakers, my delegation wishes to put on record that two
years ago we observed that such a resolution deprives
Member States of what is otherwise their quota in the
United Nations Secretariat. I have especially in mind those
countries in the southern part of Africa and in Asia where
the languages that are seemingly gaining popularity at the
United Nations have never been part of our history. The
question, therefore, becomes: will the United Nations —
here I refer to paragraph 3 of the report — also expedite
training programmes in those countries where French,
Spanish, Chinese and Arabic have never been used?
If not, we are seriously concerned that this is a way of
trying to marginalize those countries that have never been
exposed to the languages in question. The delegation of
Swaziland categorically stressed in 1995 that the United
Nations had a duty to include in the curricular systems of
those countries opportunities to learn all the languages that
are used at the United Nations. Otherwise, my delegation
may find itself advocating that the Swazi language, which
is my language, should be one of the languages used here.
And, Mr. Acting President, your language — which is a

Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin
Report by the Secretary-General (A/52/211)
Draft resolution (A/52/L.12)
The Acting President: On behalf of the President
of the General Assembly, Mr. Hennadiy Udovenko, allow
me to make a few brief remarks on agenda item 27,
entitled “Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin”.
This item is a good example of the tremendous
breadth and diversity of issues before this General
Assembly. This very delicate and sensitive issue, as
members know, has a long history. Ancient historical
texts contain evidence that, since time immemorial, the
laws of war included the right to booty. Pillaging was part
and parcel of military campaigns as the conquered
countries were sacked for treasures while the museums of
invaders were filled with the spoils of war.
But there were also examples of a quite different
nature. We may recall the action taken by Scipio
Africanus back in the second century B.C. After taking
Carthage in the course of the Third Punic War, he
decided to return to Sicily the wealth that had been taken
from it as a result of repeated pillaging by the
Carthaginians.

11

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
During the past years, the international community has
shown increased interest in the issue of cultural property.
This has found its reflection in special conventions of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) and the activities of the
Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the Return of
Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its
Restitution in case of Illicit Appropriation. Amid growing
appeals for the preservation of the collective memory
incarnated in historic and cultural achievements, there is
obviously a need for enhanced cooperation among States in
the sphere of the return and restitution of cultural property.
A constructive dialogue on this issue at the current session
will be an important step towards reaching that goal.
I give the floor to the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to introduce draft resolution
A/52/L.12.
Mr. Mwamba Kapanga (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (interpretation from French): On behalf of the
delegations of Azerbaijan, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad,
China, Cyprus, the Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Gabon, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Mali, Mongolia, Niger,
Peru and Rwanda and of my own delegation, I have the
honour of introducing the draft resolution contained in
document A/52/L.12 under agenda item 27, entitled “Return
or restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin”.
My delegation is pleased to inform the Assembly that
Colombia, the Republic of Korea, Afghanistan, Bolivia and
Turkey have become sponsors of the draft resolution.
The item on the return of cultural property is regularly
debated by our Assembly. To be sure, since its introduction
in 1972, we have witnessed rather timid implementations of
various resolutions. Indeed, the promises made by countries
holding cultural treasures, which are indispensable to the
preservation and growth of cultural values, have not been
fully kept. Hence the great importance of the Medellín
Declaration for Cultural Diversity and Tolerance and the
Plan of Action on Cultural Cooperation adopted at the first
Meeting of the Ministers of Culture of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, held on 4 and 5 September 1997.
My delegation, on behalf of the sponsors of this draft
resolution, again requests the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) to do everything in their power to encourage
those countries to honour their own promises and thereby

12

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
allow the United Nations and the countries of origin to
achieve their aims.
As the Assembly will note, the draft resolution
before the Assembly is essentially procedural. Taking
note with satisfaction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral submitted in cooperation with the DirectorGeneral of UNESCO, it recalls earlier resolutions, of
course, as well as the Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property adopted on 14
November 1970 by the General Conference of UNESCO.
It welcomes the Declaration and Plan of Action
adopted in Medellín. I wish once again to thank the
Government of Colombia for having hosted that first
Meeting, which was so important to our Ministers of
Culture.
The draft resolution commends UNESCO on the zeal
and skill it has displayed, in particular in the promotion
of the return of cultural property.
The Assembly will certainly recognize the
importance to our countries of the restitution of cultural
property taken years ago by the colonial Powers. Our
countries support all the initiatives and recommendations
of the Assembly and hope that the Secretary-General, in
collaboration with the Director-General of UNESCO, will
submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session
a detailed report on the progress they will undoubtedly
register with regard to the return of cultural property to
the countries of origin.
On behalf of all the sponsors of draft resolution
A/52/L.12, my delegation recommends this text to the
attention of all delegations and thanks them for their
support.
Mr. Bohaievs’ky (Ukraine): Cultural sovereignty
and the upholding of national identity have always been
recognized as important elements of national sovereignty
and important preconditions for the cultural development
of any country. Therefore, any attempt to deprive nations
of their cultural property is a threat not only to their
sovereignty and national identity, but also to the vital
elements of the common heritage of nations. There is no
need to prove that every nation has the right to a national
and cultural heritage, and in this context the restitution of
historical and cultural property is an indispensable
element for enjoying this right.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Politically, legally, socially and ethically, the return of
cultural treasures to the countries of their origin is an
extraordinarily delicate problem. That is why in every
specific case it should be dealt with in an appropriate
manner, with due regard for the conditions in which a
masterpiece was relocated — that is, whether it was stolen,
bought, presented as a gift, found by archaeologists or
taken as a result of military operations or colonial
plundering and so on.
These issues should be solved on the basis of
generally recognized principles of international law and by
the application of civilized moral standards. Mutual respect
for spiritual sentiments and the needs of nations should
determine the relationship between States and their attitude
towards the solution of the problems of restitution. We note
with satisfaction the growing understanding that the
restitution of cultural property scattered throughout the
world is a moral obligation of humankind.
For its part, Ukraine is trying to make its political and
practical contribution to solving this issue. It has ratified a
number of relevant international instruments, including the
1970 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property. In September
of 1994, under the aegis of UNESCO, an international
seminar took place in the Ukrainian city of Chernihiv on
the issues of restitution of national and cultural objects that
were lost or displaced during the Second World War. In
December 1996, the capital of Ukraine hosted the
international symposium entitled “Legal Aspects of
Restitution of Cultural Property: Theory and Practice”.
The fact that Ukraine is making valuable contributions
to international cooperation in the field of the restitution of
cultural property was proved by its election to the
Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the Return of
Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its
Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation. Ukraine is also
developing bilateral cooperation, and such cooperation is
yielding positive results.
In our view, the following measures would be
appropriate to enhance international efforts in this field.
First, the role of UNESCO should be strengthened.
Secondly, those Member States which have not done so
should be further encouraged to adopt relevant legal acts
and join the 1970 UNESCO Convention and the
Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural
Objects, which was opened for signature in Rome on 24

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
June 1995. Thirdly, the conclusion of bilateral and
multilateral agreements should be encouraged, with the
aim of preventing the illegal circulation of cultural objects
and promoting their restitution. Fourthly, the inventory of
lost cultural property should be initiated. Lastly, the
activities of mass media and educational institutions to
make public opinion aware of the necessity of the
restitution of cultural property and the prevention of
illegal circulation of cultural property should be
intensified.
New thinking should be promoted among collectors
and other persons dealing with the circulation of cultural
property. It is important to develop a kind of code of
conduct for such groups of people, as well as national
legislative provisions which would prevent illegal trade in
works of art. We also believe that there is a need for the
creation, under the auspices of UNESCO, of a special
fund to promote restitution of cultural property. In our
view, UNESCO could also contribute to the establishment
of an international cultural order in the context of the
global culture of peace, which could underpin a fruitful
dialogue between nations. Finally, the United Nations
should consider the possibility of proclaiming 1999 an
international year for the preservation, protection and
restitution of cultural property.
As was stated in the Mexico City Declaration on
Cultural Policies, every nation has the right and duty to
defend and preserve its cultural heritage, since the
viability of any society is inseparable from the national
values in which its citizens find a source for their
creativity.
It has been recognized by many that in many cases
cooperation between States and nations depends on the
successful resolution of issues related to the return and
restitution of cultural treasures to the countries of their
origin. It is on this understanding that we should base our
approach to the issue under consideration. Otherwise, we
will continue to be involved in endless discussions with
no substantial outcome.
Mr. Mra (Myanmar): The importance of agenda
item 27, entitled “Return or restitution of cultural property
to the countries of origin”, in international relations is
reflected in the periodic consideration of this question by
the General Assembly. The commitment of the
international community to the question keeps alive the
process of negotiations that will enable the countries
concerned to recover the cultural property that has been
appropriated.

13

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
In this regard, we are grateful to the Secretary-General
and the Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) for the
information provided in the report contained in document
A/52/211, dated 25 June 1997, on UNESCO’s continuing
efforts for promotion of bilateral negotiations for the return
or restitution of cultural property and on its work to curb
illicit traffic in cultural property. We are convinced that
these steadfast efforts not only enhance international
awareness of the question before us but also contribute to
better understanding among nations.
We are also encouraged to observe that the report
reflects success in a number of cases. We view these
successes as positive signs. We are convinced that, through
a genuine spirit of cooperation, pending cases will also find
solutions acceptable to the parties concerned through
bilateral negotiations.
It is gratifying that the ninth session of the
Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the Return of
Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its
Restitution in case of Illicit Appropriation was able to take
up important questions, such as the creation of standardized
national inventories, an international database of movable
cultural property, an international code of ethics for art
dealers and the creation of an international fund to facilitate
the restitution of stolen cultural objects. Further discussion
of these questions, it is hoped, will eventually lead to
certain concrete actions which will have a bearing on the
efforts of UNESCO to curb illicit trade in cultural property.
Among the recommendations adopted by the ninth
session of the Intergovernmental Committee,
Recommendation No. 5, on an international code of ethics
for art dealers, is particularly interesting. Despite doubts
expressed at the session concerning its non-binding
character, an international code of ethics for dealers,
together with such existing codes for some dealers’
associations, could serve as a tool in the future in drawing
a distinction between the licit and illicit trade in cultural
objects and will provide guidance for transactions in
ambiguous situations. Further exploration of the views on
the question is a step in the right direction. We believe that
the Director-General of UNESCO will be able to implement
other recommendations and achieve positive results.
Myanmar subscribes to the view that the cultural
heritage of a people conditions its overall development.
Likewise, the loss of a people’s cultural heritage leads to its
cultural impoverishment and loss of identity. Myanmar,
whose civilization dates back many centuries, attaches great

14

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
importance to its cultural heritage, and its preservation is
regarded as a national undertaking. The Government has
laid down a national objective entitled “Uplift of national
prestige and integrity and preservation and safeguarding
of the cultural heritage and national character” as one of
the social objectives of the country. With this objective in
mind, the process of safeguarding and preserving
Myanmar’s cultural heritage is an ongoing undertaking
carried out by the Government, which is spending
millions of kyats. Fully aware of the significance of this
process, the people of the country are also contributing to
the process in various ways.
Our efforts to recover the cultural property seized
and removed from Myanmar in the past constitute part of
this undertaking. This is being done with the assistance of
UNESCO. In view of the heartening successes in certain
cases reflected in the report of the Secretary-General, we
very much hope that Myanmar’s efforts will achieve
similar success.
The commitment of all States to the principles
concerning the return or restitution of cultural property to
the countries of origin is vitally important. This
commitment alone can enhance cooperation among
nations and lead to the amicable resolution of the pending
specific cases.
Myanmar believes that, with this commitment on the
part of all States concerned, UNESCO’s efforts in this
regard will be successful.
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from
Arabic): My delegation has reviewed the report of the
Secretary-General, presented in cooperation with the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
[A/52/211], which is under consideration today. I should
like in this regard to express Kuwait’s satisfaction at the
contents of the report, which include important points.
We commend the efforts of UNESCO and the
Intergovernmental Committee concerned with the
restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin,
or its return to those countries in cases of illegal
acquisition of such property. In this regard, we
particularly commend the efforts aimed at encouraging the
promotion of bilateral negotiations to ensure that the
properties are inventoried and to limit their illicit traffic.
We in Kuwait join our voice to the call for the restitution
to the countries of origin of all artworks, archaeological
pieces, manuscripts, historical documents, and all other

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
cultural and artistic treasures. This should contribute to
bolstering international cooperation, to the preservation of
the world’s cultural heritage, and to its further development.
Kuwait appreciates fully the great sadness that States
and individuals experience at their loss of their cultural
treasures which preserve for them their history, civilization
and indigenous cultures which are usually in their custody
for successive generations. This is especially so when the
loss occurs through theft, looting and the destruction of
these important historic treasures before the very eyes of a
society that made every effort to preserve this high level of
culture.
Kuwaiti society endured this very bitter experience
during the 1990 oppressive Iraqi occupation, when Iraqi
soldiers perpetrated acts of arbitrary destruction and of
systematic theft and looting of Kuwait’s cultural and
archaeological properties, taking them to Iraq in an attempt
to obliterate Kuwait’s cultural and civilizational
development from the annals of history.
I find myself compelled to refer to some of the
negative impacts of the Iraqi occupation, especially as
regards Kuwait’s cultural property. First, 140 manuscripts
and historical pictures which were located in Kuwait’s
central library were looted or destroyed. Of this number,
only 15 manuscripts are left. Secondly, the department of
Arab heritage of the National Council for Culture, Arts and
Literature experienced grave cultural losses. Rare and
original manuscripts were looted, among them precious to
Kuwait gifts from Arab and foreign libraries in Berlin,
Syria, and Tunisia. This is in addition to dictionaries and
rare Arab books brought from the Netherlands, Great
Britain, Germany and Russia.
Thirdly, the National Museum of Kuwait was
subjected to the ugliest forms of comprehensive destruction
of historical monuments, especially of pieces located in the
museum’s department of Islamic archaeology. Iraqi soldiers
destroyed and burned historical manuscripts. The same was
done to archaeological treasures located in building number
1 and the museum of the island of Faylakah, which date
from the Bronze Age and the Hellenic or Islamic eras.
Fourthly, rare archaeological pieces were taken from the red
palace in the city of Al Jahrah and from the window
exhibits of Kuwait’s international airport. In this context, I
should like to say that since the liberation of Kuwait from
Iraqi occupation nothing new has occurred with regard to
this situation. Those pieces that have been returned from
Iraq through the United Nations were either defective or
broken or were missing a great deal of their features.

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
We in Kuwait call on the international community,
represented by the United Nations and UNESCO, to
continue their efforts to exert pressure on the Iraqi
Government to comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions in order to ensure the restitution of all Kuwaiti
cultural property as soon as possible. This should include
official State documents including the private archives of
the office of His Highness the Emir of Kuwait, the
archives of the Foreign Ministry, as well as documents of
important Kuwaiti institutions, which constitute a
complete record of the country’s history.
Although we are satisfied with the report of the
Secretary-General and the Director-General of UNESCO
referred to earlier, we hope that the next report, which
will be considered at the fifty-fourth session under this
agenda item, will include a separate paragraph embodying
more comprehensive information about international
efforts in this regard, especially if no appreciable progress
has been made in the area.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate Kuwait’s
support for UNESCO. We commend it for the role it has
been playing in the return or restitution of cultural
properties to the countries of origin, as we consider these
properties to have a fundamental cultural value for their
respective societies in that they provide a historical and
cultural continuum through successive generations.
Mr. Najem (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation
from Arabic): All peoples attach special importance to
their cultural property, because it is a part of their history
and symbolizes their deep roots and their civilizations.
Today’s discussion is therefore of great importance, as it
is part of a new campaign against individuals and States
to make them return or restore to the countries of origin
whatever they looted in the past: manuscripts,
archaeological artefacts and other works of great artistic
value.
Over the past five centuries, Libya, like many other
States, was the victim of vast cultural pillage. Conditions
dictated by the occupiers opened the door to the vast,
systematic looting of Libya’s ancient Arab cultural
heritage. Anyone who visits the famous museums in
Europe and the Americas will see many works of art and
valuable manuscripts exquisitely wrought by the artistic
creative hands of Arab Libyans, who left behind a great
historical heritage which was looted and scattered around
the world by the colonial Powers, which stripped away
many of its most important features.

15

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The Arab Libyans laid the foundations of ancient,
prehistoric civilizations. They contributed also to the
building of many later civilizations, as can be seen in
museums and documentation centres, whose holdings testify
to the vast quantity of Libyan artefacts and sculptures.
Many of these are displayed, while still more are hidden
away in the storerooms of foreign museums all over the
world. Suffice it to mention that in 1860, 165 artefacts were
looted from the eastern Libyan archaeological city of
Shehat; other artefacts — pottery and jars — elucidating
the history of that city were also looted, along with
thousands of rare coins. Historical sources indicate that
dozens of huge columns and several ornamented
architectural elements were taken in that year from western
Libya to the United Kingdom for use as garden ornaments
for the queen. The same source indicates also that 350
marble pillars and thousands of small artefacts were also
stolen from the same location. From Bengazi alone, 600
pieces dating back to prehistoric times were stolen; these
are now on display in a famous European museum.
Through the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the United Nations
has tried to restore such artefacts, works of art and
manuscripts to their countries of origin. As noted in the
report of the Secretary-General contained in document
A/52/211, progress has been limited, despite repeated
attempts over the past 20 years and more. It is regrettable
that some of the countries that possess these cultural
treasures still refuse to accede to the Convention on the
Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property.
This must be condemned; and the true nature of those
claiming to be the leaders of modern civilization, the
protectors of human rights and the keepers of the heritage
of mankind must be exposed.
We should not stop here. It is important to punish
those who have committed such crimes so that they will not
repeat them in the future and as a deterrent to others. The
point of the punishment would be to prevent repetition of
such acts in the future. Those who commit crimes must
know that they will be punished sooner or later.
We call upon the international community to stop
toying with the cultural history of mankind. The Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya — among the first countries to propose
that the General Assembly discuss this item a little more
than two decades ago — insists on the restoration of its
historical heritage whether it be in the form of jewels,
artefacts or manuscripts. Now that we have gained complete
freedom, we understand the harm done to us through this

16

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
theft and pillage, and we demand that the countries that
are holding our intellectual property restore our
possessions to us, because their ownership is based on
theft, which is prohibited by law and by the decree of
God. If they delay or procrastinate, we will be obliged to
resort to all available means to regain our possessions,
including bringing suit in international courts. We cannot
stand idly by when our historical heritage is at stake,
because it is ours, and symbolizes our identity and our
civilization. It is a living expression of our deep cultural
roots and a legitimate right which we shall insist on from
generation to generation.
Mr. Zacharakis (Greece): Draft resolution
A/52/L.12 deals with a question that has been before the
General Assembly for many years and which reflects
concerns that are shared by many States Members of the
Organization.
The report of the Secretary-General submitting the
report of the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) depicts the untiring efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the Director-General to enhance world
awareness and to assist States in claiming their cultural
property. We thank them and reaffirm our support for
their efforts. However, the report also clearly reveals the
difficulties that the United Nations and UNESCO are
confronting in launching the process that would lead to
the return of illicitly appropriated cultural property.
As a country with an important cultural history, and
as the victim of systematic plundering of its cultural
treasures, Greece attaches great importance to the
restitution of illicitly appropriated cultural property to its
country of origin. It has to be recalled that not even one
of the major monuments in Greece has escaped pillaging.
In fact, invaluable parts of these monuments have been
removed and transferred abroad, far away from their
original architectural structures.
We firmly believe that such actions, which reflect
tendencies and attitudes of dark periods of the past, do
not match present realities, and the unfortunate results of
those past actions should not be perpetuated by our
inaction and silence. In this context, we deemed it our
duty to co-sponsor this draft resolution, just as we did in
1995. We are determined to spare no effort to curb the
illicit traffic in cultural treasures and to promote the
return of cultural property to its countries of origin or its
restitution in case of illicit appropriation.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
To this end we are actively participating in UNESCO
and in the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its
Restitution in case of Illicit Appropriation. We are also
contributing to any effort aimed at the improvement of the
Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property
in the Event of Armed Conflict, as well as at the further
elaboration of the International Institute for the Unification
of Private Law (UNIDROIT) Convention on Stolen or
Illegally Exported Cultural Objects and the European Union
regulation dealing with the transfer of cultural objects.
Furthermore, we have taken initiatives aimed at the
protection of cultural treasures of our neighbouring
countries which experienced the aftermath of the Balkan
crisis.
Being the repository of a cultural heritage which
belongs to the whole world, Greece strongly believes that
is our duty to entrust this heritage, healed from the traumas
inflicted on it both by time and by human actions, to future
generations. This duty emanates from respect for our
monuments and from our responsibility towards the
international community.
In this context, I would like to avail myself of the
opportunity to raise an issue which is of particular
importance to my country. The issue of the restitution of
the Parthenon Marbles has always remained open for
Greece, as well as for the international cultural community,
present and past, including many important figures in
British history, such as Lord Byron, Shelley and Hardy. By
the term “Parthenon Marbles”, Greece refers to the
sculptural decoration and other elements of the Parthenon,
such as column drums, capitals and other elements which
were removed and transferred to London by Lord Elgin and
are currently on display at the British Museum. The
detailed description of these elements has been submitted to
UNESCO and is amply documented in international
archaeological publications.
It must be noted that the Parthenon Marbles are not
self-standing sculptures but indivisible elements of the
Temple of the Parthenon, which constitutes the greatest
monument of Greek civilization and the symbol of Western
civilization, as well as the emblem of UNESCO itself.
Moreover, certain of these elements are essential not only
for the sake of aesthetic appearance, but also for the static
stability of the Parthenon’s structure, as was certified during
its restoration works.
In the light of the above, it is self-explanatory why the
Greek Government is requesting the restitution of the

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
Parthenon Marbles and not simply their return. Since
1982 the matter has been referred on several occasions to
the relevant UNESCO bodies, and it was submitted
formally to the British Government in 1983.
A number of UNESCO bodies have repeatedly
called, through relevant resolutions, for bilateral
negotiations between the Greek and British Governments.
This is the natural process between two countries which
enjoy deep-rooted and friendly relations and are allies,
European Union partners and members of the Council of
Europe. Greece is willing to discuss the issue with the
British Government. We are aware of the delicate nature
of the issue and are dealing with it with extreme
discretion. At the same time, we remain confident that our
cause is justified and endorsed by the international
community. We sincerely hope that the British
Government and British society, with their undeniable
traditional sensitivity towards cultural issues, will not take
too long before redressing a grave error. This is an
obligation not to Greece, but to the cultural heritage of
the whole world.
As the Director-General’s report observes, much has
been done under the auspices of UNESCO to protect
cultural property in its original and natural context and to
repatriate the property illegally taken from its countries of
origin. However, there is still much to be done. My
country is fully prepared to cooperate with international
bodies in taking all necessary measures to put an end to
the illicit trafficking in cultural property and to ensure the
protection, recovery and return of stolen and illegally
exported cultural property. We expect that our discussion
today before this Assembly will trigger a greater
awakening of international public opinion in support of
the return or restitution of cultural property to its
countries of origin, in particular through mobilization of
the information capacity of the United Nations for this
purpose.
Mr. Rønneberg (Marshall Islands): The item before
us has always been somewhat controversial and has been
of great interest for the Government of the Republic of
the Marshall Islands over the last few years. In the
context of our debate here at the United Nations, we have
become aware of and sympathetic to the situation of
friendly countries whose cultural property has been
veritably stolen from them during periods of war or
colonialism. We can fully sympathize with their plight,
and we are willing to assist with responsible support for
certain measures that could be taken to alleviate the
problem.

17

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Many countries have good knowledge of what cultural
icons and treasures belonging to them have been taken
away over the years. This is particularly the case for the art
treasures of the great civilizations, which are put on display
in metropolitan cities around the world. We know a lot
about these very famous items, how they were acquired and
what their histories may be. But unfortunately, we cannot
say the same for all countries. Let me offer an illustration.
We had known that there was a Pacific collection at
a well-known university here in the United States, but we
did not know that it contained a large number of artefacts
from the Marshall Islands. This year, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Marshall Islands made an
official visit to that university, and he viewed the collection
that came from the Pacific. We were quite astonished by
the fine quality of the objects, and especially by some of
the handiwork involved. These artefacts were brought to the
United States in the 1800s, and were representative of a
very high standard and workmanship. We are now also
aware of major collections being held by various
institutions in Germany, a former colonial administrator.
Furthermore, at a recent symposium on the Marshall
Islands, we were informed of the large amount of
documentation and artefacts brought back to Spain by the
early explorers.
I must stress that the Marshall Islands is not calling
for these artefacts to be returned as if they had been
acquired by illegal means. In our case, we have ascertained
that they were indeed purchased in a legally acceptable
manner, that they have been cared for properly and that the
cultural value of the artefacts has greatly increased in
importance due to their age and their relative isolation.
What we are intending to do is to seek ways in which these
collections may be photographed in detail and catalogued
more fully, so that Marshallese students and others can do
research on these examples of the cultural history of the
Marshall Islands. It is also important to us that we explore
the possibility of a visiting exhibit to the Marshall Islands.
From our initial conversations with the university museum
administrators, they would be quite amenable to such ideas,
but they were concerned about the financial costs.
This is where my delegation believes that this draft
resolution could make an important contribution. In this
regard, we would appeal to the international community,
and to the expertise of the relevant United Nations agencies
and specialized bodies, to assist us in compiling the
necessary data and cataloguing the extensive materials that
are housed by these institutions.

18

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
We are fearful that in the future these artefacts may
decay or be lost before they can be properly documented.
They represent a period in Marshall Islands history that
needs to be documented better, from a cultural
perspective. It is our intention to pursue the possibilities
of a visiting exhibition to the Marshall Islands of these
collections. After such an exhibition had ended, we could
seek to have a permanent exhibition of photographs or
copies of the artefacts.
The assistance of the donor community and the
United Nations is absolutely essential if we are to be
successful. In our view, this is the sort of activity that
should be considered under the implementation of this
agenda item. In collaboration with relevant United
Nations agencies such as the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), this
could prove to be a meaningful step in the right direction,
and it would not alienate from the process those who
have these collections of artefacts. We will listen
carefully to the views of others in this debate and we
hope that our comments may provide a useful input to the
discussion.
Mr. Al-Hitti (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset, my delegation would like to welcome the
report of the Secretary-General [A/52/211] before us,
which deals with the return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin. We are very happy
with the recommendations adopted at the ninth session of
the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or
its Restitution in case of Illicit Appropriation.
In this respect, we should like to welcome the
attention devoted by the secretariat of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) to the issue of training members of different
professions affected by the issue of the illicit traffic in
cultural property, such as law-enforcement officials and
museum curators. My delegation would like to express its
full and unreserved support for the activities of the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL),
in combating the scourge of the illicit traffic in cultural
property, and in particular for its activities in publishing
and disseminating information about stolen cultural
property. I should also like to reaffirm the fact that my
country attaches importance to the exchange of
information between databases on stolen cultural property,
and supports the establishment of an international fund to
facilitate the restitution of stolen or illegally exported
cultural property. We should also make art collectors,

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
auctioneers and art gallery owners, more aware of the need
to combat the traffic in cultural property.
The fact that the General Assembly considers this
issue on a regular basis demonstrates its importance for
international relations. The problem has become
increasingly serious in recent years because of the renewed
growth in the illicit traffic in cultural property, especially
archaeological remains, resulting from the deteriorating
economic situation of some developing countries and the
devaluation of their currencies in comparison with those of
a small number of developed countries. Dealers in this
handful of industrialized countries have exploited the
situation and appropriated this property. Global economic
stagnation has further aggravated the problem. Some
owners of private capital in western countries have,
therefore, been able to buy and appropriate archaeological
remains as a reserve investment, to such an extent that trade
in archaeological remains from developing countries has
become an activity that is organized and led by companies
and auction houses openly and with the knowledge of the
Governments of the countries concerned.
Despite the fact that several agreements and
international instruments grant countries the right to recover
their cultural property and to prohibit the illegal traffic,
many countries that have appropriated such property refuse
to accede to the agreements and do nothing to facilitate
bilateral negotiations aimed at restoring the remains to their
countries of origin.
Iraq is known as the cradle of the earliest human
civilizations and for the diversity of its cultural heritage.
Indeed, it is the depositary of the treasures passed down by
these civilizations. That is why it is a prime target for the
theft of archaeological treasures by the old colonizing
Powers or by certain countries that wish to include these
rare pieces in their museums. As a result of this systematic
pillaging, foreign museums will henceforth overflow with
Iraqi archaeological treasures, not to mention the artefacts
held in private collections or collections offered by antique
dealers. Iraq is continuing to be subjected to the pillage of
its cultural artefacts and remains, which has intensified in
recent years. The aerial bombardments of the allied forces
against Iraqi towns and villages have partially or entirely
destroyed Iraqi cultural landmarks, including mosques,
churches and archaeological sites. The sanctions imposed
on Iraq and the foreign interference in its domestic affairs
have given rise to clandestine excavations that have enabled
their organizers to appropriate and sell cultural property and
rare art objects of inestimable value, as well as manuscripts
and antique books. This systematic sabotage of Iraq’s

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
cultural identity is increasing as the grip of the embargo
imposed on the Iraqi people is tightened. These illegal
activities involve the destruction of the cultural heritage
of nations and mutilate their sources of cultural creativity
throughout history.
We are grateful to UNESCO for its efforts to
encourage the international community to pay greater
attention to this problem and to help countries to recover
their cultural property. We call on all States to cooperate
fully with UNESCO so that it can achieve this objective
in conformity with the principles of equity and justice in
international relations. In this respect we welcome the
eight recommendations adopted by the Intergovernmental
Committee at its ninth session, held in Paris from 16 to
19 September 1996, in particular Recommendation No. 7,
which invites the Director-General of UNESCO to do his
utmost to help in the tracing and return of the cultural and
archaeological properties stolen and smuggled from Iraq.
We also call for the strengthening of the
international conventions that are currently in force
designed to protect cultural heritage throughout the world
and to provide technical assistance to countries in serious
difficulties related to the illicit traffic in artifacts from
their cultural heritage. We hope that the United Nations,
through its specialized agencies, will continue to step us
its efforts to sensitize international public opinion to the
irreparable losses suffered by the cultural heritage of
certain countries because of pillaging and destruction, and
prompt a more general awareness with regard to the
return or restitution of cultural properties to their
countries of origin. The loss of the cultural heritage of
some States is a loss for the culture of the world, for
future generations and for humankind as a whole.
Through its participation in international
organizations and through bilateral channels, my country,
Iraq, is working to recover Iraqi manuscripts and
archaeological artefacts that are currently in European
countries, and whose holders have confirmed that they
were taken out of Iraq illegally. Iraq has drafted a law to
prohibit in particular the import of archaeological remains
from other countries if they are not authenticated and
accompanied by a permit in due form, and to ban the
transit of archaeological remains through the territory of
third States if those conditions are not met.
On 29 October 1992, Iraq informed UNESCO,
through four sets of documents, of the loss of cultural and
archaeological items during the military aggression and of

19

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997

the thousands of archaeological relics stolen from Iraqi
museums.

due to the increased international awareness of its
importance.

As is well known, all works of art, manuscripts or
other archaeological or cultural relics embody the cultural
heritage of a people, which has the right to be proud of and
to attach special importance to these cultural objects that
belong first and foremost to their creators, their artisans and
their people. That is why the people are the legitimate
owners.

In this regard, my delegation notes with appreciation
the report of the Secretary-General (A/52/211), submitted
in cooperation with the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO). The report provides a helpful account of the
work that is being done to promote the return or
restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin
and highlights the need for the international community
to cooperate more closely in this area.

This injustice from the past can be redressed today if
certain countries imbibe the principles of justice and
fairness and put an end to the kind of selfishness that
characterized the colonial period and resulted in the
systematic pillaging of the wealth of others, including their
patrimony. The logic of law and justice calls for the
restitution of such property to its rightful owners and to its
countries of origin, since it is an expression of the cultural
identity of the people who produced it, which is why such
property is a matter of such interest and importance at the
national level.
The restitution of that cultural property could
contribute to the cultural liberation of countries whose
archaeological and historical objects have been stolen. It
would constitute a humanitarian measure and the necessary
fulfilment of a moral duty by the States which took this
property and by international organizations.
We must send a clear message demanding the
restitution to the rightful owners of all that has been stolen
or pillaged because illegal appropriation does not give those
who hold these stolen objects any rights. I should like here
to refer to the statement made by the representative of
Kuwait a short while ago, which we consider to be quite
exaggerated. Nor do we think it appropriate to indulge in
such talk under the current agenda item.
That being said, I wish to recall that all Kuwaiti
property has been restored, and we are quite prepared to
cooperate with the United Nations coordinator entrusted
with this matter to return to Kuwait all Kuwaiti property
that we discover in the future.
Mr. Cho (Republic of Korea): It was nearly 25 years
ago that the General Assembly first addressed the issue of
the restitution of cultural property to its countries of origin.
My delegation is gratified to see today that the General
Assembly is once again considering this pressing issue,
which has acquired added urgency over the past few years

20

Cultural property is the embodiment of the history
and culture of a nation, and therefore we believe it can be
best valued and appreciated when it is preserved in its
country of origin. However, over the course of history —
particularly during periods of armed conflict and
colonization — numerous priceless cultural artefacts have
been taken by illegal means from their original resting
places to locations abroad. This problem is of particular
significance to Korea, as numerous Korean cultural
objects have been pillaged and illegally transferred abroad
during our country's history of political turmoil, especially
in the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century.
The Korean Government has launched an effort to
locate these missing cultural objects by investigating the
background of their illicit transfer. As part of this effort,
we have been compiling an extensive inventory of all
Korean cultural properties illegally transferred abroad,
with a view to seeking their return or restitution, mainly
through bilateral negotiations with the countries
concerned.
Through these efforts, we have been able to achieve
some concrete results. A total of 1,659 objects have been
voluntarily returned through bilateral agreements with the
Japanese Government. An additional 1,642 items have
been returned through public and private donations,
mostly from Japan. We are grateful to the countries
concerned for their invaluable cooperation.
However, we must also admit that there are cases of
less encouraging progress in other bilateral negotiations
due to the apparent lack of a sincere spirit of cooperation.
For example, the progress achieved so far in our efforts
to retrieve the Korean Royal Archives from a certain
European country has not yet met our expectations.
It is our strong view that cultural artefacts
unlawfully taken away by forcible means cannot be

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
regarded as the property of the countries which currently
have them in their possession. Regardless of their current
location, those objects remain the property of their countries
of origin. They must therefore be returned so that they can
be truly preserved and valued in their historical
surroundings by the people for whom those objects are an
important part of cultural heritage.
This principle is, in our view, fundamental and must
be upheld in order to ensure that justice and genuine
international cooperation prevail in the international
community. It is embodied in the various international
instruments and conventions, including the 1970 UNESCO
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the
Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
Property, which provide a framework to facilitate the return
of cultural property and prohibit illicit trafficking in them.
My delegation earnestly hopes that those countries
which have acquired cultural properties by illegal means
will abide by this fundamental principle of the international
community, and thus be forthcoming in facilitating bilateral
negotiations for the return or restitution of such property to
the countries of origin. To ensure satisfactory progress in
pursuit of this goal, we believe it is critically important that
some countries summon the political will to look beyond
the narrow nationalistic interests of the past for the benefit
of common interests and cooperation in the future. Equally
vital, in our view, is the commitment of the international
community as a whole to intensify its efforts to promote a
just and fair solution to this important issue.
In this regard, we commend the UNESCO
Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the Return of
Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its
Restitution in case of Illicit Appropriation for the important
role it has played in promoting bilateral negotiations
between requesting and holding countries and in arousing
international public opinion on this important issue. My
delegation believes that the activities of UNESCO and other
relevant organizations in this regard should be strengthened
through the support of the United Nations and the
cooperation of concerned countries so as to encourage the
return of cultural property to its rightful owners.
It is our firm belief that in order to treasure and
protect the rich cultural heritage of humankind for
generations to come, the international community must do
all it can to preserve the respective cultural artefacts of
each country, and ensure that those artefacts and objects are
restored to their rightful countries of origin. The Republic
of Korea will strive to contribute to that vital task, and in

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
that regard we firmly support, as a sponsor, draft
resolution A/52/L.12, which is sure, in our view, to foster
an environment in which cultural properties can be
returned or restituted in a timely manner.
Mr. Zackheos (Cyprus): The report of the
Secretary-General on the return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin delivers a hopeful
message that much of what was needed to be done is
being done and that the important efforts of protecting
cultural properties are well on their way to bearing
fruitful results.
For this hopeful picture, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and its Director-General deserve to be
commended. Certainly, not all the provisions and goals
set by General Assembly resolutions have been
implemented. We are gratified, however, by the progress
report of UNESCO, in document A/52/211, dated 25 June
1997, and especially by its account of the results of the
holding of the ninth session of the Intergovernmental
Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property
to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in case of
Illicit Appropriation, as well as by the adoption of eight
recommendations, as contained in appendix I of the
above-mentioned report.
We commend UNESCO’s efforts to promote
bilateral negotiations for the return or restitution of
cultural property as a matter of cultural continuity and
justice, the preparation of inventories of movable cultural
properties, the dissemination of information and efforts to
establish a code of ethics for art dealers, auction houses
and galleries. Similarly, we note in the report the entry
into force of the International Institute for the Unification
of Private Law (UNIDROIT) Convention and of the
efforts to improve existing international conventions for
the protection of world cultural properties and agree that
our central goal should be increasing the number of
ratifications and providing technical assistance to States
with acute problems of illicit trafficking in archaeological
objects, as well as aiding countries experiencing armed
conflicts.
It is very correctly stated in the report that the return
or restitution of cultural and artistic treasures to countries
of origin contributes to the strengthening of international
cooperation. The establishment of an international fund to
facilitate the restitution of stolen property will be of great
practical assistance to these States.

21

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997

Our interest in the subject emanates from our desire to
communicate again with the international community and
to seek its solidarity and assistance for the preservation of
the cultural identity of the occupied territories of Cyprus.
The occupying Power’s policy of changing the demographic
and cultural character of Cyprus by the importation of
settlers and the destruction, desecration and pillaging,
especially of places of worship as a result of the 1974
invasion, constitute a continuous haemorrhage of our
cultural heritage. To highlight the immensity of the
destruction, I cite here some figures. First, some 15,000 to
20,000 icons have been removed. Secondly, several dozen
major frescos and mosaics dating from the sixth century
A.D. to the fifteenth century have been segmented for sale
abroad. Thirdly, several thousand antiquities and individual
objects of historical interest, such as wooden carvings,
crosses, bibles and so forth, have disappeared.

Phoenician, Greek and Roman sites. We hope that the
United Nations, through its specialized agencies, will
continue to contribute towards increasing the awareness
of the international community of the importance of
safeguarding the cultural heritage of Cyprus and, in fact,
of all States. The archaeological treasures of States are
treasures of the world. Their loss will be a loss to
mankind and to global civilization.

As recently as one month ago, stolen Cypriot church
objects, such as frescos, icons, ancient pottery and statues
were discovered by the German police in Munich in the
residence of a Turkish national. The recovery included over
100 valuable pieces of art from the period from the sixth to
the fifteenth century. The Government and the Church of
Cyprus have spared no effort or money in seeking to
recover, or even buy back, whatever Cypriot antiquities
could be salvaged. In this endeavour, we are grateful to
those individuals, institutions and international organizations
for their cooperation and assistance for the discovery and
return of many significant treasures.

Ms. Rodríguez (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish):
As heir to one of the oldest and richest civilizations in the
world, Peru draws on immense and extremely varied
cultural resources. My delegation is therefore taking the
floor on this item, given its extreme importance.

The first major victory relating to stolen objects
occurred with the return to Cyprus, following a civil case
in the United States, of four mosaics originating from the
Kanakaria church, dating from A.D. 525. The mosaics are
now exhibited in the Byzantine Museum in Nicosia.
Nevertheless, despite the assistance of organizations,
including UNESCO, the Council of Europe, Europa Nostra,
the International Council on Monuments and Sites and
INTERPOL, as well as devoted curators and scholars
throughout the world, a vast number of objects and artefacts
remain in the wrong hands. We are faced with an uphill
struggle, as we still have no control over the fate of our
heritage in our own territory in the occupied part of the
Republic.
This territory, may I remind the Assembly, includes
the largest part of the island’s archaeological and historic
sites: the Venetian walls of Famagusta, the medieval castles
of Kyrenia, the archaeological sites of Salamis, Mycenaean
Engomi, churches and monasteries built between the fourth
and the eleventh centuries, as well as neolithic bronze

22

As to those who intentionally destroy the cultural
heritage of States, the words of Euripides echo through
the ages as a stern warning.
“Fool is the one who sacks a city, making a
desert of temples, pillaging the tombs, the
sanctuaries of the dead, for he prepares his own
doom in times to come.”

Peru greatly appreciates the work done by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) with regard to the return of cultural property
to its countries of origin or its restitution in case of illicit
appropriation. We would like especially to commend the
work of the Director-General of UNESCO, as well as that
of the Intergovernmental Committee established to those
ends.
Likewise, we commend UNESCO's overall efforts to
promote the return of property or its restitution in case of
illicit appropriation to its countries of origin. We thank
the Director-General of UNESCO for his report contained
in document A/52/211, on which my delegation would
like to make the following comments.
Peru gives its full support to the Intergovernmental
Committee as the international negotiating forum for
reaching satisfactory solutions on behalf of countries
seeking to recover their cultural property. We can
mention specifically, as a result of such endeavours, the
return by Honduras of various art objects, for which we
express our heartfelt thanks to its Government. At the
bilateral level, we would like to express the same
gratitude to the Government of Canada, which on 28
November 1997 will officially return to Peru a collection
of valuable pre-Columbian pieces. We also attach great
importance to the memorandum of understanding signed

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
on 9 June of this year between the Government of the
United States and our own Government to restrict the
importation to the United States of Peruvian pre-Columbian
and colonial materials.
We firmly believe that international cooperation is
fundamental for curbing illicit traffic in cultural property.
Peru thanks UNESCO for its activities designed to provide
the appropriate training to various categories of
professionals who deal with the issue of illicit traffic in
cultural property. We recommend that UNESCO continue
to give priority to this matter. In this connection, Peru once
again requests UNESCO to cooperate in the training of
officials entrusted with enforcing the law on the protection
of the nation's cultural heritage, since in recent years my
country has continued to suffer great losses of its cultural
heritage because of clandestine excavations and subsequent
illicit traffic.
We are also grateful to the International Council of
Museums (ICOM) for the publication of a training manual
for the documentation of African collections, as an
additional effort to facilitate the establishment of national
inventories and the training of local personnel.
We share the views of the representative of the Getty
Information Institute on the need to rely on some
standardized, basic method of exchanging information on
stolen cultural property and on the importance of having
precise information about such property, as well as the
conclusion that only through closer cooperation between
private organizations and the public sector, at both the
national and the international level, will we be able to curb
this illicit traffic.
Peru, a signatory of the 1995 Convention on Stolen or
Illegally Exported Cultural Objects of the International
Institute for the Unification of Private Law (UNIDROIT),
appeals to those countries that have not yet done so to
adhere to or ratify the UNESCO and UNIDROIT
Conventions. We welcome with satisfaction the UNIDROIT
initiative to establish a database of legislation and
international conventions for the protection of cultural
property, States' participation and a bibliography.
Peru supports the establishment of an international
fund to facilitate the restitution of stolen or illicitly exported
cultural property, which would be of benefit to those
countries that cannot pay the costs entailed by this effort.
We believe that the establishment of this fund must take a
number of factors into account, particularly the sources of
funding, in order to ensure its effectiveness and viability.

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
Peru believes it advisable to adopt a code of ethics
for art dealers and other professionals in the field of
cultural property. Though non-binding, such a code will
make it possible to enhance ethical standards in the art
trade.
In addition, we fully agree with the importance
attached to a public awareness campaign to curb illicit
traffic in cultural property, and we believe the Internet is
a valuable tool for that purpose. In this connection, my
delegation commends the Government of France for its
valuable initiative to disseminate via the Internet
information on French museums' holdings of cultural
property whose owners are unknown and which has never
been claimed.
For these reasons, the delegation of Peru fully
supports the text of draft resolution A/52/L.12, now
before the General Assembly for consideration.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
Before proceeding to take action on draft resolution
A/52/L.12, I should like to announce that since its
introduction, Egypt has become a sponsor of the draft
resolution.
The Assembly will now proceed to take a decision
on draft resolution A/52/L.12.
One representative wishes to make a statement in
explanation of vote before the voting. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): My delegation is
appreciative indeed of this debate on the restoration or
restitution of cultural property. I am speaking as a son of
Africa and also as a student of history who has seen how
much havoc was brought on the developing nations,
particularly in my continent, Africa.
Prior to debating this subject, we debated the
question of languages. The way in which we African
nations were deprived of our own languages, which are
also our heritage, is another important phenomenon.
Thank God, however, that we in the Kingdom of
Swaziland are still one of those unique nations in Africa
that retains our heritage, languages and traditional

23

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
institutions. We praise the Almighty God, who blinded the
eyes and minds of those who were responsible for the illicit
trafficking and extermination of our African heritage.
I have a question: Who are these that are still the
culprits today? The draft resolution and agenda item are not
coming before the Assembly for the first time. The culprits
are known. Can they behave like Christians in a church
who, when they are convinced of their sins, simply stand
up and say, “We confess our misdeeds”? For sure, they
know themselves, and they know the heritage they took
from other nations.
I am thinking of the Rosetta Stone, which was taken
from Egypt, I am thinking of the papyrus material that was
taken from Egypt, and, on a more serious note, I am
thinking of the embalmed bodies that were taken by some
Members of the United Nations to use to serve as centres
to attract tourism. I shudder to say that those culprits are
Members of the United Nations. My delegation would
therefore humbly request them that of their own accord, and
having heard and understood the cry of the world, they
restitute these heritage properties.

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
As the United Nations, we want to forgive them. As
Member States we want to forgive them. But let them
live up to their promises. In future, the draft resolution
should be a consensus resolution because of the fact that
we shall be in a position to understand and agree
mutually.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/52/L.12. I call first on the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Perfiliev (Director, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs Division): I should
like to inform members that, should the General
Assembly adopt draft resolution A/52/L.12, there will be
no programme budget implications.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

We Africans have a bad history. We have heard our
brothers and sisters who were hewn from our continent and
taken elsewhere on the globe. While on their way their
teeth were extracted forcibly, their morals were extracted
forcibly, and their brains were extracted forcibly and kept
in certain museums. This, we regard as a heritage for
Africa, and we are saying that the time has come that such
should be restored, with a minimum of compensation at the
most.
Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the report, however, give my
delegation a sense of encouragement that certain countries
have agreed to return the heritage wherever it was taken.
Heaven is theirs, I can assure them, because they are telling
the truth. God the Almighty will reward them if they
honour what they have said in paragraphs 6 and 7 and if
they can live up to their promises.
We call for yet other Members to do likewise. The
time to restore what was accidentally taken from us has
come. We suffered from the boundaries that divided Africa,
we suffered from the languages that divided us in Africa.
I am no longer able to understand and communicate with
my brother in Central Africa. I am no longer able to
communicate and understand my brother in the western part
of Africa. All that was due to the history that has been
imposed on us.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada,
China, Colombia, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, Ghana, Greece, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Myanmar, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovakia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Zambia
Against:

24

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
None
Abstaining:
Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Chile, Denmark, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Spain, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Draft resolution A/52/L.12 was adopted by 87 votes to
none, with 23 abstentions (resolution 52/24).
[Subsequently the delegation of Hungary informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: The delegation of Kuwait has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I remind
members that, in accordance with decision 34/401,
statements in exercise of the right of reply shall be limited
to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to five minutes
for the second, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Al-Awdi (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic):
I would like to express my regret at having to ask for the
floor at such a late hour. I listened attentively to what the
representative of Iraq said a little while ago on agenda item
27, regarding the return or restitution of cultural property to
the countries of origin. I would like to make the following
remarks in this regard.
First, my delegation has taken note of what the
delegation of Iraq said towards the end of his statement
about their readiness to cooperate in restoring Kuwaiti
property, and we hope that this will be done in a serious
manner. Secondly, my delegation remains committed to all
that was said by the Permanent Representative of Kuwait
on this item just a while ago.

55th plenary meeting
25 November 1997
Thirdly, the representative of Iraq's characterization
of what was stated by the Permanent Representative of
Kuwait regarding the negative impact of the oppressive
Iraqi occupation on the cultural property of Kuwait as
exaggerated is wrong and Iraq cannot deny it. The
destruction and pillaging of important cultural and
historical property perpetrated by the occupying Iraqi
soldiers in Kuwait in 1990 has been documented by
concerned international organizations. It was also
witnessed by me, as a Kuwaiti citizen, before I became a
diplomat here. As a Kuwaiti I lived out the period of
Iraqi occupation of Kuwait, and I have personally seen
the deliberate destruction by the Iraqi Republican Guards
of museums and cultural property in Kuwait. I cannot
forget seeing the Iraqi occupiers accompanied by a
director of one of the Iraqi national museums or cultural
centres break down the doors of the National Museum
and then loot and steal the Museum's acquisitions,
removing them to Iraq.
Fourthly, Iraq is creative in contradicting itself and
its acts. When the representative of the Iraqi regime refers
to the importance of cultural property for States and calls
for not trafficking illegally in them and for their
restoration, he is simply ignoring that his own regime has
done the same heinous thing. This does not surprise us
because we have grown accustomed to the style of
contradiction which the Iraqi regime lives by.
Fifthly, I would like to reaffirm that this is the
appropriate item under which we can express Kuwaiti
concerns regarding Iraq's refusal to return the rest of
Kuwaiti intellectual property. And what has been returned
has arrived destroyed and defective. Therefore, we again
call upon Iraq to cooperate seriously in implementing the
relevant Security Council resolution.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 27?
It was so decided.

The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.

25
