S/2017/870

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 October 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 32 of Security Council
resolution 2352 (2017), in which the Council requested to be informed of progress
in implementing the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) and to have any serious violations of all applicable agreements
brought to its immediate attention. It also provides an update on the status of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, as reques ted in paragraph 8 of
resolution 2352 (2017). It covers the period since the issuance of my previous report
(S/2017/649), from 25 July to 7 October 2017.

II. Abyei
Conflict dynamics and security situation
2.
Conflict in the Abyei Area continued to be characterized by four trends. First,
there were reports of intercommunal violence over access to grazing land and water
during the annual migration of the Misseriya, which has been a traditional source of
conflict between the Misseriya and the Ngok Dinka. Second, criminal activities at
the Amiet common market were a persistent problem, with the potential to
exacerbate intercommunal tensions as the two communities intermingle at the
market and in the surrounding areas. Third, incidents of petty crime continued,
largely as a result of the adverse economic situation in the Abyei Area, which
includes a lack of livelihood opportunities and the prevalence of arms. Fo urth, the
presence of armed groups created the potential for inflaming tensions between the
two communities. Overall, the number of violent incidents in the Area decreased
during the reporting period, which coincided with the rainy season, as compared
with the previous period. In particular, there was a marked reduction in violence at
the Amiet common market, following proactive engagement by UNISFA with both
communities and its robust military posture, which was reinforced at certain
flashpoints. Despite a number of violent incidents, the security situation in the Area
remained relatively calm. Nonetheless, the situation continued to be volatile, in the
absence of progress in implementing the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and
establishing the final status of the Area.
3.
During the annual southward migration, an estimated 35,000 Misseriya arrived
in the Abyei Area. Their subsequent reverse migration northward was delayed by the
late arrival of the rains, but was completed by the end of July. The conflict

17-17922 (E)

191017

*1717922*

S/2017/870

prevention and mitigation strategy adopted by UNISFA, based on the
disengagement line between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities, was
effective in reducing large-scale violence, although sporadic incidents continued
during the rainy season. One serious incident of cattle-rustling occurred between
Goli and Todach, Sector North, on 27 July, in which Ngok Dinka assailants killed
three Misseriya herders and stole 141 cows. While the assailants managed to evade
UNISFA patrols, the mission recovered and returned 135 of the cows.
4.
The significance of the Amiet common market as an economic hub continued
to grow, especially in the light of the adverse economic conditions in South Sudan,
as the market provides access to otherwise unavailable or costly goods and servi ces.
The escalation seen in the number of violent incidents in the vicinity of the market
in June and July persisted briefly. On 27 July, two Ngok Dinka men were stabbed in
the market; both were treated for their injuries at the local hospital in Agok, Sec tor
South. The following day at the market, on the basis of information provided by
Misseriya traders, UNISFA apprehended a Misseriya individual who was suspected
of orchestrating the attack. The individual was handed over to Misseriya community
leaders on 31 July.
5.
With intercommunal tensions running high, UNISFA convened separate
meetings with Misseriya community leaders in Diffra, Sector North, and with Ngok
Dinka community leaders in Dokura, Sector Centre, respectively, on 26 July.
Through those meetings, UNISFA was able to broker an agreement with each
community to address contentious issues using the joint peace committees. Leaders
from the two communities met in Dokura on 27 July, where they agreed to resolve
existing problems by using traditional mechanisms. It was the first time since 2011
that Misseriya community leaders had been welcomed by the Ngok Dinka in
Dokura.
6.
On 30 July, the joint peace committee comprising members of both the Ngok
Dinka and Misseriya communities agreed that the Ngok Dinka community would
pay restitution for the 11 Misseriya community members killed in the attacks on
22 July and 27 July. On 22 July, eight Misseriya had been killed on the road
between the Amiet common market and Diffra, Sector North (see S/2017/649,
para. 11). Trading in the market had been suspended following that attack and the
committee also agreed that the market would be reopened immediately to avoid
creating further hardship for both communities. This was the second closure of the
market in July, with the first following the killing of two Ngok Dinka along the
Amiet road on 9 July (ibid., para. 10); the market had re -opened on 19 July.
7.
During the reporting period, UNISFA facilitated 82 meetings of the joint peace
committee in the three sectors to strengthen intercommunal relations and facilitate
reconciliation. In general, intercommunal violence in the Area has subsided since
August, notwithstanding a few incidents. On 5 August, two Ngok Dinka were kill ed
and one was injured in Dungoup, Sector Centre, allegedly by a group of Misseriya.
8.
Sector Centre continued to be the area with the highest level of crime, as the
location of the Amiet common market and owing to its position on the only all weather route from the town of Abyei towards Diffra and Farouk, Sector North.
However, criminal activity has diminished during the ongoing rainy season as a
result of hampered mobility. UNISFA continued both aerial and ground patrols
around the market and surrounding roads to provide a deterrent security presence.
9.
Petty crime remained largely intra-ethnic. An affray involving Ngok Dinka
young people in the market, on 13 August, led to the detention of 17 young people
by the community protection committee. Some 100 young people protested against
the detention, and UNISFA worked with the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief to
contain the situation. In a separate incident, 11 detainees escaped from the detention
2/13

17-17922

S/2017/870

cell at the market on 27 August. Members of the community protecti on committee,
in conjunction with UNISFA, apprehended all the escapees. However, one member
was injured in the process and subsequently received treatment at the UNISFA
clinic.
10. There were two further civilian fatalities in the Abyei Area during the
reporting period, in addition to the five people killed in violent intercommunal
incidents mentioned in paragraphs 3 and 4. On 26 August, in Jok Jul, near Agok in
Sector South, one Ngok Dinka individual was shot dead by unknown assailants. In a
separate incident in Agok on the same day, a Nuer language assistant at a hospital
run by an international non-governmental organization was shot by three
unidentified assailants; he died in hospital a few days later.
11. In addition, there were frequent reports from the local population indicating
the presence of unknown armed groups around Sink, Shegeg, Um Khariet and Alal,
in Sector North, and around Dungoup, Sector Centre. UNISFA apprehended an
armed South Sudanese individual wearing a South Sudan National Police Ser vice
uniform near Noong, Sector Centre, on 16 August, and handed him over to the Ngok
Dinka traditional chiefs and South Sudanese national monitors on 19 August.
Meanwhile, the Government of the Sudan continued to maintain some 120 police
personnel at the Diffra oil complex in the northern Abyei Area. The presence, albeit
occasional, of South Sudanese security service personnel and the deployment of
Diffra oil police units in the Area directly violate the Agreement of 20 June 2011
and contravene Security Council resolutions 1990 (2011) and 2046 (2012), as well
as subsequent resolutions that stipulate that the Area is to be demilitarized,
including the withdrawal of all national forces or armed elements of the local
communities, except for the presence of UNISFA and the Abyei Police Service.
12. In the light of the sources of insecurity mentioned above, UNISFA continued
its efforts to keep the Abyei Area free of weapons. On 11 August, near Shegeg,
mission personnel apprehended two Misseriya men in possession of an assault rifle
magazine with 30 live rounds and a dagger. In line with the UNISFA mandate to
confiscate and destroy weapons, the Mine Action Service destroyed 12 weapons and
108 rounds of small arms ammunition at the UNISFA weapons and ammunition
management facility, in a process observed by national monitors from the Sudan and
South Sudan. During the reporting period, the Service delivered mine risk education
messages to 227 individuals, bringing the total number of persons reached to date
within the Area to 64,670, including UNISFA personnel, nomadic herders and
returnees. The delivery of the messages, which promote the identification and
clearance of explosive ordnance in the Area, in conjunction with the conducting of
non-technical surveys, led to the identification and destruction of three explosive
remnants of war.
Political developments
13. UNISFA operations continued to enhance peace and stability within the Abyei
Area through a robust and targeted military posture and rapid deployment in cases
of intercommunal violence. The mission has also been able to adapt to changing
conditions, such as the seasonal migration of the Misseriya. Efforts su ch as the
UNISFA initiative to support dialogue between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities have enabled improved intercommunal relations and facilitated
stability and reconciliation in the Area. Despite the mission’s determination to
prevent the recurrence of violence or displacement of civilians, intercommunal
tensions persisted in the absence of progress in the implementation of the
Agreement of 20 June 2011 or the settlement of the final status of the Area.

17-17922

3/13

S/2017/870

14. The Sudan and South Sudan have diametrically opposed positions on the way
forward to settle the Abyei question. The Government of the Sudan and the
Misseriya insist that their representation in the Abyei Area must be equal to that of
their Ngok Dinka counterparts. It should be recalled that, according to the
Agreement of 20 June 2011, the Abyei Area Administration should consist of a
Chief Administrator nominated by the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/
Government of South Sudan, a Deputy Chief Administrator nominated by the
Government of the Sudan and five heads of department, three from the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Government of South Sudan and two from the
Government of the Sudan. As to the Abyei Area Council, the parties agreed that it
would be composed of 20 members, with the Chairperson to be elected by the
members from a list of three nominees from the Government of the Sudan. The
Government of South Sudan and Ngok Dinka community leaders disagree with the
prospect of equal representation, citing the Agreement of 20 June 2011, as well as
the Abyei Protocol, which defined Abyei as the area of the nine Ngok Dinka
chiefdoms transferred to Kordofan in 1905, providing the Misseriya with access
based only on their traditional rights to graze cattle. They also invoke the final
award by the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague, Netherlands, in 2009,
which recognized the Ngok Dinka claim on the Abyei Area as the traditional region
of the nine Ngok Dinka chiefdoms. The Sudan continues to insist that the
establishment of these joint institutions under the Agreement of 20 June 2011 is the
only way forward, while South Sudan disagrees on the need for them, citing that the
agreed time frames for their establishment have lapsed.
15. In the continued absence of the Abyei Police Service owing to a disagreement
on its composition, police officers deployed as a part of UNISFA maintained their
advisory and capacity-building role with the community protection committees in
the central and southern parts of Abyei, with a focus on sustaining la w and order.
On 6 September, UNISFA police officers conducted a two-day workshop to build
the capacity of 50 members of the community protection committees based in Abyei
town on the management of law and order processes. Delays in the establishment of
the Abyei Police Service have left a rule-of-law vacuum in the Abyei Area. The
establishment of a special police unit to deal with issues relating to nomadic
migration would help to maintain law and order and prevent intercommunal
conflict.
16. Since the killing of the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief, Koul Deng Koul, in
Abyei in May 2013, the South Sudanese delegation to the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee continues to insist that all meetings of the Committee be convened
outside the Abyei Area until reconciliation is achieved between the Ngok Dinka and
Misseriya communities. Despite the various efforts undertaken to support such a
reconciliation process, the South Sudanese delegation remains unwilling to engage,
arguing that the report by the African Union investigation team into the killing of
the Paramount Chief should first be released. The African Union Commission is in
consultation with the African Union High-level Implementation Panel to determine
the best approach to settle the matter of the investigation rep ort, such that it should
serve as a confidence-building step between the two communities.
17. The African Union Commission convened an extraordinary session of the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, which had not met in more than two years, in
Addis Ababa in May. At the meeting, the members resolved to meet every two
months, with the next meeting to be held in the last week of July. However, the
meeting in July was not convened. To maintain a forum for discussion, the African
Union called for a follow-up meeting of the Committee in Addis Ababa on
16 August. This was to be held in conjunction with a meeting of the Ngok Dinka
and Misseriya traditional leaders, as agreed at the meeting of the Committee held on
4/13

17-17922

S/2017/870

29 and 30 May 2015, to settle the issue of the killing of the Ngok Dinka Paramount
Chief in 2013. Both meetings were postponed the day before the scheduled date at
the request of South Sudan, which cited the need to await the outcome of the
meeting between the President of South Sudan and the President of th e Sudan in
Khartoum. The Presidents have been expected to meet since July; however, at the
time of finalizing the present report, there was no confirmed date for the meeting.
18. According to media reports, the President of South Sudan issued a decree on
14 September, replacing the South Sudanese Co-Chair of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee, Deng Mading Mijak, with Deng Arop Kuol. The change was described
as routine, as Deng Mading Mijak had served in this capacity since 2013.
19. In its resolution 2352 (2017), the Security Council urged the Governments of
the Sudan and South Sudan to resume direct negotiations in order to urgently agree
on a final settlement of the Abyei question, and called upon the Af rican Union Highlevel Implementation Panel and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the
Sudan and South Sudan to support efforts towards the full implementation of the
agreements of 2011. In that regard, during their visit to the two countries in July, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the Special Envoy
engaged with both the Sudan and South Sudan regarding the importance of the
concrete progress requested by the Council. This was followed by a joint visit by
the African Union, the African Union High-level Implementation Panel and the
Department for Peacekeeping Operations in August to seek agreement from the
parties on areas in which progress could be made, in particular with regard to the
joint institutions stipulated in the Agreement of 20 June 2011. In addition, I wrote to
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on 13 September to seek support
for advancing the political resolution of the Abyei issue.
Operating environment
20. As at 7 October, the UNISFA military component stood at 4,316 personnel
(4,294 troops and 235 military observers/staff officers), against an authorized
ceiling of 4,791. During the reporting period, UNISFA troops conducted 4,044 day
patrols and 2,253 night patrols, including 1,431 escorts. The UNISFA police
component stood at 33 officers (23 men and 10 women), of an authorized total of
50, which is the highest number deployed since the mission was established. The
police officers are deployed at four team sites in Abyei town, Agok, Banton and
Diffra. An additional team site will be established at Todach, Sector North, near the
Amiet common market, to allow the police to work closely with the community
protection committee at the market on law and order issues. The number of civilian
staff stood at 137 international, 32 United Nations Volunteers and 81 national staff,
against an authorized total of 161 international, 33 United Nations Volunteers and
89 national staff posts. The Government of the Sudan issued 61 visas for UNISFA
personnel during the reporting period, while 110 visas remained pending for 18 staff
members, 32 military personnel, 13 police officers, 4 Mine Action Service
contractors, 26 official visitors and consultants and 17 contractors.
21. The mission continued to upgrade the infrastructure and environmental
installations at all camps. Depreciated prefabricated buildings were replaced at
seven company operating bases (Farouk, Diffra, Todach and Goli in Sector North
and Tejalei, Agok and Marial Achak in Sector South). The conve rsion of the Noong
temporary operating base into a permanent operating base was 92 per cent complete.
Site preparation works at the expansion site and the improvement of the challenging
living conditions at the mission headquarters in Abyei were 78 per cen t complete.
The construction of new troop accommodation was completed, while staff
accommodation at the expansion site was 61 per cent complete. With regard to the

17-17922

5/13

S/2017/870

environmental and hygiene aspects, of the 36 planned wastewater treatment plants
for all UNISFA bases, 17 have been installed, of which 15 are operational.
22. UNISFA continued to operate four helicopters and three fixed -wing aircraft.
Of the missions undertaken during the reporting period, 13 were aerial patrols of the
Abyei Area, 9 were in support of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism and others were reconnaissance missions. The mission continued to
share the costs of one of its aircraft with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
received ground-handling support from the contracted services providers of
MONUSCO and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) in Entebbe, Uganda, and Khartoum, respectively. During the reporting
period, the mission completed the rotation of 2,105 troops (1,062 inbound and 1,043
outbound) and the transportation of 116,063 kg of goods (41,935 kg inbound and
74,128 kg outbound) through the Kadugli airport, as the mission remained
unauthorized by the Government of the Sudan to use the 90 per cent completed
airstrip in Athony, which continued to put a considerable strain on its air assets.
Similarly, 115,026 kg (41,230 kg inbound and 73,796 kg outbound) of goods were
transported by road through Kadugli.
Humanitarian situation
23. Limited or absent basic services, displacements from South Sudan and
returnees to the area who had left at the onset of the Abyei crisis resulted in
continued significant humanitarian needs in the Abyei Area. United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and non-governmental organizations continued to
provide humanitarian and recovery assistance to 163,000 vulnerable people. These
included persons displaced from neighbouring areas in South Sudan and seasonal
Misseriya nomads. Since my previous report, an estimated 7,500 people displaced
by conflict in South Sudan have transited through Abyei to reach destinations in the
Sudan. In addition, there were reports of new arrivals from South Sudan who had
recently settled in Abyei; exact numbers remained unverified owing to impassable
roads during the ongoing rainy season.
24. Despite the logistical challenges, 99 per cent of the food assistance
requirement for the rainy season was stored in advance in seven warehouses in
central and southern parts of Abyei, through South Sudan. Some 100,000 vulnerable
people benefited from activities relating to food assistance, mainly food for assets,
food for education and general food distribution for those displaced from South
Sudan. Food support continued to be provided to the 27 primary schools in the
central and southern parts of the Abyei Area, including Abyei town, reaching 21,700
schoolchildren.
25. The 13 health facilities throughout the Abyei Area remained operational with
support from the humanitarian community. In addition, awareness-raising and
capacity-building activities were conducted, including on-the-job training for
clinical staff, training of elementary health-service personnel and the holding of
health awareness sessions. A targeted supplementary feeding programme continued
to cover 4,300 children aged under 5 years and pregnant and lactating women. In
July, the health cluster conducted a “mop-up” vaccination campaign in three
villages north of the River Kiir/Bahr al-Arab. Assistance efforts to provide a safe
water supply benefited some 16,000 people. Other major activities during the
reporting period included the drilling of four new boreholes, the rehabilitation of
eight hand pumps, the construction of 10 school hand -washing facilities and the
distribution of water supply containers and hygiene kits to 300 families in the sites
established for displaced persons. In the northern Abyei Area, ensuring a safe water

6/13

17-17922

S/2017/870

supply remained a challenge as the water table is considerably low and the
communities are scattered.
26. Early recovery and transition activities within the reporting period included
the construction of a community hall in Abyei town, and the rehabilitation of the
Abyei Referral Hospital, Abyei Women’s Centre and Abyei Youth Cen tre had
commenced. In addition, more than 200 young people and women were targeted
through livelihood ventures, including vegetable production and the promotion of
small businesses. As a result of an outbreak of suspected blackleg in Ameth -bek
cattle camp, over 30,000 livestock were vaccinated to prevent the spread of diseases
as livestock are moved to and from neighbouring areas into the Abyei Area for
grazing and to be traded at Amiet market.
27. As a result of the weak local protection institutions and mechanisms within the
Abyei Area, women and children continued to be exposed to the risk of violence,
exploitation and abuse in some areas. Pursuant to paragraph 29 of Security Council
resolution 2352 (2017), UNISFA has completed the recruitment of a Women and
Child Protection Adviser. At the time of finalizing the present report, a visa
application for the selected candidate had been submitted to the Government of the
Sudan on 23 August and was pending approval.

III. Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
28. In December 2010, the parties had agreed to establish a joint political and
security mechanism to facilitate coordination between the security forces of the
Sudan and South Sudan in implementing the arrangements of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, particularly on their common border. The agreement of 30 July
2011 established a border monitoring and verification mission, which was made
operational as the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism through the
agreement on security arrangements of 27 September 2012. Nearly six years later,
the Mechanism remains at its initial operating capability, with only two of the four
sector headquarters in operation. Despite the lack of progress, the two countries and
the African Union view the Mechanism as essential for border security and for
facilitating the demarcation of the border. In that connection, the Sudan and South
Sudan transmitted a joint letter to the Security Council on 23 Sep tember to request
the continued support of the United Nations for the Mechanism.
Conditions required to achieve full operating capability
29. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2352 (2017), during the reporting
period, UNISFA engaged with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to
make progress in relation to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism. As stipulated in the resolution, continued investment in achieving the
full operating capability of the Mechanism should be based on the conditions
outlined in 2015 (see S/2015/439), namely the resolution of the dispute over the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, the resumption of border demarcation discussions,
the holding of regular meetings of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and
the granting of full freedom of movement for the operations of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. The status of implementation of t hese
conditions is outlined in the paragraphs below.
Dispute concerning the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone
30. During the extraordinary meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, held in Addis Ababa on 14 October 2015, the parties agreed that the
centreline of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone represented only the location of
17-17922

7/13

S/2017/870

the separation line between the armed forces of the two countries and had no
bearing on the definitive and final location of the boundary. With this decision, the
Sudan and South Sudan resolved their dispute over the centreline of the Zone and
provided the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism with a defined
area of operations.
Border demarcation discussions
31. Following the meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism held on
15 May 2017, UNISFA invited the technical team of the African Union Border
Programme to mark on the ground the coordinates of the border crossing corridors.
From 14 to 22 September, the team undertook an initial mission to UNISFA to meet
the parties and prepare the support, identification and marking on the ground of the
border crossing points at Safaha, Sumayh, Tishwin and Abu Qussa. Owing to
inclement weather, prior mine clearance of the area could not be undertaken an d, as
a result, ground reconnaissance and marking were postponed. Furthermore, the
technical representatives of the parties, whose participation is crucial to the
preparation of the ground mission and, in particular, raising the awareness of the
population, did not attend this initial mission.
32. With regard to the discussions on the contested areas of the border, the
documents required for the finalization of a non-binding opinion on the disputed,
and then the claimed, areas of the border are yet to be provided by the parties to the
African Union technical experts for their consideration.
Meetings of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism
33. The Joint Political and Security Mechanism held its last extraordinary meeting
on 14 and 15 May (see S/2017/649), during which the parties committed themselves
to resuming regular meetings at the agreed 45-day intervals. Overall, limited
progress has been made in the implementation of the decisions taken at that
meeting, in particular with regard to the establishment of the ad hoc committee for
the 14 Mile Area. The Sudan postponed the regular meeting of the Mechanism,
which had been scheduled to be held in Juba by the end of June, accusing South
Sudan of supporting rebels involved in a confrontation with the Sudanese Armed
Forces in late May and early June and of having its forces north of the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone. In response, South Sudan accused the Sudan of
harbouring opposition groups on its territory and did not invite the Sudan to Juba
for the meeting of the Mechanism.
34. To prepare for the meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism
scheduled for June 2017, the Joint Security Committee was to implement its
decisions of 30 September 2016. The decisions addressed the alleged presence of
the armed forces in the north and south of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and
the support for armed groups and the expulsion of those groups. However, the
Mechanism did not meet in Juba by mid-June as agreed. The Joint Security
Committee was established through a decision adopted by the Mechanism at its
meeting held in April 2013 to discuss such concerns and resolve such allegations.
However, the Committee has not met or implemented the decisions emanating f rom
the meeting of the Mechanism held in May 2017. Both parties reiterated during the
reporting period that specific action could be taken only following the expected
meeting between the President of the Sudan and the President of South Sudan, for
which a date is yet to be announced.

8/13

17-17922

S/2017/870

Freedom of movement
35. Considerable progress has been made by the Government of South Sudan to
grant full freedom of movement in relation to the operations of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. The helipad at Gok Machar is now fully
functional and expedited approval procedures to provide clearance for aerial patrols
conducted by the Mechanism have been implemented. Of 18 planned aerial patrols
within the reporting period, only 4 were cancelled, represen ting a cancellation rate
of 22 per cent. The cancellations resulted from inclement weather (on two
occasions), technical difficulties and the unavailability of air assets (on one
occasion each). Compared with the average rate of 56 per cent, this was the l owest
cancellation rate recorded since the Mechanism began operations in 2013.
Operational progress towards full operating capability
36. To advance the implementation of the decisions adopted at the most recent
meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, held in May, UNISFA
proposed plans to the parties to establish four temporary observation sites in the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, at Safaha, Sumayh, Tishwin and Abu Qussa, in the
vicinity of 4 of the 10 agreed border crossing corridors. The presence of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism at these sites would serve as a
confidence-building measure towards marking border crossing points and
subsequently establishing immigration posts with a view to normalizing relat ions
between the two countries at agreed locations.
37. On 24 August, UNISFA sought clearance on the plans and the reconnaissance
routes from both parties. In a positive move, both parties agreed to participate in a
mission to mark the four temporary observation sites. Representatives of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism from Juba and Khartoum, together
with their national monitors based at the Sector headquarters in Kadugli, arrived in
Abyei on 14 September to begin joint reconnaissance missions with UNISFA with a
view to identifying the four temporary observation sites. The joint team consisted of
representatives of the Mechanism, national monitors, the technical team of the
African Union Border Programme and UNISFA, including the Mine Action Service.
38. According to the plan developed by UNISFA, the joint team would move to
each location by helicopter, while a ground team with the Mine Action Service
would carry out exploratory operations in mine -resistant, ambush-protected vehicles
to ensure that the landing site was free from any explosive ordnance. Upon review,
the joint team established that, owing to the rainy season, the roads would be
impassable for the heavy vehicles. Consequently, the joint team decided to initiate
aerial reconnaissance missions as an alternative. It was noted that further security
clearances were required for the Abu Qussa location, with a new flight plan required
to account for refuelling at Bentiu, South Sudan, for the return journey.
39. On 16 September, initial aerial reconnaissance missions were conducted by
UNISFA aircrews for the sites at Safaha, Sumayh and Tishwin, with the joint teams
to join in once the aircrews were familiar with the routes and locations. The
following day, the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) informed UNISFA at
the sector headquarters of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
in Gok Machar, South Sudan, that SPLA troops in the Sumayh area had been
unaware of the aerial reconnaissance mission and had requested per mission to shoot
down the helicopter. UNISFA requested the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of South Sudan to investigate the incident, as approval of
the plan and clearance for the route had been provided in advance. On
29 September, the SPLA Chief of Defence Forces responded by stating that there

17-17922

9/13

S/2017/870

were communication problems with the commander based in the Gok Machar area
and that he had been called to Juba to explain his actions.
40. On 20 September, the joint team conducted aerial reconnaissance of Safaha,
Sumayh and Tishwin, but further clearances for Abu Qussa could not be obtained
within the time constraints. Joint ground reconnaissance missions for all four
locations will be conducted in the forthcoming dry season.
41. In a further show of commitment to making tangible progress towards
achieving the full operational capability of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism, the Government of South Sudan approved and facilitated a
reconnaissance mission, from 14 to 17 August, to determine the site of the fourth
Mechanism sector headquarters at either Malakal or Renk. The team recommended
Renk as the more suitable site, although a preliminary request for the identification
of suitable land at both locations has been sub mitted to the Government. Acquisition
will proceed only after a decision is taken by the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism at its next meeting.
Operations
42. During a routine aerial reconnaissance, on 20 September, an unknown camp
was observed in the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone along the route AM -122 within
the 14 Mile Area. An unknown military presence was also observed in the vicinity
of the three temporary observation sites at Safaha, Sumayh and Tishwin during the
joint aerial reconnaissance missions undertaken on the same day. UNISFA is
verifying these reports and conducted preliminary aerial verification patrols over
Tishwin on 2 October and in the 14 Mile Area on 4 October, which were
inconclusive. In this regard, the mission plans to cond uct further aerial patrols with
upgraded optical systems along the border crossing corridors and in the vicinity of
the three temporary observation sites to further verify any military presence in the
Zone. These will be followed by ground patrols to confi rm or disprove any military
deployment in the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone by either party. If the presence of
armed forces is confirmed at any of these locations, it would raise concerns
regarding the claims by the parties that they have withdrawn their troops from the
Zone and would reinforce the importance of continuous monitoring of the border.
43. Lastly, in line with the recommendation of the strategic review of 5 April
2017, UNISFA will conduct an assessment with technical experts from New York
from 10 to 17 October to determine a possible cost-neutral upgrade option to
improve visibility during aerial patrols. In the interim, UNISFA has procured a high resolution camera that can be used immediately without any modifications to the
aircraft. In addition, the mission has procured satellite imagery, in particular high resolution images to cover areas of high interest in the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone.

IV. Financial aspects
44. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/298, appropriated the amount of
$266.7 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2017 to
30 June 2018. As at 20 September, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special
Account for UNISFA amounted to $70.0 million. Total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$4,095.5 million. Troop costs have been reimbursed for the period up to 30 June,
while the costs of contingent-owned equipment have been reimbursed for the period
up to 31 March, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

10/13

17-17922

S/2017/870

V. Observations and recommendations
45. UNISFA has clearly had a stabilizing role in Abyei and along the border region
between the Sudan and South Sudan. No major confrontation has taken place
between the forces of the two countries in the Abyei Area or the border area since
2011 and 2012, respectively. I commend the mission for its proactive posture and
for supporting mediation and political engagement activities, which attest to the
mission’s commitment to peace, stability and the well-being of the people of Abyei
and the border area.
46. The Force was set up to create a secure environment to enable the Sudan and
South Sudan to settle their disputes at the negotiating table. UNISFA has played the
role expected of it and Abyei has now become an area of refuge for displaced
persons from South Sudan and a vibrant trade hub between the Sudan and South
Sudan that serves as a testament to the strong bonds between the two peoples and
the benefits of strong neighbourly relations.
47. The resilience of the local population is evident, with traditional leaders
weighing in against spoilers. Cooperation and efforts to preserve the peace are most
apparent in the Amiet common market, which remains the most visible symbol of
the commitment of the two communities to peace and reconciliation. In this regard,
I urge the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to consolidate the gains
achieved by UNISFA at the local level by engaging actively in discussions to
resolve the deadlock over establishing the Abyei Area Administration and Council
and constitute the Abyei Police Service in order to address the pressing security and
humanitarian concerns facing the people of Abyei.
48. While work continues with both parties to set up interim arrangements that
would improve the lives of the people, efforts must also be directed at furthering the
discussion on the final status of the territory. In that regard, I intend to approach the
African Union to request an update on the status of the process. In my letter of
13 September addressed to the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Moussa Faki Mahamat, I sought support to advance the political resolution of the
Abyei issue and prevent it from becoming a frozen conflict. Account is taken, of
course, of the difficult internal circumstances facing the two countries and, in
particular, of the intensifying crisis that has persisted in South Sudan since 2013,
which has had a significant impact on the ability of the Government to further
decision-making, including on the Abyei question. Nevertheless, five years after the
signing of the cooperation agreements of 27 September 2012 and the proposal put
forward by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel on 21 September
2012, the two countries must take advantage of the established mechanisms to solve
outstanding issues and implement decisions. This is essential to further good
neighbourly relations and avoid a relapse into conflict. I encourage th e
Governments to build on the progress made in other areas, notably regarding the
implementation of the Agreement on Oil and Related Economic Matters, and to take
the measures necessary to implement their pending bilateral agreements.
49. Earlier in the year, the two Governments made strides towards revitalizing
their political dialogue, with a view to implementing their agreements on security
arrangements, by convening an extraordinary meeting of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism in May. However, I am concerned that no further progress has
subsequently been made. I am encouraged by the parties’ participation in the
reconnaissance missions to establish the four temporary observation sites in the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone, which represents a confidence-building measure that
allows both parties to come together to mark the border crossing points.

17-17922

11/13

S/2017/870

50. I thank the two Ministers for Foreign Affairs for their joint letter dated
23 September, in which they stressed their commitment to the agreements an d
requested continued support from the international community. Much is expected of
the meeting envisaged between the President of the Sudan and the President of
South Sudan, and I urge them to work together to unlock the status quo, both by
discussing a way forward on Abyei and by moving forward on the agreed security
agenda. Failing that, I call upon the African Union High -level Implementation Panel
to convene an extraordinary session of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism.
In the same vein, I call upon the Peace and Security Council of the African Union to
do its utmost to encourage the two Governments to collaborate constructively in
resolving their problems.
51. As stressed by the Security Council during its previous consultations on
UNISFA, the primary responsibility rests with the Sudan and South Sudan to
demonstrate progress in implementing the provisions of their agreements on
security arrangements of 2012 in order to address outstanding issues on their
common border. I strongly reiterate the point that the situation will remain in limbo
until the parties act responsibly to perform their international legal duties under the
agreements, regardless of the resources channelled into maintaining relative
stability in Abyei. In that connection, I call upon the Security Council to redouble
its efforts to compel the parties to discharge their obligations. To that end, the
Organization must work in tandem with the African Union, the Special Envoy and
other partners.
52. In considering the future of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, while bearing in mind the mutually reinforcing roles of the Mechanism
and UNISFA, the Security Council must maintain its emphasis on the primary
responsibility of the parties. At the same time, I urge the Council to give due
consideration to the imperative to preserve the achievements of relative stability
realized through the work of UNISFA, both towards maintaining peace and stability
in the Abyei Area and preventing confrontations along the border betwee n the Sudan
and South Sudan. These achievements should be protected to contain the real risk of
relapse into international armed conflict. I therefore recommend the extension of the
mandate of UNISFA for another six months with the expectation that both
Governments will make progress towards fulfilling the commitments that they have
defined for themselves in their agreements.
53. In conclusion, I extend my sincere gratitude and appreciation to the acting
Head of Mission and Force Commander, Major General Tesfay Gidey Hailemichael,
and to UNISFA personnel for their efforts to maintain peace and stability in the
Abyei Area, under challenging conditions. I also commend my Special Envoy,
Nicholas Haysom, as well as the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
the African Union Commission, the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union and the Government of Ethiopia, for remaining engaged with the two
Governments in support of the stabilization of the Abyei Area.

12/13

17-17922

S/2017/870

17-17922

13/13
