84

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Having examined the report of the review mission to
Lesotho transmitted by a note by the SecretaryGeneral' dated 9 November 1977, 44 sent in compliance
with Economic and Social Council resolution 2096
(LXIII) of 29 July 1977 to review the over-all economic situation of Lesotho,
1. Endorses the assessments and recommendations
contained in the notes by the Secretary-General dated
30 March and 9 November 1977;
2. Draws the attention of the international community to the identification in these reports of continuing and urgent requirements for assistance beyond
that received to date;
3. Further draws the attention of the international
community to the special account which was established at United Nations Headquarters by the SecretaryGe,neral in compliance with Security Council resolution
407 ( 1977) to receive contributions for assistance to
Lesotho;
4. Expresses satisfaction with the measures already
taken by the Secretary-General to organize an effective
programme of assistance to Lesotho;
5. Notes with appreciation the assistance so far
provided to Lesotho by the international community;45
6. Calls upon all Member States and regional and
interregional organizations to continue to respond to
the appeals of the Security Council and the General
Assembly for urgent and generous assistance to Lesotho;
7. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to strengthen further his humanitarian
assistance programmes on behalf of refugees in Lesotho
and urges the international community to provide him
speedily with the necessary means to carry out these
programmes;
8. Requests the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system-in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
International Fund for Agricultural Development, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the International Labour Organisation, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees-to continue their
assistance to Lesotho in carrying out its planned development projects without interruption and to co-operate
closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an
effective international programme of assistance;
9. Further requests the appropriate organizations
and programmes of the United Nations system to
report regularly to the Secretary-General on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made
available to assist Lesotho;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the resources
necessary for an effective programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to Lesotho;
44 A/32/323-S/12438. For the printed text, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1977,
45 A/32/323-S/ 12438, appendix I. For the printed text,
see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for October, No,•cmher and December 1977.

(b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the mobilization
of resources and to co-ordinate the international programme of assistance to Lesotho;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Lesotho in time for the matter to be considered
by the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fifth
session;
(d) To keep the situation in Lesotho under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States,
regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the
specialized agencies and international financial institutions, and to report on the question to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session.
101 st plenary meeting
13 December 1977

32/99.

Assistanl'e to Cape Verrle

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 17 of 24 November 1976
relating to assistance to Cape Verde, in which it
requested the Secretary-General to mobilize the financial, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular the developed countries
and the appropriate organizations of the United Nations
system, with a view to meeting the short-term and
long-term development needs of this newly independent
country,
Recalling its resolution 31/156 of 21 December
197 6, in which it urged all Governments to lend their
support, in the context of their assistance programmes,
for the implementation of the specific action envisaged
in favour of developing island countries,
Recalling its resolutions 3054 (XXVIII) of 17 October 1973 and 3512 (XXX) of 15 December 1975
concerning the economic and social situation in the
Sudano-Sahelian region and measures to be taken for
the benefit of that region,
Recalling further that Cape Verde is a member of
the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought
Control in the Sahel,
Noting Economic and Social Council decision 252
(LXIII) of 29 July 1977, in which the Council, inter
alia, took note of the view of the Committee for Development Planning 46 concerning the inclusion of Cape
Verde in the list of the least developed countries, 47
Noting with concern the grave economic situation
existing in Cape Verde as a result of nine successive
years of drought, of the total lack of development infrastructure and of the grave effects of the international
,'conomic situation on its entire economy,
Expressing its appreciation for the assistance provided by various States and organizations, including
both food aid and development aid,
Noting, however, that, despite the appeal by the
Secretary-~eneral for _development aid to enable Cape
Verde to implement rts development programme, the
international response has fallen short of the requirements of the situation,
46
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/5939 and Corr.I):
paras. 82 and 8~.
47 See resolulin,1s 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting further the efforts made for the benefit of
the Sahel by the Office for Sahelian Relief Operations
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and by the United Nations Sahelian Office,
Recognizing the need for active measures to stimulate
new economic activities,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
of 21 September 19 77, 48
1. Urges Member States and the relevant international institutions-in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme and the World Health Organization-to
continue to provide effective and continuous assistance
to the Government of Cape Verde so that it may deal
effectively with the catastrophic situation resulting from
the drought, and to ensure the supply of food, medical
and other products to that country;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to send a special
mission to Cape Verde with a view to determining, in
consultation with the Government, the nature and
extent of the development aid needed in order:
(a) To expand and strengthen the economic and
social base of the country;
(b) To initiate an accelerated development programme;
3. Decides to include Cape Verde in the list of the
least developed countries;
4. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary resources for an effective programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to Cape Verde;
(b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of
resources and to co-ordinate the international programme of assistance to Cape Verde;
(c) To keep the situation in Cape Verde under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions, and to report on the question to
the General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
101 st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32/100.

Assistance to Guinea-Bissau

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the serious economic situation
in Guinea-Bissau as a result of more than eleven years
of a war of national liberation, the return of large
numbers of refugees and the total lack of infrastructure
for development,
Recalling that Guinea-Bissau is included in the list
of the most seriously affected countries, 4 n
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on
48 A/32/219.

49 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/31/21), annex IV.

85

the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations svstem to extend assistance to the newly independent ,1nd
emerging States,
Recu!ling recommendation 99 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Devclopment/'0 particularly paragraph 4 thereof, in which
the Conference recommended that measures of assistance should be undertaken by the appropriate org~1!S
of the United Nations system in favour of the n~wly
independent States in Africa,
Recalling further its resolution 3339 (XXIX) of 17
December l 974, in which it invited Member States,
particularly the developed countries, to provide economic assistance to the newly independent State of
Guinea-Bissau,
l. Urgently appeals to Member States and the international institutions concerned-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the international financial institutions, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the World Food Programmeto assist the Government of Guinea-Bissau in an effective and continuous manner so as to enable it to deal
effectively with the difficult situation resulting from the
long liberation struggle and the return of large numbers
of refugees from neighbouring countries, and to meet
its economic development needs;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financial, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular the developed
countries and the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, with a view to meeting the
short-term and long-term development needs of this
newly independent country;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning at its fourteenth session, as a matter of priority, to
give favourable consideration to the question of the
inclusion of Guinea-Bissau in the list of the least developed countries 51 and to submit its conclusions to
t~e Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fifth sess10n;
. 4. Invites in the meantime Member States, particularly the developed countries, and the organizations
of the United Nations system to grant Guinea-Bissau
the same benefits as those enjoyed by the least developed among the developing countries in the light of
prevailing conditions in Guinea-Bissau;
5. Requests _the Secretary-General to keep this
matter under review and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
I O1 sf plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32il01.

Assistance to Seychelles

The General Assembly,

Having heard the statement of the representative of
Seychelles 52 concerning the serious economic and social
00
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference 011
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (U111ted Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IT.D:10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
~ 1 See ~esolutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).
" 2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-secontl.
Session. Second Committee, 41st meeting, paras. 27-31.
