General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session
194
----------------------=---

tion of Human Rights,44 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights45 and the Interna­
tional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,45 with spe­
cial regard for the right to education and to work,
Aware of the fact that insufficient education and the
unemployment of young people limit their ability to parti­
cipate in the development process, and, in this regard,
emphasizing the importance of secondary and higher edu­
cation for young people, as well as access for them to
appropriate technical and vocational guidance and training
programmes,
Expressing its serious interest in the success of the forth­
coming International Youth Year which should, inter alia,
promote increasing participation of young people in the
socio-economic life of their country,
1. Calls upon all States, all governmental and non-gov­
ernmental organizations and the interested bodies of the
United Nations and specialized agencies to pay continuous
attention to the implementation of General Assembly res­
olutions 36/29, 37/49 and 38/23 relating to efforts and
measures aimed at the promotion of human rights and
their enjoyment by youth, particularly the right to educa­
tion and vocational training and to work, with a view to
resolving the problem of unemployment among youth;
2. Requests the Advisory Committee for the Interna­
tional Youth Year to pay, in its activities, full attention to
resolutions 36/29, 37/49 and 38/23 and to all relevant
international human rights instruments, particularly in
elaborating guidelines for further planning and suitable
follow-up in the field of youth;
3. Invites national co-ordinating committees or other
organs of co-ordination for the International Youth Year:
Participation, Development, Peace to give appropriate pri­
ority in the activities to be undertaken during the Year to
the implementation and the enjoyment by youth of human
rights, particularly the right to education and to work;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to pay adequate
attention, in his report surveying the implementation of
the Specific Programme of Measures and Activities to be
undertaken prior to and during the International Youth
Year, 46 to the enjoyment by youth of human rights, partic­
ularly to the right to education and to work.
71st plenary meeting
23 November I 984

39/24. Channels of communication between the
United Nations and youth and youth
organizations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/135 of 16 December 1977
and 36/17 of 9 November 1981, in which it adopted
guidelines for the improvement of the channels of commu­
nication between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations, and also recalling its resolution 38/26 of 22
November 1983,
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of effec­
tive channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations for the proper
information of young people and their effective participa­
tion in the work of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies at the national, regional and international levels.
44 Resolution 21 7 A (lll).
45 See resolution 2200 A (XXI). annex.
46 N36/2 I 5, annex, sect. IV. dension I (I)

raking note of the report of the Secretary-General
relating to youth.4 •
Also taking note of the report of the Expert Group meet­
ing on channels of communication. held at Vienna from 9
to 13 January 1984,
Further taking note of the report of the Advisory Com­
mittee for the International Youth Year on its third ses­
sion,43 specifically of the paragraphs dealing with the chan­
nels of communication,
Taking note of resolution 22 on youth adopted on
25 November 1983 by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural
Organization, 48
Convinced that effective and proper functioning of chan­
nels of communication between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations forms a basic prerequisite
for active involvement of young people in the work of the
l lnited Nations,
Equally convin.:ed that the effective participation of
youth representatives from the Member States in interna­
tional congresses dealing with youth issues will enhance
and strengthen the current and future channels of commu­
nication and will help in understanding the problems
facing youth in our contemporary world,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
detailed. structured and evaluative report on the imple­
mentation of the guidelines and additional guidelines for
the improvement of the channels of communication,
which would serve as a background paper at the fourth ses­
sion of the Advisory Committee for the International
Youth Year, and to submit that report to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
2. Calls upon Member States, United Nations bodies,
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organi­
zations to implement fully the guidelines relating to the
channels of communication not only in their general
terms. but also in concrete projects dealing with issues of
importance to young people:
3. Calls upon the national co-ordinating committees of
the International Youth Year and other similar structures
to assist national youth organizations, upon their request,
in carrying out their role as channels of communication
between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations:
4. Stresses the necessity of making use, within the
framework of the channels of communication, of mecha­
nisms which have been set up by youth and youth organi­
zations themselves at the national, regional and interna­
tional levels:
5. Decides to take up at its fortieth session the question
of the channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations on the basis of
the next report of the Advisory Committee for the Interna­
tional Youth Year
71st plenary meeting
23 November I 984

39125. Question of aging
The General Assembly.
Reaffirming its resolution 38/27 of 22 November 1983.
rn which it called upon Governments to make efforts to
implement the principles and recommendations contained
47E;I984i40 and Corr.I
48 United Nattons Fducat,onal. Sornt1fic and Cultural Organization.
R,n1rds o(the (iencra (',inf(·n-nn'. Tw,,nti·-sccond S(•ssion. vol I. R,,so/u
,',',)/'Vi, p

100

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committt>e

195

in the International Plan of Action on Aging49 in accord­
ance with their economic, social and cultural systems and
social values and changes, taking into account the circum­
stances of each country,
Reaffirming its resolution 37 /5 l of 3 December 1982, in
which it requested the Secretary-General to continue to
use the United Nations Trust Fund for Aging 50 so as to
assist countries, in particular developing countries and
least developed countries, in formulating and implement­
ing policies and programmes for aging in order to meet the
rapidly increasing needs of older persons,
Recognizing the role played by the United Nations and
the specialized agencies through their efforts in the field of
aging and the need to strengthen this role, especially at the
regional level, in order to ensure the implementation of the
Plan of Action and the systematic and efficient functioning
of the technical advisory and co-ordination services of the
United Nations,
Recalling recommendation 58 of the recommendations
for the further implementation of the World Population
Plan of Action,51 adopted at the International Conference
on Population, 1984, which urged Governments to make
further efforts to analyse the issue of aging, particularly its
implications for overall development, social services,
medical care and other related fields,
Recorifirming that aging is a population issue which
affects development and is affected by it,
Recognizing the increasing awareness in many countries
of issues related to aging and of the need to provide
national authorities, at their request, with technical and
financial assistance in their efforts to implement policies
and programmes,
Stressing the importance of the activities of the United
Nations Trust Fund for Aging towards the realization of
the goals and objectives of the Plan of Action,
Acknowledging that aging is an interdisciplinary issue
and that the United Nations and the specialized agencies
must ensure a well co-ordinated international response to
this question,
Confident that the first review of the Plan of Action, to
be undertaken by the Commission for Social Development
at its twenty-ninth session in 1985, will be of considerable
value in view of further measures with regard to the ques­
tion of aging,
Noting with satisfaction that the question of older
women will be considered at the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, to be held at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985,
Noting that the Plan of Action recognizes the relation­
ship between aging and youth, particularly as it relates to
intergenerational matters,
Appreciating the role of non-governmental organizations
in promoting international awareness of and action on the
issues of aging,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the question of aging; 52
2. Calls upon Governments to consider the changing
age structure of the population in their plans for economic
and social development;
3. Invites Governments to retain or establish appropri­
ate mechanisms at the national level to promote an effec-

tive and co-ordinated response to the implementation of
the principles and the recommendations contained in the
International Plan of Action on Aging;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts for the implementation of the Plan of Action at the
national, regional and international levels and to continue
to promote the United Nations Trust Fund for Aging so as
to assist countries in formulating and implementing poli­
cies and programmes for aging;
5. Invites Governments to continue, and increase
when possible, their contributions to the Trust Fund and
calls upon Governments that have not yet done so to con­
sider contributing to the Fund;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to pro­
mote the exchange of information and experience in order
to stimulate progress in the field of aging, to encourage the
adoption of measures to respond to the economic and
social implications of aging and to meet the needs of older
persons;
7. Urges the Secretary-General to include advisory
services to developing countries that request them in tech­
nical co-operation programmes, to the extent feasible
under the funding of those programmes;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
promote, in co-operation with the national committees
concerned, joint activities in the field of aging and youth,
particularly as they relate to intergenerational matters,
especially during the International Youth Year, to be
observed in 1985;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure a
well co-ordinated system-wide response in implementing
the provisions of the Plan of Action;
10. Urges the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, in co-operation with all organizations respon­
sible for international population assistance, to continue
its assistance, within its mandate, in the field of aging, par­
ticularly in developing countries;
11. Invites the regional commissions and specialized
agencies to continue contributing to the realization of the
objectives of the Plan of Action;
12. Invites the non-governmental organizations con­
cerned to join in the co-operative effort to implement the
Plan of Action and accomplish its objectives;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the measures
taken to implement the present resolution, taking into con­
sideration the first review of the Plan of Action to be
undertaken by the Commission for Social Development at
its twenty-ninth session in 1985;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Question of aging".
71st plenary meeting
23 November 1984

49 See Report on the World Assembly on Aging, Vienna, 26 July-6 August

51 See Report of the lnternatwna/ Conference on Population. /984, Mexico
City. 6-14 August /984 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.XIIl.8

198:Z (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.1.16), chap. VI, sect. A.

SO Previously known as the United Nations Trust Fund for the World
Assembly on Aging.

39/26. United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons
The General Assemblv.
Recalling its resolutions 37/52 of 3 December 1982, by
which it adopted the World Programme of Action con­
cerning Disabled Persons, 53 and 37/53 of 3 December
1982 by which, inter alia, it proclaimed the period 1983and corrigenda). chap. I, sect H
52 A/39/14 7.
53 A/37 • 3511 Add. I and Add I •Corr. I. annex. sect. VIII, recommenda110n
I (IV)
