United Nations

S/PV.9275

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9275th meeting
Monday, 6 March 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Afonso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Parga Cintra
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Hamamoto
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Shevchenko
Mr. Hauri
Ms. AlMatrooshi
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 February 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2023/158)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-06675 (E)
*2306675*

S/PV.9275

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 February 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/158)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/158, which contains the text of a letter
dated 28 February 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Council members for
the opportunity to brief them on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2118 (2013) on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Since the last consideration of this matter by the
Council, and consistent with established practice, the
Office for Disarmament Affairs has been in regular
contact with its counterparts at the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on activities
related to resolution 2118 (2013).
Efforts by the OPCW Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT) to clarify all outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration and subsequent declarations of
the Syrian Arab Republic have not progressed since
the Council last met on this matter (see S/PV.9255).
Unfortunately, all efforts by the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to organize the next round of consultations
between the DAT and the Syrian National Authority
continue to be unsuccessful.
2/12

06/03/2023

As Council members were previously informed, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat has provided the Syrian
Arab Republic with the list of pending declarations
and other documents requested by the DAT since 2019
that could assist in resolving the current 20 outstanding
issues. However, I have been advised that the OPCW
Technical Secretariat has not yet received any such
pending declarations or other documents from the Syrian
Arab Republic. This includes the complete declaration of
activities at the Scientific Studies and Research Centre
(SSRC) and the declaration of quantities of nerve agents
produced at one chemical weapons production facility
that was declared by the Syrian Arab Republic as never
having been used to produce chemical weapons.
Owing to this situation, and in a further attempt to
implement the mandate, a reduced team comprised of
some members of the DAT deployed to conduct limited
in-country activities in the Syrian Arab Republic from
17 to 22 January 2023. It is my understanding that these
activities did not involve any technical consultations
with the Syrian National Authority. The outcome of that
mission will be included in the next report of the DAT.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat remains fully
committed to verifying the full implementation by the
Syrian Arab Republic of all its declaration requirements
and to assisting Syria in fulfilling its obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention, decisions by OPCW
policy-making organs and Security Council resolution
2118 (2013).
However, as has been previously emphasized,
full cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to closing all
outstanding issues. Considering the identified gaps,
inconsistencies and discrepancies that remain unresolved,
at this time the OPCW Technical Secretariat assesses that
the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic
still cannot be considered accurate and complete in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
With regard to the inspections of the Barzah and
Jamrayah facilities of the SSRC, I have been advised that
the OPCW Technical Secretariat continues to plan the
next round of inspections, to be held in 2023.
I regret to inform the Council that the Syrian
Arab Republic has yet to provide sufficient technical
information or explanations that would enable the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to close the issue related
to the detection of a Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah
facilities of the SSRC in November 2018.
23-06675

06/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Regarding the unauthorized movement of the two
cylinders related to the chemical weapons incident that
took place in Douma on 7 April 2018, in which said
cylinders were destroyed in an attack on a chemical
weapons production facility, and although the Syrian Arab
Republic shared with the OPCW Technical Secretariat
on 8 February 2023 pictures from the site at which the
cylinders were reportedly destroyed, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat is still awaiting information related to the
unauthorized movement of those cylinders. I again call
upon the Syrian Arab Republic to respond with urgency
to all of the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s requests.
With regard to the invitation extended by the
OPCW Director-General to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic for
an in-person meeting, I note that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat stands ready to engage further on an agreed
agenda for the meeting through the agreed channel.
It is my understanding that the United Nations
Office for Project Services (UNOPS) continues to
provide support to the OPCW mission in Syria, in
accordance with the Tripartite Agreement concluded
between the OPCW, UNOPS and the Syrian Arab
Republic. The current extension of that agreement
remains in force until and including 30 June 2023.
I have been advised that the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM) continues to study all available
information related to allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. In that context,
I understand that the FFM was deployed to the Syrian
Arab Republic from 6 to 12 November 2022 and is
currently preparing upcoming deployments.
The Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) also
continues its investigations into incidents in which the FFM
has determined that chemical weapons were used or likely
used in the Syrian Arab Republic. On 2 February 2023, the
Director-General of the OPCW and the Coordinator of the
IIT briefed States parties in The Hague on the third report
of the IIT, in which the IIT concluded that the Syrian Arab
Air Force was responsible for the use of chemical weapons
in an incident in Douma on 7 April 2018, killing at least 43
named individuals and affecting dozens of others. Council
members will recall that at the invitation of the President
of the Security Council, the Director-General and the
Coordinator of the IIT also briefed the Security Council
on the report during last month’s meeting, on 7 February.
The IIT will issue further reports in due course.

S/PV.9275

In closing, I would like to reiterate that any use of
chemical weapons is a grave violation of international
law, and it is imperative that those responsible for such
attacks are identified and held accountable. That is not
only what we owe the victims of such attacks, but it
is also critical for international peace and security to
ensure continued respect for the strict norm against
chemical weapons. It is my sincere hope that the
members of the Council will unite on this issue and
show leadership in demonstrating that impunity in the
use of the chemical weapons will not be tolerated. The
Office for Disarmament Affairs stands ready to provide
whatever support and assistance it can.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Last month, we listened carefully to the briefings
by the Director-General of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
the Coordinator of the OPCW Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT) on the IIT’s latest attribution
report on the deadly chemical weapons attack on Douma
in 2018 (see S/PV.9255). The Security Council must
respond to those findings and take steps to ensure the
full implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), as well as
seek accountability for the heinous actions perpetrated
by the Al-Assad regime.
The steps to do so are clear. As we have discussed
repeatedly in the Council, the Syrian regime must
comply with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). It must
credibly account for its chemical weapons and chemical
weapons production facilities and verifiably complete
their destruction.
Month after month, however, and year after year,
the regime has failed to do so. In order to address
these shortfalls, the Al-Assad regime must permit
the return to Syria of the full OPCW Declaration
Assessment Team without delay so that it can resume
the important mission of conducting inspections and
accounting for all the many discrepancies and many
omissions associated with the Syrian chemical weapons
declaration. While we welcome news that a limited
team visited Damascus in January, that deployment fell

23-066753/12

S/PV.9275

The situation in the Middle East

short of Syria’s obligations under resolution 2118 (2013)
to accept personnel designated by the OPCW and to
provide them immediate and unfettered access to any
and all sites.
It is crucial that we seek accountability for the
chemical weapons attacks that the Al-Assad regime
has conducted against its own people. We all heard last
month the unequivocal assessment from the OPCW
that the Syrian Arab Air Force carried out the 2018
chemical weapons attack in Douma, killing dozens of
men, women and children and injuring countless more.
As the report noted, Russia controlled the airspace and
operated from the same base from which the Syrian
Arab Air Force launched the attack. The finding that the
Al-Assad regime carried out the attack, unfortunately,
was not unique. The OPCW and the United Nations
have found that the Syrian regime used chemical
weapons against its people on nine occasions. Such
clear violations of the Chemical Weapons Convention
demand accountability.
The United States has already imposed sanctions
and visa ineligibilities against more than 300
individuals and entities linked to Syria’s chemical
weapons programme. We commend other countries
that have done the same. We call on other countries
to impose similar measures, and we urge countries
to refrain from normalizing relations with the Syrian
regime until there is redress for those and other grave
injustices to the people of Syria.
In that regard, we welcome a recent joint statement
condemning the regime’s use of chemical weapons that
was issued by the International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons, a group of
40 nations committed to combating the use of chemical
weapons anywhere, by anyone.
The United States will continue to support
investigative efforts such as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011 (IIIM), which is building case files on
violations and abuses in Syria, including the use of
chemical weapons, and sharing that information with
prosecutors. The IIIM’s work has already helped lead to
convictions of former regime officials in Europe, and we
look forward to more investigations and prosecutions,
4/12

06/03/2023

possibly even here in the United States, thanks to the
Justice for Victims of War Crimes Act that President
Biden recently signed into law.
Accountability for such heinous acts is the
least we can do for the victims of chemical weapons
attacks. We have said it too many times in the Council,
unfortunately, because we have had to. There must
be no impunity for the use of chemical weapons. The
Security Council cannot abdicate its responsibility. We
must ensure that Syria complies with resolution 2118
(2013), and we call on the Syrian regime to immediately
fulfil its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention. We urge the Council and all its Members
to seek accountability on behalf of the victims of these
horrific chemical weapons attacks. The stakes are
simply too high for all of us to do otherwise.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her briefing, which
once again shows the lack of progress on the issue of
chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Any incident that involves the use of chemical
weapons must be dealt with in a transparent manner and
be subject to thorough and impartial investigations, in
accordance with the convention governing that matter.
We therefore reiterate our insistence that the Syrian
authorities comply with their obligations under that
convention, international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2118 (2013),
2209 (2015) and 2235 (2015), and facilitate and engage
in effective and unimpeded cooperation with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW).
We regret the fact that, despite the efforts made
by the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team since
2019 to clarify all outstanding issues in relation to
Syria, inconsistencies persist, as a result of which the
country’s national declaration still cannot be deemed
accurate and complete. The Syrian Arab Republic
should respond promptly and diligently regarding all
outstanding issues.
I reiterate Ecuador’s support for the OPCW
and its technical and investigative teams, which,
despite countless obstacles, carry out their work in
a professional, independent and impartial manner.
We await the results of the visit by a small group of
members of the Declaration Assessment Team.
23-06675

06/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

The findings of the third report of the OPCW
Investigation and Identification Team, which we
learned about last month (see S/PV.9255), establish
sufficient grounds to point to the Syrian Arab Air Force
as the perpetrator of the chemical attack in the city of
Douma on 7 April 2018. There can be no impunity for
those responsible for such acts.
Finally, I reiterate Ecuador’s categorical condemnation of the production, stockpiling and use of weapons of
mass destruction, including chemical weapons, by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu for her excellent briefing,
as always.
As we discussed last month (see S/PV.9255), the
Douma report is further confirmation of Syria’s disdain
for its obligations under international law. We again
commend the Investigation and Identification Team’s
integrity, impartiality and professionalism in reaching
its conclusions through rigorous scientific methodology.
The Douma report also exposed Russia’s repeated
attempts to discredit and undermine the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
to protect the Al-Assad regime from accountability.
The reprehensible scapegoating of the White Helmets
is aimed at deflecting attention. The White Helmets’
life-saving work has been demonstrated time and again,
including during the recent earthquake response.
It is also worth noting that today marks five years
since two agents from the Russian military intelligence
service carried out a chemical weapons attack in the
United Kingdom, killing a British citizen and injuring
others. It is therefore perhaps not just the Al-Assad
regime that it is attempting to protect.
Douma represents the ninth attributed instance of
the use of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad regime.
Given that consistent pattern of behaviour, and without
progress on any of Syria’s outstanding declaration
issues, we cannot exclude the possibility that the
Al-Assad regime may use chemical weapons again.
As we said many times, the outstanding issues
regarding Syria’s declaration are neither academic nor
historic. While Syria continues to fail to comply with its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention,
its chemical weapons programme presents an ongoing
threat to international peace and security. It is therefore

S/PV.9275

incumbent on the Security Council to continue to
discuss the matter and to continue to bring pressure on
Syria to cooperate with the OPCW.
Mr. Parga Cintra (Brazil): At the outset, I
would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her
briefing today.
I would also like to reiterate Brazil´s solidarity with
the peoples of Syria and Türkiye after the devastating
earthquake that hit both countries last month. The
Brazilian Government announced the donation of water
purifiers and seven tons of nutritious dehydrated foods
to the Government of Syria as part of the efforts to help to
address the immediate needs of the affected populations.
We express our deepest sympathies for their losses.
As we stated at the most recent briefing (see S/PV.
9255), the events described by the most recent report
of the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) are
extremely serious and must be subject to a thorough and
impartial analysis, in accordance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention. While we have concerns about
the process that led to the establishment of the IIT, as
well as questions regarding the challenges that it faced in
the implementation of its mandate, we acknowledge the
gravity of its conclusions. Brazil has given the report due
consideration in view of our unwavering commitment
to the prohibition of the use of chemical weapons.
We condemn the use of any chemical weapons
anywhere, by anyone and under any circumstances. Any
use of such weapons represents a threat to international
peace and security, in direct violation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. Brazil sees the use or threat of
use of any weapon of mass destruction as incompatible
with international humanitarian law.
Given the report’s worrisome conclusions, we
reiterate the need for close cooperation between the
OPCW and the United Nations, especially the Security
Council, recalling that the ultimate responsibility for
attribution rests with this organ, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the Chemical
Weapons Convention itself.
We express the hope that the Syrian authorities and
the OPCW can engage in effective cooperation in order
to clarify the incidents of the use of chemical weapons
and to address the outstanding questions regarding
Syria’s declared chemical arsenal and its destruction.
That cooperation is essential to closing the Syrian
chemical file.

23-066755/12

S/PV.9275

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her briefing.
Switzerland welcomes the fact that some members
of the Declarations Assessment Team were able to visit
Syria from 17 to 22 January. Those members carried
out limited activities, including site visits and logistical
and administrative exchanges with the authorities. We
look forward to their report, which is due to be issued
just before the next session of the Executive Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).
Switzerland hopes that the visit might be the first
step towards Syria’s renewed and full cooperation
with the OPCW. We wish to reaffirm our trust in
the OPCW and all its missions, whose integrity and
professionalism are beyond doubt. Like the 193 States
parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention, Syria
is obliged to accept OPCW-designated personnel and
provide them with immediate and unhindered access
and the right to inspect all sites. That obligation was
explicitly reiterated in resolution 2118 (2013). It has
been almost 10 years since Syria, at the unanimous
behest of the Council, submitted its initial declaration
to the OPCW, as a State party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention. To date, 20 outstanding issues related to
the declaration remain outstanding. We reiterate our
request that Syria provide the required responses to the
OPCW Technical Secretariat pursuant to the decisions
taken by OPCW’s political bodies.
Obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention have been repeatedly violated in Syria. In
presenting the report of the OPCW Identification and
Investigation Team on the April 2018 attack in Douma,
which concluded that there were reasonable grounds to
believe that the perpetrators of the attack were members
of the Syrian Arab Air Force, the Director-General and
IIT Coordinator reminded the Council of that last month
(see S/PV.9255). Our collective security, of which the
Council is the ultimate guarantor, is based on our firm
and categorical opposition to the use and proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, including chemical
weapons. Therefore, Switzerland demands that those
who were responsible for the chemical attacks in Syria
be held accountable for their crimes.
More generally, our collective security depends
on full respect for international law by everyone
and in all situations. We therefore welcome the
6/12

06/03/2023

cooperation between the OPCW and the United Nations
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism,
which is an important step towards the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013) and the application of
international law, encompassing responsibility and
accountability. That includes, in particular, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the norms of
international humanitarian law, the main goal of which
is the preservation of a minimum level of humanity
in armed conflict in order to save lives and alleviate
suffering. In that regard, I would like to reaffirm our
shared goal to prevent the use of chemical weapons by
anyone, at any time and under any circumstances.
Ms. AlMatrooshi (United Arab Emirates)
(spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing today. I would
also like to reiterate the United Arab Emirates’ firm
position of rejecting and explicitly condemning the
use of chemical weapons under any circumstances,
by anyone, anywhere. Their use constitutes a flagrant
violation of the provisions of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and international law.
In the context of our discussion today, I would like
to highlight the following points. First, making tangible
progress in this dossier requires the establishment of
a constructive dialogue between the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
Syria. We emphasize the importance of abiding by the
principles upon which the OPCW was established as
a technical organization, including the principles of
consensus and non-politicization. In that context, we
hope that both sides will hold consultations as soon
as possible, as we do not see any reason that would
prevent them from doing so. We had also hoped that the
report of the OPCW would have included more details
on the visit of the reduced team to Damascus and any
constructive outcomes of that visit. We look forward to
seeing such details reflected in the upcoming report,
which is expected to be issued at the end of this month.
Secondly, it is important to consider the threats
of chemical terrorism, given the acquisition or use of
such weapons by terrorist groups such as the Da’esh
organization. It is unfortunate that the threats posed
by Da’esh to the security and stability of Syria remain
present and grave, as demonstrated by its recent terrorist
attack in the eastern countryside of Homs, which led to
the killing of 53 people.
23-06675

06/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses
the importance of making progress on the chemical
weapons dossier in Syria, as well as on all the dossiers
related to resolving the Syrian crisis.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Let me start by thanking
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The Syrian regime has used chemical weapons nine
times — I repeat, nine times — against its own people,
claiming hundreds of lives, including those of children.
Every one of those nine incidents was independently
verified by the relevant mechanisms of the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The most recent report
of the OPCW’s Investigation and Identification Team
(IIT) concluded that there were reasonable grounds
to believe that on 7 April 2018, the Syrian Air Force
carried out a chemical weapons attack in Douma,
killing 43 people and injuring dozens more. We fully
endorse the findings of the IIT. We must see to it that
the use of chemical weapons does not go unpunished.
Our silence in the face of such abominable crimes could
be mistaken as an incentive for their use. The message
must be clear: impunity for the use of chemical weapons
must not and will not be tolerated.
The 113th report (see S/2023/158) of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat clearly confirms that Syria’s
initial declaration cannot be considered to be accurate
and complete under the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013). Albania has expressed its
concern about the continuing gaps and discrepancies
in Syria’s initial declaration and expects honest
cooperation from Syria on the current 20 outstanding
issues related to it. We deplore the non-cooperative
approach of the Syrian regime with regard to the
OPCW Technical Secretariat, which has been evident
in all OPCW reports since 2021. There is no other
solution than Syria’s full and effective cooperation with
the OPCW, in accordance with the Chemical Weapons
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013).
We commend the OPCW’s ability to respond to
allegations of chemical weapons use in Syria, including
through the work of the Fact-Finding Mission and the
Investigation and Identification Team, and we take note
with satisfaction of the OPCW’s constant efforts to
engage with Syria, including at the ministerial level. In
that framework, we look forward to the meeting to be
held between the Director-General of the OPCW and
the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates.

S/PV.9275

We also look forward to the findings of the visit to
Syria from 17 to 22 January of the reduced Declaration
Assessment Team, which was sent to carry out limited
activities. We await with equal interest the results of the
ninth round of inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah
facilities, which was conducted in September 2022.
In conclusion, Albania reaffirms its confidence in
the OPCW Technical Secretariat and its professionalism,
independence, impartiality and recognized technical
expertise. We defend the OPCW Technical Secretariat
against the deliberate and baseless attacks on its
integrity and credibility. We must have full confidence
in OPCW and United Nations mechanisms, and the
Security Council must show unity in defending its
personnel against baseless attacks and attempts to
politicize their work.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for yet another insightful briefing.
Last month, the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the Coordinator of its Investigation and
Identification Team briefed us on the third report
of the Team, which concluded in disturbing detail
that there were reasonable grounds to believe that
the Syrian Arab Air Force was responsible for the
chemical weapons attack in Douma that killed 43
people and injured dozens more. That represents the
ninth occasion so far that the OPCW and joint United
Nations-OPCW investigations have concluded that
Syria has used chemical weapons against its own
people. Such acts are a violation of international law
and are completely unacceptable.
Malta has full confidence that the report was drafted
in accordance with the best practices of international
fact-finding bodies and commissions of investigation,
as well as the applicable OPCW procedures. We fully
support the independent, unbiased and expert work
of the OPCW and its Technical Secretariat, which
play a vital role in the global prohibition on chemical
weapons and in ensuring the complete elimination of
all chemical weapons in Syria. Any unfounded claims
aimed at undermining its credibility or questioning its
findings must not go unchallenged.
Malta regrets that the Syrian authorities failed to
grant access to the site of the Douma incident despite
Syria’s obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC) and resolution 2118 (2013). That
follows an unfortunate pattern of behaviour by Syria on

23-066757/12

S/PV.9275

The situation in the Middle East

the file. Resolution 2118 (2013) is clear in its decision
that Syria should fully cooperate with the United
Nations and the OPCW. It is regrettable that the Syrian
Arab Republic has not yet provided various pending
declarations and other documents that the Declaration
Assessment Team has been requesting since 2019,
and that the declaration submitted is still considered
inaccurate and incomplete. Malta looks forward to the
publication of the report of the Declaration Assessment
Team in the coming weeks, following the Technical
Secretariat’s initiative to send a reduced Declaration
Assessment Team to Syria to conduct limited in-country
activities. We hope for progress between focal points
so that the meeting proposed between the DirectorGeneral and Foreign Minister Mekdad can finally take
place. We strongly encourage the renewed extension of
the tripartite agreement between the OPCW, the United
Nations Office for Project Services and Syria, which is
due to expire on 30 June this year.
Malta underlines its full support for the
universalization of the global norm on the prohibition
on chemical weapons, underpinned by the Chemical
Weapons Convention. There can be no justification
for the use of those abhorrent weapons. In 2013, the
Council unanimously decided that those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria must be
held accountable. The use of chemical weapons must
not go unpunished. The only way to assure the world
that Syria’s chemical-weapon programme has been
completely and verifiably eliminated is through Syria’s
meaningful cooperation with the OPCW and provision
of the necessary assurances on its programme, in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
The Council must uphold its decisions and the
norm against chemical weapons and hold Syria to its
obligations under resolution 2118 (2013) and the CWC.
Mr. Hamamoto (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu for her briefing.
First of all, Japan would like to express its full
support for the impartial, independent and professional
work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and its Technical
Secretariat. The use of chemical weapons should never
be tolerated anywhere, at any time, by anyone, under
any circumstances. Those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons must be held accountable.
Japan welcomed the third report of the Investigation
and Identification Team (IIT) as a vital contribution
towards uncovering the truth about the Douma incident.
8/12

06/03/2023

The IIT concluded that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that the Syrian Arab Air Force perpetrated the
chemical-weapon attacks. Japan once again condemns
the Syrian Government’s use of chemical weapons as
concluded in the report. While we appreciate the recent
report submitted by the Director-General of the OPCW,
it is regrettable that we have not seen concrete progress
on the file, and the monthly report has once again
confirmed that the declaration submitted by the Syrian
Arab Republic still cannot be considered accurate and
complete. We deplore the lack of progress in organizing
a high-level meeting between the Director-General of
the OPCW and the Syrian Foreign Minister, as well as
the next round of consultations between the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Syrian National Authority.
We welcome the recent visit by members of the
Declaration Assessment Team to Syria as a first step
towards meaningful engagement and consultation, and
look forward to hearing the results of their activities,
including their site visits and one interview. However, a
reduced team without any technical consultations with
the Syrian National Authority can never be considered
sufficient. We would like to reiterate our call on Syria to
guarantee full and unhindered access for OPCW staff.
Furthermore, Japan urges Syria to engage in good faith
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat and to provide
all the documents required to resolve the outstanding
issues related to the initial and subsequent declarations
submitted by Syria.
The Security Council cannot be silent on one simple
fact — Syria is not in compliance with its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution
2118 (2013). No member of the Council can tolerate
any excuses for Syria’s repeated obstructionism. Japan
reaffirms its commitment to continuing to provide
the necessary support to the OPCW and its Technical
Secretariat in their efforts to hold the perpetrators of
the use of chemical weapons accountable and to realize
a world without chemical weapons.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
As we all know, we are here because the Syrian
regime has used weapons of mass destruction against
its own people. Independent investigations by the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) have proved that
it occurred nine times. A few weeks ago the OPCW
published a damning report showing how the Syrian
air force deliberately dropped two barrels of chlorine
23-06675

06/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9275

on residential buildings, resulting in the deaths of 43
people. France again urges the Syrian regime to comply
immediately with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention. The regime must finally shed
light on its stockpiles, because as we know, they have
not all been destroyed.

collaboration on the ongoing investigation and the full
implementation of the chemical weapons elimination
programme. It goes without saying that the involvement
of all parties in good faith will allow for progress on
the file, eliminating any differences that hinder further
progress in the investigations.

We noted the limited deployment of OPCW teams
to Syria last month and await the report that they will
present. Syria has continued to obstruct the OPCW’s
work, in obvious bad faith. The lack of progress is
frustrating, but the blame lies entirely with the Syrian
regime. In that context, I would like to commend the
independent, impartial and professional work of the
OPCW. The Director-General provided a detailed
and compelling briefing last month (see S/PV.9255).
No disinformation campaign will hide the regime’s
guilt. Exposing the truth is essential to holding the
perpetrators of those attacks accountable. There must
be no impunity for war criminals. The fight against
impunity is the foundation of the effectiveness and
credibility of the prohibition regime. France will
continue to work with its partners to that end.

The international community in general and the
Council in particular must continue to be concerned
about the potential re-emergence of, and increase
in, threats of chemical warfare and must take urgent
steps to accelerate action towards a world free of
chemical weapons. As parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention and members of the Organization for the
Prohibition of the Chemical Weapons, the A3 defends
the principle of general and universal disarmament for
all States and advocates greater commitment and the
establishment of more partnerships among States on
matters related to disarmament with a view to achieving
international peace and security. The A3 collectively
stands against the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere and under any circumstances. We remain
committed to the established norms against the use
of chemical weapons and all efforts to eliminate their
production, storage or use. We reiterate our support for
resolution 2118 (2013). To conclude, we urge the early
closure of Syria’s chemical weapons programme as an
important part of our common goal of international
peace and security.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Mozambique.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Council, namely
Gabon, Ghana and my own country, Mozambique.
I thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing on the
status of the implementation of the elimination of the
Syrian chemical weapons programme. I welcome the
participation in this meeting of the representatives of
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Türkiye. We take note of the third report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Investigation and Identification Team, which
was issued on 27 January 2023. In that regard, we
would like to call upon all sides directly involved in the
ongoing investigations to assume their responsibilities
in collaborating with the Investigation and Identification
Team in order to bring to light the common findings
of its work so that, once the allegations are confirmed,
their perpetrators can be held accountable and justice
done for the victims.
However, we welcome the cooperation between
the OPCW and the Syrian National Authority on the
most recent mission of the OPCW’s limited group
of experts, which constitutes a further step towards

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also wish to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Malta, for her leadership of the work of the Council
in February.
Yesterday the world celebrated the first International
Day for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Awareness.
That occasion reminds us of the importance of the
efforts to eliminate weapons of mass destruction, the
use of which constitutes a crime against humanity and
has resulted in the worst tragedies that humankind has
suffered. The most heinous of those incidents was the
dropping by the United States of America of two atomic
bombs on the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan
in 1945, which killed hundreds of thousands of people.

23-066759/12

S/PV.9275

The situation in the Middle East

The International Day also reminds us of the first-ever
use of chemical weapons in the Belgian town of Ypres
during the First World War, which also killed tens of
thousands of people.
On 19 March 2013, the Syrian Arab Republic
witnessed the first use of chemical weapons, when
terrorist groups fired a shell carrying toxic chemicals at
the Khan Al-Assal area in Aleppo governorate, leading
to the killing of 25 martyrs, most of whom were Syrian
Arab Army personnel, and injuring 110 others owing to
asphyxiation and fainting. That incident continues to be
ignored by certain countries. Based on its commitment
to disarmament and non-proliferation, the Syrian Arab
Republic took a strategic and voluntary decision in 2013
to accede to the Chemical Weapons Convention. It was
also one of the first countries to accede to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and is also a
signatory of the Biological Weapons Convention. We
actively contribute to efforts to establish a zone free
from all weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
The Syrian Arab Republic has repeatedly expressed
its categorical condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons by anyone, anytime, anywhere and under any
circumstances. It has cooperated with full transparency
and openness with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and destroyed its entire
chemical stockpile and production facilities in 2014. It
has implemented all its obligations under the conventions
I mentioned.
Syria has continued its constructive cooperation
with the OPCW, as demonstrated in many ways, the most
recent of which include the following. The Syrian National
Authority submitted its 111th report on the activities
conducted on its territory and received the reduced
Declaration Assessment Team, which visited Syria in
January 2023. During that visit, consultations were
held between the two sides and many elements relating
to a number of outstanding issues were discussed. The
Authority facilitated visits to certain sites, the collection
of samples and the holding of interviews with witnesses.
The Syrian National Authority also facilitates semi-annual
visits by inspection teams from the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to the Scientific Studies and Research Centre
facility, of which nine rounds have been conducted
to date. The national focal point is ready to communicate
with its counterpart in the OPCW to prepare for the highlevel meeting between the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates, the Chairman of the Syrian National
Authority and the OPCW Director-General. We look
forward to convening that meeting as soon as possible.
10/12

06/03/2023

The Syrian National Authority recently provided
the OPCW Technical Secretariat with pictures of the
site where the two chlorine cylinders related to the
alleged incident in Douma were destroyed. They were
destroyed as a result of an Israeli aggression on the site
confirmed by official Israeli sources, including Israel’s
Minister of Intelligence. Israel should be condemned
and held accountable for that act, along with all of its
other repeated attacks on Syria’s sovereignty. That is
the job of the Security Council, which is entrusted
with maintaining international peace and security.
Yet the Syrian National Authority’s constructive
and productive cooperation over the years and all
the facilities it has provided to the various teams
of the OPCW have been ignored. The fact that some
countries have launched campaigns questioning Syria’s
initial declaration and falsely accusing it of failing to
implement its commitments has also been ignored, and
in many cases there has been a refusal to point to the
positive results that have been achieved. All of those
are clear indications of the extent to which the issue has
been politicized and the Organization has strayed from
the noble purpose for which it was founded.
The unprofessional reports of the Technical
Secretariat, which are based on information with no
credibility and do not follow the methodology stipulated
in the CWC, have enabled some countries to use the
OPCW as a platform to target Syria. That was clearly
evident in the performative suspension of Syria’s
rights and privileges in the OPCW, which was done
by setting up artificial time frames for unenforceable
requirements, a situation that is without precedent in
the OPCW’s history.
Armed terrorist groups continue to coordinate
with the White Helmets group, the arm of the terrorist
Al-Nusra Front, to stage chemical-weapon incidents
and accuse the Syrian Government of carrying
them out. Information recently emerged that the
terrorist organization Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham has been
coordinating with the White Helmets to transport a
number of plastic barrels containing chlorine among
warehouses in rural Idlib. The fact that some countries
continue to intentionally overlook the serious terrorist
threat posed by terrorist organizations’ possession of
weapons of mass destruction creates serious risks for
all Member States. That must be acknowledged and
condemned, because immediate and serious action is
needed to prevent such weapons from falling into the
hands of terrorists.
23-06675

06/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, it has become clear that the repetition
of these discussions when there have been no actual
developments that would justify them has trapped us
in a vicious circle that is wasting the Council’s time
and resources. The persistent hostile approach of some
countries and their attempts to influence public opinion
and exploit these discussions for political purposes
that are well known will not lead to any progress. The
right way to deal with the issue means abandoning this
mistaken approach and enabling the necessary work
to be conducted without politicization. We call on the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to engage neutrally and in
good faith, and to respect the scientific interpretations
provided by the Syrian National Authority on some
of the issues under discussion. It is time to restore the
technical nature of the OPCW’s tasks and enable it to
do its work with professionalism and impartiality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
congratulate Mozambique on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and I also
commend Malta for its successful conduct of its
presidency in the month of February. We welcome the
presence of Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, at today’s meeting.
As one of the main victims of chemical weapons,
the Islamic Republic of Iran strongly condemns the use
of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under
any circumstances. As with other weapons of mass
destruction, the use of chemical weapons constitutes
a crime against humanity and a flagrant breach of
international law. That is the reason why our people
will never forget how the Western countries supported
the Saddam Hussein regime in its systematic use of
chemical weapons against Iranians.
The Syrian Arab Republic has fulfilled its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
and continues to cooperate with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Moreover,
the Government of Syria regularly submits monthly
reports to the OPCW Director-General, with the most
recent submitted on 17 February, detailing activities on
Syrian territory related to the destruction of chemical
weapons and their production facilities. Between
7 and 22 January it also received a reduced team of the
Declaration Assessment Team. However, we are deeply
concerned about the exploitation and politicization of the

S/PV.9275

Convention and the OPCW, which has divided Member
States and weakened the credibility and legitimacy of
the disarmament machinery. The 27 January report
of the Investigation and Identification Team, like its
previous reports, was based on unauthorized sources
and lacked the required legal conclusions, while also
disregarding observations from the Government of
Syria. Those faults must be addressed responsibly to
ensure the integrity of the OPCW’s reports.
We support constructive dialogue between Syria
and the OPCW at the highest level, within a specific
time frame, in order to resolve outstanding issues and
finally close the file. The political approach to the
Syrian file has been a failed strategy and has jeopardized
the process for resolving the outstanding issues.
Additionally, applying double standards will only
distract from the technical nature of the discussions at
hand. Any investigation must be impartial, professional,
credible and objective, and should comply fully with
the Convention’s requirements and procedures.
Finally, continuing to convene monthly meetings
on the Syrian chemical file in which some members
repeat previous claims against the Syrian Arab
Republic, despite the fact that there have been no
new developments, is counterproductive and a
waste of United Nations resources and the Security
Council’s time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): We too would like to thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
It has been nearly 10 years since the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013). Last month, the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) briefed the Security
Council (see S/PV.9255) and subsequently submitted
his 113th report (see S/2023/158), which demonstrates
that outstanding issues in relation to the Syrian regime’s
initial and subsequent declarations persist.
As we heard from High Representative Nakamitsu
today, the OPCW Technical Secretariat is still awaiting
a response to its inquiries sent to the regime with regard
to its chemical weapons production facilities and the
unauthorized movement of chlorine cylinders used
in the Douma attack in 2018. Owing to the identified

23-0667511/12

S/PV.9275

The situation in the Middle East

gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that remain
unresolved, the OPCW still cannot consider the Syrian
regime’s declaration accurate and complete.
We call on the Syrian regime to fully cooperate
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat, submit pending
declarations and documents and fulfil all its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention and
resolution 2118 (2013). We commend the independence,
impartiality and professionalism demonstrated by
the OPCW’s Technical Secretariat. We also welcome
Technical Secretariat’s efforts to deliver on its mandate
by using new or alternative methods when faced with
hurdles. In those efforts, the OPCW needs the support
of the Security Council, not discouragement. We
look forward to receiving detailed information on the
outcomes of the limited in-country mission conducted
by a reduced Declaration Assessment Team in January.
The investigations of the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission and the Investigation and Identification Team
(IIT) are important to establish the truth about chemical

12/12

06/03/2023

weapons used in Syria. In its third report, released last
January, the IIT concluded that the Syrian regime was
the perpetrator of the Douma chlorine gas attack in
April 2018. Therefore, the regime’s responsibility has
been established for nine chemical weapons attacks to
date in the reports of the investigative bodies mandated
by the United Nations and the OPCW.
The use of chemical weapons is a grave violation
of international law and unacceptable under any
circumstances. Türkiye strongly condemns the repeated
use of chemical weapons in Syria. We will continue to
support the efforts of the United Nations and the OPCW
to ensure accountability in Syria. Ending impunity is
imperative to achieve lasting peace in that country. It
is also our collective responsibility to the hundreds of
innocent lives lost due to chemical weapons attacks in
Syria. We cannot change the past, but we do have the
power to change the course of the future for the people
of Syria.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

23-06675
