UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1895.”

MEETING:

23 MARCH

1976
[JN

~?ljiv

vf

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SjAgendall895)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.............

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Request by the’ Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan for consideration of the
serious situation arising from recent dev,e!ogments in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent Representatives of the
Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12017) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1895

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are, normally published in
.quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.’

1895th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 23 March 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Thomas S. BOYA (Benin).

tion) took places at the Council table and Mr. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia), Mr. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic) and
Mr. PetriC (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Security
Council has met in an urgent meeting to examine the
serious situation which has arisen in the occupied
Arab territories.

agenda (S/Agenda/lS95)

of the agenda
3. We note with satisfaction the fact that at this
meeting, as at a number of previous meetings, the
Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO) is represented. In the first place, this is fully in accordance
with the united will of the Arab countries as expressed
at the 1974 Rabat Conference of Heads of State and
Government, and, in the second place, it fully confirms
the principled
nature of the position taken by the
Council on this issue.

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan
for consideration of the serious situation arising
from recent developments
in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives
of the Libyan Arab Republic
and Pakistan to the United Nations to the President of the Security Council (S/12017)
The meeting

4. In welcoming to the Security Council the new
Permanent
Representative
of the United
States,
Ambassador Scranton, we should like to express our
hope that the United States delegation will co-operate
with all members of the Council in seeking a just
solution of the issues now being examined by the
Council. Unfortunately,
we cannot fail to note that the
request of the United States delegation again to put to
the vote the long-since-resolved
issue of inviting the
representative of the PLO is far from the well-known
postulate of even-handed treatment. What is more,
this is a unilateral action which ignores the existence
in the Middle East of an entire people-the
Arab
people of Palestine.

was called to order at 11.25 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan
for consideration of the serious situation arising from
recent developments in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives of the Libyan Arab Republic and
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12017)

5. The issue before the Council is extremely clear, as
is indicated in the letter of the representatives of the
Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan of 19 March
[S/12017]. It is a question of a whole series of completely impermissible
actions by the Israeli occupation
forces. The recent actions of the Israeli forces with
respect to the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the recent expropriation of lands occupied by Arabs in Jerusalem, the
creation of Israeli settlements in Arab lands-all
of
this has aroused mass protests by the Arab population.
This is in no way a religious problem. The scale, the
force and the stubbornness of the demonstrations
of
the peaceful Arab population show something more,
namely, the resolution of the people of the occupied

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions which we adopted
at the 1893rd and 1894th meetings, I invite the representatives of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization to take their places at the Council table
and the representatives of Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Yugoslavia to take places
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber
on the understanding that, as is customary, they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table whenever
they wish to speak.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Herzog
(Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organiza1

Arab territories to stand up to the attempts of Israel
to annex the occupied lands.
6. As is known, the Israeli occupying forces have
answered the peaceful protests of the Arab population
with violence. They have opened fire on the demonstrators and undertaken mass arrests and are frightening the civilian population with their armed force.
But this once again only shows that the ‘struggle in
the occupied Arab lands is growing and that the current
events in the West Bank of the Jordan are a reflection
of a very severe crisis with which the ruling circles of
Israel are confronted in the occupied Arab lands.

11. In the opinion of the Soviet delegation, the
guarantee for creation of truly normal conditions for
the population of the territories occupied by Israel
can only be the liberation of those territories and a
full withdrawal of all Israeli forces from them.
12. Mr. LECOMPT (France) (interpretation
from
The facts before the Council. arise from a
situation which has been before the United Nations
since the 1967 conflict. Indeed, the occupation of
Arab territories as a result of that conflict and its
prolongation could not but lead the United Nations to
take up the fate of the populations compelled to submit
themselves to a de fucfo authority. This is a humanitarian preoccupation because .it falls within the
purview of respect for the fundamental human rights
of this people. But it is also a political concern
because it is clear to the international community that
one of the fundamental factors in a settlement in
the MiddIe East must be the evacuation by Israel
of occupied Arab territories.

French):

7. Thus it is a clearly political problem. Indeed, the
acts of the Israeli authorities are a clear violation of
human rights in the occupied Arab territories, and the
alienation of the native Arab population from its
history, civilization and culture by the Israelization
of the school curricula is an anti-human act. But the
essence of the matter is that as long as the Israeli
forces are not withdrawn from all the Arab territories
occupied in 1967, the situation will not radically
change.

13. Each one of .us here knows, either through
instinct or through experience, that any occupation
engenders resistance on the part of local populations
and inevitably leads the occupying Power to resort
to force. Imposed order sows the seeds‘of resistance
to it. Rights recognized by international conventions
are violated. The frustration of passions imperils
efforts to achieve a settlement. But in the case before
us this threat is even more serious because of the
unique religious element involved .and because of the
reactions which this arouses in all peoples sharing the
same belief. The very name of Jerusalem is fraught
with passions and conviction, each equally legitimate
in their apparent contradiction.

8. The delegation of the Soviet Union decisively
condemns the highly arbitrary acts of the Israeli
occupation authorities against the Arab population and
considers that an end should be put to such acts once
and for all. Israel must be compelled to respect the
appropriate decisions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.
9. At the same time, the serious situation which has
arisen as a result of the actions of Israel in the
occupied territories is once again evidence of the
need for a cardinal solution of the whole Middle East
problem. The Israeli troops must be withdrawn from
all the Arab territories occupied since 1967. The legitimate national rights of the Arab people of’Palestine
must be guaranteed, including its inalienable right
to create its own State. The security of all States in
the Middle East must be guaranteed, as well as their
right to an independent existence and development.

14. I do not wish to refer to the numerous recommendations and decisions that have been adopted by
the major bodies of the United Nations calling upon
the occupying Power to respect in Jerusalem and in
the occupied territories the principles of international
law and of the Charter. In 1968 and again in 1969
and 1971, the Security Council adopted resolutions
inviting Israel to postpone all legislative and administrative measures that might tend to modify the status
of Jerusalem. For its part, the General Assembly,
considering at each of its sessions the problem of the
occupied territories as a whole, declared:

10. As was noted by the General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev, in the report of the
Central Committee to the twenty-fifth Congress of
the Party:

“that changes carried out by Israel in the occupied
Arab territories in contravention of the Geneva1
Conventions.. . are null and void”

“There is no war in the Middle East at present.
But neither is there peace, let alone tranquility.
And who would venture to guarantee that hostilities
do not erupt anew? This danger will persist as long
as Israeli armies remain in the occupied territories.
It will persist as long as the hundreds of thousands
of Palestinians driven from their land are deprived
of their legitimate rights and live in appalling conditions, and as long as the Arab people of Palestine
are denied the possibility to create their national
State.”

and it called upon Israel
“to rescind forthwith all such measures and to
desist from ail policies and practices affecting the
physical character or demographic composition of
the occupied Arab territories” [resolution 2949
(XXVir)].
2

15. In the particular case of Jerusalem, there canbe no doubt that all legislative and. other measures
taken by the Israeli authorities
to facilitate and
accelerate through a de facto occupation the process
of integrating a part of the Holy City are in flagrant
contradiction
to all of the resolutions of the United
Nations. What appears serious to us in this policy of
fait accompli is that not only does it contradict those
resolutions and international law but it also exacerbates
feelings and aggravates tensions in the Middle East
and compromises the chances of achieving a peace
settlement.

within the framework of an overall settlement it will
have to coexist with its neighbours. That coexistence
could be compromised very seriously if the populations
once they are finally set free should continue to feel
deep resentment vis-a-vis the former occupier.
19. Our efforts here, despite the distressing circumstances surrounding our discussion, must be designed
to ensure that all actions which increase tension and
compromise
the chances for a settlement that the
peoples in the region and the entire international community aspire to will be brought to an end. The resolution which we will adopt must first and foremost be
an appeal to wisdom and to reason. It is in the deepest
interests of the Israeli authorities that this appeal be
heard.

16. The Israeli authorities have, admittedly, given us
many assurances that they would make every feasible
arrangement to protect the Holy Places and to ensure
free access to all other religious places, in respect for
established customs. With regard to the recent events
which involved the Temple esplanade and led to the
present turbulence, we recognize the fact that these
authorities have attempted to counteract the effects of
a legal decision the implementation
of which would
have caused the worst disturbances, within both the
Islamic and the Jewish community.
They have also
agreed to appeal this decision. The Israeli Supreme
Court has, indeed, confirmed the validity of the action
taken by the Israeli authorities to preserve the status
quo. But, as my delegation already stated in the Council in 1969 [1483rd meeting], the problem, despite its
fundamental religious aspects, is not merely administrative or social in nature. It is above all political and
legal. It is the future of Jerusalem which is basically
involved. This future cannot be decided unilaterally,
but rather must be decided by all interested parties.

20.

Mr.

HUANG
Hua (China) (translation
from
Recently a series of incidents in Israelioccupied territories has attracted people’s attention.
In the first place, with the abetment of the Israeli
authorities,
the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem was
violated. This aroused the just resistance of the Arab
people in the occupied territories. Furthermore,
the
Israeli authorities
sent police and armed forces to
Jerusalem and other cities on several occasions to
suppress the mass demonstrators,
resulting in casualties. This is another, new crime committed by the
Israeli Zionists against the Arab people. The Chinese
delegation expresses its indignation at and condemnation of this.
Chinese):

21. These incidents are by no means accidental.
Their root cause lies in the illegal Israeli occupation
of Arab and Palestinian territories. As pointed out by
the representatives
of Pakistan and other countries
and the representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, these incidents have once again revealed
that, in defiance of General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, the Israeli Zionists are doing their
utmost to change the status of Jerusalem and even
the status of all the occupied territories in an attempt to
perpetuate their occupation there. This can never be
tolerated. Therefore, we hold that the Council should
adopt a resolution strongly condemning
the Israeli
Zionists for their atrocities and resolutely supporting
the Arab people in their struggles in the occupied
territories.

17. It is obvious that the situation which led to the
recent incidents in the occupied territories and the
resultant repression will be solved only within the
framework of an over-all settlement. Any initiative
to modify the srutus quo can only further complicate
the search for this settlement. No one can ignore
the fact that Jerusalem, a holy city for three religions,
the city of three types of prayer, the city of the Holy
Sepulchre, of the Dome of the Rock and of the
Wailing Wall, is one of the most sensitive points of
any settlement.
It is particularly
essential for the
Government
that is at present exercising authority
to refrain from any action that might have irreversible
consequences.

22. I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate
the following: the Chinese Government and people will,
as always, firmly support the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples in their just struggles for the restoration
of their national rights and the recovery of their lost
territories, until they win their final victory.

18. Aware of the emotions and fears expressed by
the Islamic countries, France hopes that Israel will
understand how much the international community is
devoted to the preservation of the universal character
of Jerusalem, that is to say, its Jewish, Christian and
Islamic vocation. In general, France insists, as it has
done at each session of the General Assembly, that
the rights of the population in occupied territories must
be respected in the provisional situation that they are
experiencing. This is a requirement stipulated by the
principles of international
law. But Israel must also
demonstrate
elementary
political
caution, because

23. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite
,him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
24. Mr. ABDEL
MEGUID
(Egypt): While the
Council is debating the dangerous situation in the
3

occupied Arab territories, we are faced today with
another flagrant violation by Israel. It is definite proof
of Israeli expansionist
policy and demonstrates
Israel’s clear intention to perpetuate its occupation
of Arab land.

I will take much of the Council’s time. Besides, the
Council has dealt with the subject several times
before and already knows the true facts on which it
based its unanimous resolutions condemning
Israeli
policy. For that reason I shall confine my remarks to
answering some of these allegations and distortions.

2j. Just yesterday, 22 March, the news agencies
reported from Jerusalem that Mr. Gad Jacoby, Minister
of Transport of Israel, stated in his report to the
Knesset that his Ministry will start right away the
preparatory work for building a deep-water port on
the Mediterranean
in so-called Yamit. Such an act
cannot be considered as anything except another null
and void and illegal measure aimed at perpetuating
Israeli occupation. It is clear also that Israel, by such
acts, is destroying all chances and potentialities
for
peace.
26. On 13 January I ‘stated the following
clear terms before the Council:

30. First, the Israeli representative tried yesterday,
as he has tried several times before in the General
Assembly, to allege that there are major differences
among Arab countries. To dispel any.notion he still
could have about this matter, I want to assure him
that all the Arab countries, including Egypt, are united
and will continue to be united in their goal to liberate
their occupied territories and to enable the heroic
Palestinian people to exercise its inalienable rights.
I had hoped that the October war of liberation was
enough of a lesson to Israel and to him, but unfortunately it seems that they have not yet drawn the
necessary conclusions.
So trying to play on Arab
differences is of no use whatsoever.

in very

“Israel is still playing a dangerous game in defiance of international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and the Geneva Convention of -1949, as
well as United Nations resolutions, by establishing
settlements and colonies that to date number 59 in
Sinai, the Golan and the West Bank. One of these
settlements is called Yamit, is conceived as a city
and is situated inside Egyptian territory to the south
of the Gaza Strip.“-1
repeat, inside Egyptian
territory to the south of the Gaza Strip.-“It
is
incredible that Israeli leaders still believe that by
such settlements they can constitute established
facts in the occupied territories and encourage more
immigration
from
abroad.”
[1871st meeting,
para. 24.1

31. Secondly, Egypt was the first to support the
‘Palestinian
people and its sole representative,
the
Palestine
Liberation
Organization,
by all means,
material and otherwiie, ‘and it will continue to support
the PLO. Instead of ignoring.facts and reality, Israel
has to face them on the soil of Palestine itself.
32. Thirdly,
the Israeli representative
claims that
Israel’s occupation in the West Bank and Gaza is a
benevolent one and that Israel has done a lot for the
inhabitants of those areas. Concerning Gaza, if that
were so, how could he justify the fact that the first
major uprising in the occupied territories after the 1967
aggression was in Gaza? It was so intense that the
occupation authorities imposed a total news blackout
about the situation there and prevented foreign correspondents from going to Gaza to see for themselves.
How could he justify that Gaza is still under direct
military rule and that military patrols constantly roam
the streets of Gaza and the refugee camps, arresting
people at random?

27. Upon clear instructions that I have received today
from my Government,
I should like to state in very
clear terms that Israel bears all the responsibility
for
such a policy and for acts which endanger the whole
process of peace. Therefore Egypt asks that the
Council adopt a resolution and take firm action in order
to force Israel to stop such plans immediately.
Egypt
holds Israel fully responsible for the dangerous consequences of its expansionist
policy, which runs
counter to the declared objective of the international
community
to reach a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

33. I need not recite here the record of Egypt in
Gaza, but United Nations authorities are witness to
the fact that Egypt was spending more than $30 million
in Gaza every year. Students in Gaza got, and still get,
their education in Egyptian shcools and universities
free. Egypt believes that Gaza must be returned to its
lawful owners, the Palestinian people; so any measures
undertaken by Israel in the Strip are null and void.

28. Yesterday the Council heard a long statement by
the Israeli representative
[189&h meeting].
I must
confess that he did not astonish us. As usual, his statement was full of distortions,
false allegations and
simple acrobatic semantics. As I anticipated, he used
at length the argument of the appeal to the Supreme
Court to demonstrate his Government’s
good will.
I think that my statement yesterday [1893-d meeting]
sufficiently refuted that argument, which could deceive
no one.

34. Furthermore,
if the Israeli representative is so
sure about his claim that the people of Gaza and other
parts of the occupied territories
are content with
Israeli rule, why did his Government bar the Special
Committee on the investigation of Israeli practices from
visiting the occupied territories
and verifying the
situation for themselves? I dare him to say yes if he
is so sure that the people in Gaza and the West Bank
are happy with Israeli occupation. What about the.

29. If I proceed to refute all the false and unfounded
allegations which he threw at everybody, I am afraid
4

reports and decisions of the Commission on Human
Rights, the Red Cross, Amnesty International,
church
leaders, distinguished
correspondents,
even the
Israeli Human Rights Commission and many others?
If the Israeli representative is so sure, let him invite
the Special Committee.

41. One very revealing fact which reflects this is what
the Israeli
representative
said yesterday:
that
Jerusalem was always dominated by foreigners. In the
Israeli mentality,
in the Zionist mind, people who
have lived in Jerusalem, inhabited it, whose possession
it is and who have lived there for centuries did not
exist. What existed was the spiritual association of the
Jews with Jerusalem of several thousand years ago.
Since then and throughout this period the inhabitants
of the occupied territories, of Jerusalem, have not
existed for the Israelis. This alone explains Israel’s
actions towards the people and the population there.
It did not exist in their mind.

35. Fourthly, the Israeli representative tried in vain
to distract the attention of the Council from the plight
of the inhabitants of the occupied territories by alleging
that minorities
in the Arab world are mistreated.
I should like him to understand that we in Egypt
have no minorities: every inhabitant, whether Moslem,
Christian or Jew, is an Egyptian citizen, equal before
the law, and enjoys the same rights.

42. It is by that logic that the Israeli representative
spoke yesterday of Jerusalem’s
being divided and
Jerusalem’s being reunified by Israel in 1967. It was
divided by Jordan in 1948 because Jordan intervened
to prevent its division, to prevent its take-over by
the Israelis, the Zionists, in 1948. The fact that the
Israeli expansionist thrust in 1948 stopped in the midst
of Jerusalem does not mean that Jerusalem was
divided by Jordan. It means that Jerusalem was
divided by Israel and that the natural and normal thing
was for Jerusalem not to be divided,. because the
natural and normal thing for Jerusalem was that the
Zionists should not take it over exclusively,
that
Jerusalem should remain a centre of pluralism,
of
universal existence for everybody and of the unity of
spiritual attachment to it.

36. One last word of advice to the Israeli representative: the world is now so accustomed to Israel’s
distortions of facts and to its false allegations that
there is no need to belittle the intelligence of Council
members any more.
37. The PRESIDENT
(interpretarion
from French):
The representative of Jordan has asked to exercise his
right of reply. I invite him to take .a place, at the
Council table, and I give him the floor.
38. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): The statement yesterday
by the representative of Israel [189&h meeting] was
a revelation to all members of the Council. It was less
of a revelation to the people, who live in and belong to
the area, who have been at the receiving end of Israel’s
policies and practices. In the bitter, long, angry and
disjointed
statement by the Israeli representative
yesterday there was still a unifying theme, and this
unifying theme is at the very root of Israel’s approach
to the problems in the area, to its problems with its
neighbours and to the problems with the people which
was the first victim of its activities and actions, the
Palestinian people.

43. If Jewish spiritual attachment to Jerusalem is
justified,
so too Moslem and Christian attachment
of a spiritual character to Jerusalem is justified and
legitimate.
But this cannot be translated into a unilateral physical take-over of a city which belongs first
and foremost to its own inhabitants-and
its own
inhabitants were and continue to be Arabs. They
are the inhabitants who have inherited Jerusalem for
successive generations for the last several centuries.
That is at the root of the problem of Jerusalem. So
when Israel speaks of Jerusalem having been divided
by its own people-meaning
their defence of it against
being unilaterally taken over-it
is the same as when
Israel speaks of its own reunification
of Jerusalem,
meaning extra expansion and complete take-over of
Jerusalem. That is symptomatic,
and that is the spirit
and the mentality that have caused Israel’s problems
with its neighbours.

39. The unifying theme which permeated Israel’s
statement yesterday, the underlying assumption, was
that, in the Israeli Zionist mentality, there is one reality;
others do not exist. The whole of Israel lives within,
its own fantasy, lives within its own obsession. In
this mentality,
no others exist; others do not exist
physically, their rights do not exist. And there is in
this mentality and this “logic” no reciprocity of rights,
no reciprocity of obligations and no existence for the
other party.

44. By the same token and as an expression of that
same basic approach to the Arab problem-if
one wants
to call it “the Arab problem”,
which would be
paraphrasing
the Israeli mentality-again,
as the
Israeli representative assured us yesterday, there was
no ruling by the Supreme Court on Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Again, the culture of the Arabs, the inhabitants, the
non-Israelis,
and their physical monuments do not
exist. There was a ruling regarding the Temple Mount
and, therefore, the Israeli representative was literally
justified in saying that there was no ruling on AlAqsa. But Al-Aqsa is there. In the Israeli fantasy and

40. The practical implementation
of this obsession
and mentality has been reflected in the activities of
Israel-of
the Zionist movement. When it descended
upon Palestine it did not feel the existence of the
human environment within which it lived. For Israel,
the human environment was merely a physical barrier.
Hence the violence which was at the root of the
establishment
of Israel, hence the physical displacement of the Palestinian people which had for centuries
inhabited its own homeland.
5
.c.

fanatical obsession, Al-Aqsa did not exist and only
the Temple Mount existed; but no, Al-Aqsa Mosque
is a monument of a physical character with a deep
transcendental spiritual existence which is there.
It has significance for millions of people and it is
there physically.

churches in what became Israel in I948 were wiped
out by the Israelis and desecrated and held in derision.
The famous Mamillah Cemetery, the Islamic cemetery
in Jerusalem, was completely wiped out. It was a
1,OOO-yeardoldhistorical monument, a cemetery which
at that time we believed to be as precious to. us
historically as Arlington is to the American people, and
perhaps even as the Kremlin or parts of it are to the
Soviet people. Israel repeatedly did the same.thing
after the second take-over of the rest of Jerusalem in
1967 to the quarter of Moslem Saints-which we call
Hai Al-Magharbah-a holy religious quarter, which
was completely bulldozed.

45. By the same token and as an extension of this
mentality which does not recognize reciprocity of
rights, which unilaterally accords to Israel rights
which it denies to the others, Israel looks at and
scrutinizes the so-called record of Jordan in Jerusalem
between 1948and until it was taken over and occupied
by Israel in 1967. Again, it is a very distorted lense
through which the Israeli representative looked. If
I may borrow an expression from yesterday’s
“friendly” New York Times, which spoke of the people
in the Council looking at the Israeli problem through
what it called “a crazy prism”, it is a “crazy prism”.

49. The Government of Jordan at Ieast‘ has never
pursued a policy of systematic destruction or mutilation of historical, religious and cultural institutions
and monuments. Israel, as part and parcel of its
mentality and policies, pursues a policy of complete
change, destruction and wiping out of existence of
the culture of the other party.’ The monuments,
cemeteries, churches and any symbol of the cultural
continuity and existence of the people who inhabited
that area who were not Jewish were not respected
and had no sanctity in the eyes of Israeli Zionist
chauvinism.

46. In Israel’s obsessions with what it calls its own
rights, in Israel’s obsession with its own claims, in
Israel’s obsession with its own existence and the nonexistence of others, there is of course no mutuality
and reciprocity of rights. Israel could take over
Jerusalem in 1948 and displace the people who lived
in so-called West Jerusalem, which was predominantly
owned by Arabs but where many Jews lived in
brotherhood before 1948 with the Moslem and Christian Arabs; it could divide Jerusalem, cut off the
water to Jerusalem, displace the Arabs who lived in
West Jerusalem and force them out, destroy their own
cultural and religious institutions, and pound with
mortar fire the walled Old City-but all that meant
that there should be no reaction on the other side.
Israeli citizens could continue to claim the right of
access to what they regard as their own institutions to
which they have attachment and spiritual association,
and at the same time, Israel would not recognize the
rights of the others whom it displaced and whose
mosques and churches it destroyed.

50. Jordan is proud of its record in Jerusalem and in
the West Bank. During the period in which that part
of Palestine was held in trust, Jordan merged its history
and future and destiny with that of the Palestinian
people on the West Bank. Jordan is proud of the record
of constructive brotherhood and openness and prosperity in Jerusalem and around it.
51. In the Islamic tradition there is respect for the
religions of Christianity and Judaism. That is part and
parcel of Islamic tradition, dogma and doctrine, and in
no way could it be affected or undermined-by the fact
that Israel is an exclusive and exclusivist Jewish
State which carries the religious banner and hides
behind it an extreme and dogmatic fanaticism.

47. In 1948, as part of the arrangements by the
United Nations, the proposal was addressed to Jordan
and Israel to make arrangements, pending an overall political solution, to allow freedom of access and
of worship to all faiths on both sides. Jordan, together
with the other Arab parties, accepted that; Israel
rejected that offer by the United Nations and its
Conciliation Commission for Palestine. Hence the
restrictions by the Jordanian Government on Israeli
citizens-not on Jews because they were Jewsentering Jordan or that part of Jerusalem which was
under Jordanian administration and the -fact that
Jordan continued to pursue that policy in the absence
of reciprocity on Israel’s part which Jordan would
have been willing to accept.

52. By the same logic, and as a continuation of the
same attitude of completely ignoring the rights of
others, the Israeli representative yesterday invoked
.relations among the Arab countries-inter-Arab
relations, relations between Jordan and the Palestinian
people or some of their representatives and organizations.
53. The problem before the Security Council is not
inter-Arab relations; it is the right of any single Arab
Government to come to the Council and ask it to look
into a complaint lodged by that Arab Government
against another Arab Government. In such a case the
Councilis entitled to look into that matter according,to
its rules, practices and traditions. But that is not the
situation. There is no comparison whatsoever between
differences and even conflicts within the Arab world,
between Arab countries or sectors of the Arab$eople,
and the situation of alien occupation-. Certainly, in the
...

48. Naturally, during 1947 and 1948 there was destruction in Jerusalem, and that destruction was caused
by Israel’s onslaught which extended to synagogues,
churches and mosques. Hundreds of mosques and
6

.

56. One could” continue analysing the statement
made by the Israeli representative;but that would add
very little to the present debate in terms of enlightening
the membership of the Council or in terms of adding
any constructive note to the debate. I have exercised
my right of reply simply to point out what I started
with: that the Israeli statement is a revealing statement; it reflects an I&aeii obsession with its own
claims and what it thinks is righj, and the total absence
of any recognition of mutuaiity and reciprocity with
the others. Hence the whole policy of Israel regarding
its neighbours and in the occupied territories. They
are thought of as non-existent. The Palestinians were
a human barrier which was removed in 1948. They
form another human barrier at the moment, because
there are more than a million people in the occupied
territories, and they cause’ a -problem for Israel.
According to this mentality and this obsession, the
religious monuments of the people of the occupied
territories have no sanctity. According to this mentality
and this obsession, these pe:dple have no cultural
identity, no national rights and no human rights.

long history of Jordan and its association with ttie
Palestinian people and the history of- our modem
existence as an independent State, we have had
troubles; we have had conflicts; we have had resfiess. ness. We belong to an area of the world which is
undergoing a period of transition and which, like the
rest of the third world, is groping for new institutions,
for new ideals and for rejuvenation, moving from
the old to the new. In this process we are bound to
have our inner dialectical problems, our conflicts,
our internal debate. This has occurred in Jordan. It
is a symbol of the thriving, the forward movement of
our country. It is also a reflection of the deep tian
in the Arab world, the determination to move ahead
in spite of the fact that it is at times agonizing. So
we have had our difficulties in Jordan, as have other
countries, but we were honest in dealing with those
problems; we were genuine- in dealing constructively
with them. And, above all, they were domestic
problems. It is the same when there are disturbances
in the United States, when there are disturbances in
Pakistan or when there are disturbances in Israel
regarding issues of a domestic nature. The situation
in Lebanon has nothing to do with, and cannot be
compared with, the situation that prevails in the
occupied territories.

57. But regardless of the merits of the Israeli arguments, the Council is entitled to ask a question of
Israel which even the friends, the dwindling number
of friends,‘of Israel are entitled to &k and have been
asking of it: what it the alternative? f$rael can claim
that it is preserving human rights. in the occupied territories; it can probably even manage to gag or distort
the information media in many sectors of the world
regarding its atrocities in the occupied territories and
its suppression of the people of the occupied territories.
But you are ail, even the friends of Israel, entitled to
ask the Israeli representative what Israel offers as an
alternative. Is Israel offering a continuous, endless,
indefinite occupation of the occupied- territories? This
is the central issue. During the last nine, nearly
ten years, what has Israel offered in terms of a peaceful
exit from the occupied territories, in terms of a
constructive solution? It has closed every avenue for a
political settlement. It has closed every road td hope
of the people in the occupied territories that ultimately
there would be ati Israeli exit and withdrawal in the
context of peace. So what is Israel offering the Council
other than this fiat-ribe, this vehement and ugly attack
on Jordan, on the Palestinians and on the rest of .the
Arab countries and even on the Arabs as a culture,
when the Israeli representative implies that the Arabs
are almost inherently racist, inherently anti-Jewish,
inherently enemies of the world? What does Israel
have to. offer other than saying this? There is an
occupation, which has to end. IS&e1is in a continuous
state of military relationship, of hostility, towards its
neighbours and the human envjronment within which
it is supposed to survive. This is’ the problem Israel
has to address itself to and cannot ignore, and the
Council is entitled to hear answers to this question.

.54. But in his statement yesterday the Israeli representative pursued the ‘same logic when, in a most
cynical way, he invoked an argument which we had
thought had by now, in this chamber and in ail chambers of the United Nations, become anachronistic
and totally unacceptable. He invoked the alleged
benefit that has accrued to the people of the occupied
territories as a result of the blessings of Israeli occupation. This is a most cynical, argument. It is anachronistic and outmoded and totally unacceptable within
the United Nations and the new era of the Charter.
How can any country justify its continued occupation
on the basis of the alleged benefits it is giving the
people under its occupation? Such justification was
repeatedly rejected in the Council when it was invoked
by the representatives of white rac,ism in Africa. It
was completely rejected when the whole institution of
coionization and colonialism collapsed in the world.
55. What benefit has been accruing to the people
of the occupied territories? The people have been
exploited; their institutions have been manipulat‘ed;
their economic relationship with Israel is one of
exploitation; exports from the occupied territories to
Israel proper practically do not exist. Imports from
Israel to the occupied territories amount to five times
as much as exports. W%atis this situation of prosperity
existing in the occupied territories, economically and
otherwise? Is it the implanting of over 60-nearly
65-settlements in various parts of the occupied territories, in Gaza, in the Golan, in the West Bank, in
and around Jerusalem? How_can this--be regarded’.as
respect. for- the hum&h rights of the people in the
occupied territories and compliance with international
law and international practice?

58. It does not help the Israeli representative to
involve himself in an unending romantic poem regarding the sentimental attachment Israel has to the
7

Holy Places, because as individuals all people who
have religious, sentimental and spiritual attachments
to the Holy Places are justified in that-but this is
not a title deed for physical acquisition, nor is it in
any way a cover or a justification for ruthlessness of
policies and for violence.

walls. So the violation, according to this plan provided
by the representative of Tel Aviv, happened within
the walls of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. I should like to
request you, Mr. President, to have this document
made a document of the United Nition?.
64. We have been asked to be gratified at the benign
occupation, at the benevolence, at the advancement.
Yet the demosntrations for seven weeks against the
occupation belie those statements. A child was shot
at and killed, and yet we are tisked. to believe and
thank and be giateful to the occupation authorities.
I recall that something like 30 years ago Mussolini’s
forces of occupation in Ethiopia were trying to convince the world to be happy that the Italians, with
their civilization-with
all due respect-were there
to civilize the Ethiopian people and the people of
Libya. This theory is not acceptable. The world has
arisen and has awakened to fight- for its liberation.
If some nation is ‘a little more developed or much
more developed than another, it is here we’are meeting
to benefit from one another and not to make the world
accept what is known as benign occupation.

59. The Council is entitled to ask Israel the relevant
and important question: what is Israel offering as an
alternative to the continuing situation? It does not
help for the Israelis to engage in attacks on the
domestic situation in various Arab countries or criticize
their institutions or point out what they claim are
cultural deficiencies or deficiencies in their political
or social institutions. All these are irrelevant to the
issue before us, which is that of Israel’s continued
occupation of the occupied territories and the need for
Israel to end this occupation and to offer a constructive
solution, which, so far, it has avoided.
60. The PRESIDENT (interpret&on from French):
The ‘reprgsentative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has requested to be allowed to exercise his
right of reply, and I now call upon him.

65. However, what shocks me most in the statement
,is this sentence: “I think that it is time that the
world awoke to the inherent destructiveness.of the
Arab purpose in the world today” [ibid., para. 1081.
That is preposterous. I am sure that if Adolf Hitler
were living today he would have applauded that
statement. Who else but a racist would think with that
mentality-that a people has inherent characteristics?
But after all, we all know that the Zionist representative is racist by nature.

61. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
I listened with very great care to the diatribe of the
representative of Tel Aviv. I read his statement this
morning in the verbatim record of the meeting, and
I refer to the following sentence: “Words fail me as
I contemplate this barren and futile discussioii”
[189&h meeting, paru. 581: That was his statement.
Mr. President, my organization has accepted your
jnvitation to participate in this discussion because we
believe and we know that much could be achieved
through this discussion. It is not a barren and futile
discussion; otherwise we should have saved you the
trouble of spending so much time listening td us here.

66. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretation from French):
The. representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply. I ask
him to take a seat at the Council table, and I call
upon him.

62. My nostalgia and love for Jerusalem were aroused
yesterday. I could not help it; I was born in Jerusalem.
I was raised in Jerusalem and I was even accepted as
a Knight of the Order of the Holy Sepulchre in
Jerusalem. There is so much for me in Jerusalem. It
1is my home town; it is home for me, and I shall keep
up my struggle until I return to Jerusalem.

67. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): The Zioni.st
representative did nothing in his very tong statement
yesterday but confirm the arrogant and racist nature of
his regime. In fact, exactly as predicted, the representative of the Israeli occupiers found it strange t.hat
the Security Council should turn its attention to what is
going on in the West Bank and the rest of the occupied
Arab territories-little children slain by the soldiers of
occupation, youths savagely beaten and arrested,
curfews imposed without interruption- on Arab towns
and villages. Nothing shoutd cause the c.&cem. of the
Council because, according to the representative of
the alien forces of occupation, all that is part of the
normal state of existence under occupation. The
Arabs of the occupied territories are very happy, as
he said, and prospering under the occupation. Those
students, workers, men and women roaming t6rough
the streets and confronting the Zionist soldiers and
paratroopers and hoisting the flag, of their martyred
homeland are no more than incited youngsters who
have been misled by the Palestine Liberation
Organizatiqn.
)’

63. In his statement yesterday the representative
of Tel Aviv avoided completely the issue we are
considering here. We are not considering a court ruling;
we are considering the situation arising from the
practices of the forces of occupation. He completely
avoided that. Be that as it may, he spoke about the
court ruling and tried to insult the intelligence of the
persons around this table. Before us we have a plan,
and it reads “Al-Haram At-Sharif ‘. The Zionists wish
to change the name to “Temple Mount”. It is their
practice to alter the status and the names of places
in Palestine. We may note that around the compound
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif there are four walls, with gates
and openings, and the site of the prayer incident
-what iS referred to as ‘an incident-is within those

I

8

1

.:

-

most of which condemned Israel for its attacks and
continued aggression against the Arab countries.

68. Even if we could swallow the lie that the tens of
thousands of students, workers, men, women, boys
and girls are merely incited and are reacting to the
provocations,of the PLO, what about the mayors and
town councils of the towns and villages of the occupied
territories? What about the thousands of businessmen,
shopkeepers,,doctors and teachers who are going on
strike in protest against the Zionist occupation? And
if the PLO is really able to cause all that uprising and
revolt, then that is the best certificate given by the
Zionist regime of the fact that the PLO is really the
sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people.

73. As for the joke with which the representative of
Israel began his statement yesterday, I do not know
how to take it. Should I take it as a compliment to
the Syrians or as an insult? We Syrian Arabs are
proud to have the same qualities as those persons who
are followers of Judaism. We are equally proud and
honoured to bear also the same qualifications and
characteristics of those who are the followers of the
Christian religion. But what we would not be proud of
would be to have the qualities of followers of Zionism.

69. What is important is that the representative of
the Zionists did not refer even once in his very long
statement to the real cause of all that is going on in
the occupied territories. He did not mention military
occupation at all, as if what is going on is a normal
situation which, if no disturbances at all were taking
place, would not necessitate any action or consideration by the Council. On the contrary, the representative of Isreal attempted to divert the attention of world
public opinion and proceeded, as the representative of
the PLO said, to insult the intelligence of Council
members and of all those who listened to his long
statement.

74. The renresentative of Israel said that evervthinn
said about the ruling of the Jerusalem court regarding
the desecration of the Al-Aqsa Mosque was false and
a big lie, and he presented the Council with a map
showing that the site of the prayer incident in May
1975 was only the courtyard of Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
As stated by a colleague who spoke before me, AlHaram Al-Sharif is Al-Haram Al-Sharif, whether in its
main building or in .its courtyard, unless Israel really
means to do in Al-Haram Al-Sharif what it did for the
Al-Ibrahimi Mosque, that is, to divide Al-Aqsa also and
give part of it to the Jews and prevent the Arabs from
praying in its courtyard.

70. He spoke about what was happening in Lebanon
and asked why the Council was wasting its time
considering what was happening in the occupied territories rather than what is happening in Lebanon.

75. All we heard from the Israeli representative
were repeated arguments which have time and again
been refuted by Arab and non-Arab representatives
in the General Assembly and the Security Council.
The real issue is the occupation through aggression of
Arab territories and the denial of the national rights of
the Palestinian people. As long as Israel does not
realize that its aggressive occupation is the reason
for all that is happening, there can be no peace in
the region for Israeli soldiers and no peace in the
world.-

71. Why does the representative of Israel shed crocodile tears about what is happening in Lebanon?
Has he forgotten the Phantom aircraft of his regime
that repeatedly bombarded the refuiee camps in
Lebanon and the artillery of the Zionist forces that
repeatedly bombarded and shelled the southern sector
of Lebanon and the peaceful villages there7 What is
happening in Lebanon is a civil conflict, and many
other nations in the world have had such difficulties
in similar painful stages of their history. The great
American nation, the great french nation, the great
Italian nation, the great Soviet nation-they all passed
through more painful and much more dangerous situations than what is now happening in Lebanon. We
hope that the outcome of what is happening in Lebanon
and the peace which all the Arabs are trying to restore
there will lead to a situation of well-being and freedom
like that now being enjoyed by the nations that I have
just mentioned.

76. The Arabs of the occupied territories have
decided to declare 30 March as “Homeland Day”,
and the Council of the Arab League has decided
to consider that day as a day of solidarity with the
struggle of the Arab people in the occupied territories.
We appeal to you, Mr. President, and to the other
members of the Council, to contribute to that solidarity
by adopting a resolution condemning Israeli repression
in the occupied territories and requesting Israel
-pending the speedy termination of its -aggressive
occupation-to cease all its measures and acts against
the Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories.
77. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of Israel in exercise of his
right of reply.

72. The representative of Israel should be the last to
speak about Lebanon or about an alleged incident in
Damascus in 1965, because the records of the Security
Council and the General Assembly are filled with
condemnations of Zionist acts of aggression against
inhabitants and against towns and villages, completely
razing towns like Quneitra. Two weeks ago we received
a bulky document of 244pages&containing resolutions,

78. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): As I listened to the vicious
diatribe from most of the speakers thus far, it occurred
to me that never has the injunction requiring those
people who live in glass houses not to throw stones
been so applicable. Here one has a group of nations
9

nractisinz evervthinz that thev have attributed to
Israel, vklating eve& human and natural law in the
conduct of their o’wn affairs, engaged in racism as an
integral part of their legal system, guilty of massacres,
of mass arrests and characterized one by the other
as a mass prison. This is the characterization of Syria
in a semi-official Egyptian newspaper, Al-Gumhuriya,
in an article only a few months ago, on 9 November
1975, headlined “Syria is one big prison”. These are
countries which deny any elementary human rights,
countries such as Jordan and Egypt which did not do
in the West Bank or Gaza what they had in their power
to do and what they ask Israel to do today, countries
which are actively engaged in all forms of mediaeval,
Byzantine types of suppression, torture and oppression
and international intrigue which defy description; countries which carry out a continuous and persistent
policy of the prosecution of minorities, countries
whose conduct in respect of the basic principles of
natural law and humanity is a disgrace to mankind,
countries such as Yugoslavia, in which we learned the
other day that a lawyer was sent to gaol for defending
his client.

I am deeply moved by the solicitude of the representative of the Soviet Union for freedom of education,
which, I would like to believe, indicates a new
development in the Soviet Union’s approach to this
freedom.
84. These two departures prompt me to express the
hope that the Soviet Union willnow change its attitude
and its behaviour towards the Jewish people in the
Soviet Union and towards its discriminatory behaviour
in respect of Jewish freedom of religion and that it
will, since he considers attempting to impose school
curricula an anti-human act, remove all disabilities
from Jewish education in the Soviet Union and will
allow our people to maintain their. own curriculum
and their links to our ancient heritage. The Soviet
Government’s attitude to its Jewish population should
exercise it before it begins to meddle in other affairs.
Indeed, were the Soviet Union to cease meddling in
the Middle East, we might achieve peace. Let me
quote President Sadat of Egypt. on the role of the
Soviet Union in the Middle. East, as reported in an
Egyptian newspaper only a few weeks ago:

79. Indeed, if I mention Yugoslavia, it is because the
internal problems in that country must truly be grave
if the representative of Yugoslavia feels obliged to
divert attention from them by propelling himself to
the forefront on every occasion when an anti-Semitic
or anti-Israel free-for-all is taking place.

“The USSR communicates things to certain
Arab sides.in order to turn us one against each other.
It is resorting to the policy of turning the regimes
against each other as usual. It is turning Syria against
Egypt and Egypt against Syria; Syria against Iraq
and Iraq against Syria; Egypt against Libya and
Libya against Egypt-and the process is going on.”

80. I could go on, but this whole cynical exercise is
so disgusting that it hardly merits the time we are
taking.

85. The representative of Egypt asked why the United
Nations Special Committee on the territories is not
allowed to visit the territories. He knows as well as
I do. He knows that at the time that Committee was
appointed the Government of Israel said it would
only co-operate with that Committee if, in addition
to examining Israeli practices in the territories, it
would examine Arab practices against Jewish populations in Arab countries. This was refused, and that is
the reason why we refused to have anything to do
with that Committee.

81. Let me give you a bit of advice, Mr. President.
If you want to know the true character of these countries, read what each one of them says about the
other. There is a saying in Arabic to the effect that
no one knows your secrets except your God and your
neighbours. The Arab neighbours know each other
so well that I do not have to elaborate in any way
on what they say about each other for you to understand their nature.

86. I was deeply moved by the moving concern of
the Egyptian representative for the Palestinian Arabs,
but frankly I am perplexed. I have been reading his
President’s interviews and speeches of late. I read
them ah, and I detect a certain dissonance between
his remarks and those of his President with-respect
to this issue. I am quite convinced that many of, the
representatives here will join me in envying him his
freedom of action.

82. I was very moved by the concern of the representative of the Soviet Union for the religious rights
of the Moslem community in Jerusalem. At least he
might have limited himself to the falsehoods in the
Arab accusations levelled against us. But he goes even
further and talks of the use of Israeli forces in AlAqsa Mosque. May I express the hope here-which,
1am sure, is reflected by millions of Moslems throughout the world-that his intervention indicates a major
departure in Soviet Government policy in regard to
the practice of religion.

87. He talks about Gaza. Let me quote from a
Saudi Arabian newspaper published in 1966, from
a resident of Gaza quoted in this newspaper at a time
that the Egyptian occupation was in force:

83. The representative of the Soviet Union talked
about the “anti-human” act involved in attempting to
influence school curricula in Jerusalem. I pointed out
that these curricula are Jordanian and not Israeli or
Christian, in accordance with the desire of each church.

“Gaza is the only remnant of our seized country.
I wish it had also been taken so that we could at
least know that the one who profanes our honour,
10

hurts us and tortures us is the foreign Zionist
oppressor, Ben Gut-ion, and not an Arab brother
named Abdel Nasser. Consider the attitude of
Nasser’s administration to us and you will find that.
the Jews under Hitler did not suffer as we do under
Nasser. First of all, in order to leave our camps and
go to Cairo or to Alexandria or other cities, we
have to go through a long drawn-out process.
Anyone who requests a travel permit must undergo
an inspection and suspicion is cast on his loyalty.
The scheming and unscrupulous investigators are
liable to land in prison anyone who asks for a
travel permit.”

fighters a good deal of interference and difficulty.
I embarked, therefore, on the shelling of the quarter
with mortars, creating harassment and destruction.
Only four days after our entry into Jerusalem the
Jewish quarter had become a graveyard. Death and
destruction reigned over it.”
90. The French Consul in Jerusalem. the late
Mr. Neuville, whom I knew very well at the time,
sent a cable to the President of the Security Council
which was read by the President at the 301st meeting
of the Security Council on 22 May 1948:
“The Arab Legion has heavily shelled the New
City and the Jewish quarters in the Old City during
the night. The shelling, which started again this
morning, has been going on for about two hours.
The destruction of the city is proceeding at an everincreasing rate.” [301st meeting, p. 28.1

Or let me quote Jidda Radio in Saudi Arabia, again
during the period of Egyptian occupation:
“Let us now examine the Cairo rulers’ attitude
to the Palestinians. Saudi Arabia opened its doors
wide to the people of Palestine at a time when Egypt
shut its door in their faces. We are aware of the
laws which prohibit all Palestinians from. working
in Egypt with or without pay, a condition which is
stamped on the passport of every Arab who enters
Cairo. On this occasion, we would like to ask Cairo
what is this Iron Curtain which Abdel Nasser
and his cohorts have lowered around Gaza and
the refugees there? The Military Governor in Gaza
has prohibited any Arab from travelling to Cairo by
air without a military permit, which is valid for
24 hours. Imagine, Arabs, how Nasser, who claims
to be the the pioneer of Arab nationalism, treats
the Arab people of Gaza, Gaza and its miserable
people who starve while the Egyptian Governor of
Gaza and his offtcers and soldiers bask in the wealth
of the Strip.‘*

91. So much for what happened in 1948 and for the
tales told by my Jordanian colleague.
92. I must say that is very moving indeed to hear the
solicitude of the Jordanian representative for the PLO.
The fact is that the PLO dare not show their noses in
Jordan today. Let me quote from two statements
recently made. One was made by Mr. Farouk Khaddoumi, a member of the PLO Executive Committee,
only a few weeks ago. He said, “The PLO demands a
political and military presence in Jordan, an objective
which’ *-in his opinion- “will necessitate a change of
the regime in Jordan.” Or Yasser Arafat, who, on
10 November 1974 in a letter addressed to the
Congress of Jordanian Students in Baghdad, wrote:
“Jordan is ours. Palestine is ours, and we shall build
our national entity on the whole of this land after
having freed it both from the Zionist presence and the
reactionary traitor presence*‘.

88. The representative of Jordan represents the
country which was the first in history to bombard the
Holy City of Jerusalem. The second time they did it
was in 1967, and if you just want to get a measure of
the veracity of his remarks, he has talked about
Mamillah Cemetery being destroyed. Now, I know that
quite a number of people seated in this hall have been
to Jerusalem and are very familiar with the Mamillah
Cemetery, which is part of the national park in
Jerusalem. They pass it every day when they are at
the King David Hotel, and each one of you who has
been in Jerusalem of late will know that this is a
complete and utter falsehood.

93. How completely unreal this whole situation really
is. Let me ask the representative of Jordan: When the
Syrians stabbed you in the back on 9 September 1970
as your forces fought against the PLO in Amman,
from whom did you ask for air support against the
advancing Syrian tanks? If you have forgotten, please
refresh your memory by reading the Kalb book entitled
Kissinger.

94. If the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is still independent, it is thanks in no small measure to Israel.

89. Now he talks about the events of 1948. Let me
quote from the book published by Colonel Abdullah
Al-Tal, who commanded part of the Jordanian forces
at that time. In his memoirs, published in 1959 in
Arabic at Cairo, because in the meantime, as part of
the normal procedures that we are aware of in the Arab
world, he had been obliged to leave Jordan, he says:

95. And as we are already talking about occupation,
let me quote from an interview given by Arab inhabitants of the West Bank who came to Lebanon in 1971,
an interview in the Beirut daily, AI-Huwadith
on
23 April 1971. It was a form of public opinion poll
about Israeli rule carried out among the West Bankers
visiting Lebanon:

“The operations of calculated destruction were
set in motion. I knew that the Jewish quarter was
densely populated with Jews who caused their
11

“Those arriving from the West Bank define the
situation thus: We have not forgotten nor will we
, ,
i

ever forget the type of rule which degraded our
honour and trampled the human feelings within usi a
rule which they built by their inquisition
and the
boots of their desert men. We have lived a long
period under the humiliation
of Arab nationalism,
and it pains us to say that we had to wait for the
Israeli conquest in order to become aware of human
relationships with citizens.”

98. But for 19 years we sat along the 1967 borders,
until the Arabs attacked in 1967. They talk today of
aggression in 1967. They talk of occupied territories.
But they very conveniently
forget the reasons for
the occupation of the territories, the historical‘ facts
of 1967. For 19 years we sat along those borders.
Did they make peace? Did they negotiate for peace?

96. Finally, we were asked by the Syrian representative why we were so concerned with Lebanon. Have
you ever heard such a cynical question? How revealing
it is. Lebanon is bleeding, Lebanon is being tom apart,
and we are sitting here engaged in a useless diatribe
which can bring no good either to the Israel-Arab
problem or to the Middle East or to the peace of the
world. From the time of our meeting yesterday morning
to our meeting this morning, 1SO people have been
killed in Lebanon. And yet this world body is cynically
ignoring all that is going on there.
97. I wish to make just one remark in conclusion.
In the process of solving international
problems by
means of producing
facile slogans-and
what is
happening in the Middle East is a classic examplethe magic formula of the 1967 borders is produced;
indeed, it has been produced again this morning.
Everybody pulls this solution out of the hat-including
my Western friends: if only we would pull back to
the 1967 borders, all would be solved.

99. This is not the problem. If it were, why was it
not solved long ago? Why should there have been an
Arab attack in 1967? The answer is that, I repeat, thisis not the problem. It is not a question of territory;
it is not a question of Palestinians-although
both
issues are very important. It is a question of a change
of heart in respect of Israel on the part of the Arab
countries. Until that change is achieved, no meaningful
advance can really be made. I repeat that at the heart
of the conflict lies the Arab refusal to recognize the
right of the Jewish nation to self-determination
and
national sovereignty. That is the crux of the problem.
That is what we should be dealing with if we really
wish to tackle the problem, rather than engaging in
this facile and useless diatribe now going on here.
The meeting

rose et 1.15 p.m.
Note

’ AlAC.183lL.2.

12

. .

’

‘,..

.

. .

, ..
, .

‘,

.*

. . ..-

c

.
‘8,.

.

.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PIJRLICATIONS IXS NATIONS IJNIRS

I.es publications des Nations Unies sent enventedans Ieshbrairieset Iesagences d&&aires du
monde entier. Informez-vous aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-v6usP : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gem%.
KAK

I’IOJIYYHTb

H3AAHKZ

OPI-AHN

BAU(EIII

OlYbEAKHKHHhIX

KAUK&

‘ZIsAanua Opranuaaqmi 06'beAUAeHHbIX
fIanHR
MOWHO KyIIHTb
8 KHB~KHbIX
Maraanxax li arerrTcrxax a0 xcex panonax Mupa. HaBDAETe
CUpaBKH
06 K3ABKHKX
B
BarrreX RH~~~KBOYmaraaswe rrnu nnmnTe
no agpecy : Qprann~anmr 06neJp~eH~blX
HanriR. Cexnaa no npoAaxce AJAaHNn, HbIO-&?OpK
HIlH %eEieBa.
COMO CONSECUIR PIJBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en hbrerias y @as diitribttidoms en
todas partes del mundo. Consuhe a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccih de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Lidio In United Nations, New York

00300

83-60801-rulgust198ez,?OP
