S/2021/723

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 August 2021
Original: English

Situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 16 of Security Council
resolution 2540 (2020) and paragraph 41 of resolution 2568 (2021), provides updates
on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the mandates of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers significant developments from 8 May
to 31 July 2021.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
Progress was made towards holding the delayed elections. The National
Consultative Council met between 22 and 27 May. It brought together Federal
Government and federal member state leaders, the Governor of the Banaadir Regional
Administration and the Mayor of Mogadishu. It reached an agreement to resolve the
contentious issues in the implementation of the agreement of 17 September based on
the recommendation made by the technical committee in Baidoa. Those issues
included the composition of electoral management and dispute resolution teams, the
composition of an electoral management committee on “Somaliland” seats and
arrangements for holding national elections in the Gedo Region of Jubbaland. The
Council reiterated its commitment to safeguarding the 30 per cent quota for the
parliamentary representation of women, but fell short of identifying an
implementation mechanism. Somali leaders also agreed upon a road map towards
completing State-building, including a timeline for crucial national priorities.
3.
On 29 June, the National Consultative Council concluded a follow -up two-day
summit in Mogadishu and issued a revised electoral timetable, schedul ing the
elections for the Upper House for 25 July, the elections for the House of the People
between 10 August and 10 September, the swearing-in of parliamentarians and the
election of the Speakers of both Houses for 20 September and the presidential
elections for 10 October. It also announced a 50 per cent reduction in the candidate
nomination fees for women candidates.

21-10604 (E)

110821

*2110604*

S/2021/723

4.
On 29 June, following the summit, the Prime Minister, Mohamed Hussein
Roble, appointed a four-member regional ministerial reconciliation committee for
Gedo Region, tasked with ensuring a conducive environment for elections in Gedo,
especially in the Garbahaarrey district.
5.
On 10 July, the Prime Minister concluded a four-day visit to Jubbaland, including
the Garbahaarrey district, where he discussed the implementation of the electoral
agreement and reconciliation efforts. The reconciliation committee, comprising
ministers from four federal member states, visited Garbahaarrey on 14 July, in line with
the decisions of the National Consultative Council, to prepare for the elections.
6.
Elections for the Upper House were scheduled to begin on 25 July, but faced
some delays. On 29 July, the first round of the Upper House elections took place in
Jubbaland, with four seats out of the eight allocated to Jubbaland contested and filled.
7.
On 14 June, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kenya formally accepted an
invitation by the Federal Government to reopen its embassy in Mogadishu. The
invitation, issued on 12 June, was in response to the decision taken by the Government
of Kenya on 10 June to reopen its airspace to flights from Somalia.
8.
On 12 June, the Hirshabelle Vice-President, Yusuf Ahmed Hagar “Dabageed”,
met for the first time with General Abukar Warsame “Huud” in Beledweyne, Hiraa n
Region, following the latter’s demands for a greater role for the Hawadle clan in the
power-sharing arrangements in Hirshabelle. General Huud called for the involvement
of leading elders of the clan in resolving the dispute with the Hirshabelle
Administration, which centres on the question of whether the state capital and
presidency should be in an area with a significant population from one clan. The
Office of the Prime Minister is engaged in resolving the dispute and mediating the
increased tensions that occurred early in July between militias loyal to General Huud
and the Administration.
9.
On 31 May, “Somaliland” held long-delayed joint parliamentary and local
council elections. Sixty-five per cent of registered voters cast their votes to elect 82
members of the House of Representatives and councillors for 21 districts. On 5 June,
the results were announced, with the opposition winning 52 of the 82 parliamentary
seats. No woman was elected to Parliament, but a minority clan candidate was elected
to the House of Representatives and a woman as a mayor. The two opposition parties
formed a coalition and won mayoral positions in five of the seven major towns,
including the capital, Hargeysa.
10. The United Nations provided technical and advisory support to the Office of the
Prime Minister and the newly appointed technical electoral support team in preparing
for both National Consultative Council summits. Separately, together with the
representatives of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the Europ ean
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, my Special
Representative visited the federal member states to encourage continued constructive
engagement in the electoral preparations.

B.

Security developments
11. The security situation remained volatile, with a monthly average of 260
incidents recorded. Most continue to be perpetrated by Al-Shabaab, primarily hit-andrun attacks targeting the Somali security forces and AMISOM, as well as attacks using
improvised explosive devices. In particular, the use of person-borne improvised
explosive devices has continued to increase over the past year, mainly in Mogadishu.
Most affected overall by Al-Shabaab activity were Banaadir, Shabelle Hoose and
Shabelle Dhexe Regions.

2/16

21-10604

S/2021/723

12. Al-Shabaab targeted the international airport in Mogadishu with six mortar
rounds on 21 July, affecting the United Nations and AMISOM compounds and
resulting in slight injuries to two United Nations contractors. Another mortar attack
targeted the presidential palace on 10 July, but caused no casualties. Al-Shabaab also
maintained the capability to carry out high-profile improvised explosive device
attacks in the capital. On 10 July, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device
targeted the Chief of the Banaadir police in the Wadajir district. He survived the
attack, but at least five people were killed. On 9 May, a person-borne improvised
explosive device detonated at the Waab Arye police station, killing seven people,
including the commander and deputy commander, and injuring five others. On 5 June,
another such device exploded at a security checkpoint in the Dharkenley district,
reportedly injuring nine people. On 15 June, a suicide bomber detonated his
explosive-filled vest at the General Dhagabadan military training centre in the
Wadajir district, reportedly killing 23 people and injuring 26 others. Information
indicated that he may have posed as a Somali National Army recruit and blown
himself up at the entrance to the training centre as recruits were waiting to complete
applications. On 2 July, a person-borne improvised explosive device detonated at a
restaurant in the Shibis district, reportedly killing 12 people and injuring at least 7.
13. In the southern and central regions, Al-Shabaab maintained its pressure on the
Somali security forces, resulting in military and civilian casualties. In Bay Region,
on 9 June, Al-Shabaab temporarily captured the Somali National Army base in
Daynuunay, Baidoa district, attacking Somali National Army and AMISOM
reinforcements with improvised explosive devices and ambushes before the Somali
forces regained control. A hand grenade attack against a police position in Baidoa on
22 May left six people injured, including the dependant of a United Nations national
staff member, who later died. In Shabelle Dhexe, the Somali National Army launched
a large-scale security operation on 26 May, targeting Al-Shabaab positions east of
Jawhar and reportedly killing several members of the group. The offensive was met
with resistance from Al-Shabaab, who, on 18 June, detonated a vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device outside the Somali National Army base in Biyo Cadde,
Mahadday district, killing four soldiers. On 4 July, an improvised explosive device
detonated within an internally displaced persons site in Jawhar. Three people were
reportedly killed and more than 10 injured.
14. In Mudug Region, on 18 May, the premature detonation of a suspected vehicleborne improvised explosive device loaded on a rickshaw took the life of the driver,
who was transporting the device to an unknown location in Gaalkacyo, highlighting
the continued Al-Shabaab presence and operations in the central regions. On 27 June,
heavy fighting broke out in Wisil, Hobyo district, when Al-Shabaab carried out a
complex attack on the Galmudug security forces. More than 30 people, including
civilians, were reportedly killed. The Somali National Army and Galmudug security
forces recaptured the area of Ba’adweyne, Hobyo district, in July and advanced
towards the Xarardheere district. Al-Shabaab sought to counter the offensive and
targeted the Somali National Army and Galmudug forces in Ba’adweyne with
improvised explosive devices and with a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device
attack on 16 July. Security forces clashed with Al-Shabaab on several occasions
during the military operations, which were supported by two air strikes by the United
States of America on 20 and 23 July.
15. Activity by pro-Da’esh elements continued to be reported in Bari Region,
where, on 26 June, the convoy of the Puntland Minister of Security was targeted with
an improvised explosive device attack in Balidhidin, Qandala district. On 29 June,
the Puntland Security Forces were targeted by two more such devices in the same
area. One soldier was reportedly killed.

21-10604

3/16

S/2021/723

C.

Economic developments
16. The political stalemate over the implementation of indirect elections continues
to negatively affect the economy, as does the triple shock of locust infestation,
flooding and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Federal
Government is struggling with a budget deficit of between $6 million and $7 million
per month as budgetary support from international partners remains on hold and
domestic revenues decline.
17. The World Bank conducted an analysis in June that indicated a reversal of recent
economic gains, with the economy contracting by 0.4 per cent in 2020, compared with
a pre-pandemic estimated growth rate of 3.2 per cent. The trade deficit is projected to
widen, given that exports of livestock and services have fallen owing to the restricted
Hajj and the general pandemic-induced shutdown. The private sector is also
struggling, as 45 per cent of microfirms are reported to have closed and nearly half
of the firms have experienced a fall in sales or layoffs.
18. In contrast, the financial sector continued to demonstrate a broad level of
stability as bank deposits and official remittances increased, although informal
inflows declined. Private sector credit experienced an upward trend, and bank
deposits have remained high since late 2020, when they rose sharply. The World Bank
raised concern that political risks could destabilize the rising credit to the private
sector and limit remittance flows.
19. On 9 June, the Prime Minister signed the instrument of acces sion to the United
Nations Convention against Corruption. The United Nations continued to provide
substantive and financial support to the Federal Government through the
implementation of the national anti-corruption strategy.

III. Support for peacebuilding and State-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal State

1.

Preparations for elections
20. On 8 June, the Prime Minister established a technical electoral support team to
support the implementation of the agreement announced by the National Consultative
Council on 27 May. The United Nations has been engaging with that team through an
electoral task force, comprising UNSOM, UNSOS, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), to ensure the coordination of international
technical and donor support. Reconstituted ad hoc electoral implementation
committees, including the Federal Elections Implementation Team, state election
implementation teams and the Federal Disputes Resolution Committee, were
announced by the Prime Minister on 19 June. Members underwent a four-day
induction course from 30 June to 2 July, organized by the technical electoral support
team with United Nations assistance. On 16 July, the Federal Elections
Implementation Team issued a revised electoral timeline, with the elections for the
Upper House scheduled to be held between 25 and 28 July and those for the House of
the People between 12 September and 2 October.
21. On 5 July, the Prime Minister presented the updated electoral budget of
$26.5 million to the international community. In late July, the Federal Government,
international partners and the United Nations agreed on a revised electoral budget of
$18.7 million. The Federal Government committed itself to providing direct budget
support, including through candidate fees of $11.2 million, and which, together with

4/16

21-10604

S/2021/723

the commitment of international partners of $7.7 million, should be sufficient to fully
resource the election budget.
22. Announced in the agreement communiqué of 27 May was the formation of a
nine-member national electoral security committee, which includes the Federal
Government and the chiefs of police of the federal member states and is chaired by
the Prime Minister. AMISOM and United Nations police commissioners are also
members. Its key priorities will be finalizing the national electoral security plan and
budget and directing the priority tasks to ensure electoral security, including the
delivery of the approved and funded training for the Somali Police Force. The
committee met on 13 July for the first time and then held several days of meetings to
discuss the plan and budget.
23. On 28 June, the Transitional Puntland Electoral Commission announced that
46,187 people had registered for the local elections scheduled for 25 October, 50.5 per
cent of them women and 49.5 per cent men. The announcement followed the
completion of a voter registration exercise in three pilot districts.
2.

Constitutional review
24. Following the presidential decree of 24 December 2020 through which the
constitutional review process and the procedure of approving the Constitution were
deferred to the eleventh session of Parliament, the institutions mandated to facilitate the
process, namely the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, the Oversight Committee and the
Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission, prepared
handover reports for the next Administration to safeguard the gains made thus far.
25. Consequently, the joint constitutional review support project was closed on
30 June. The United Nations and international partners organized a work session to
consolidate lessons learned and identify challenges and gaps in the constitutional
review process and the implementation of the project. Based on their conclusions, a
strategy was developed to take the process forward. Another joint activity, on
parliamentary support, is assisting with programme development on
constitutionalism, parliamentarism and federalism, in line with the agreement of
27 May and the State-building road map.
26. In May, the National Consultative Council agreed on the main State-building
milestones and their implementation, highlighting that the completion of the
Constitution was a priority. Subsequently, UNDP and UNSOM developed a project
proposal to support implementation. The project will serve as a vehicle for developing
a programme for long-term United Nations engagement, focusing on State-building
milestones.

3.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts
27. A dialogue process between the Jejele and Makane clans over a land dispute in
Hiraan Region, in which several persons were killed, was concluded with the financial
support of the United Nations. A reconciliation process between the Dir and Hawadle
clans, in the same region, is aimed at enabling the completion of a bridge in the
community, which will boost the local economy, and is also supported by the
Organization.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
28. UNSOM continued its efforts towards the implementation of a minimum quota
of 30 per cent for the parliamentary representation of women in relation to the

21-10604

5/16

S/2021/723

forthcoming elections. Women currently account for 24 per cent of the 329 me mbers
of the bicameral parliament, a number that falls short of the minimum 30 per cent
quota. On 27 May, the National Consultative Council reached an agreement in which
leaders affirmed their support for the quota but did not communicate any guidelines
or specify how the quota would be secured. The subsequent appointment of the
electoral committees failed to fulfil the commitment to the quota. As a result, the
United Nations Gender and Elections Task Team, led by my Deputy Special
Representative, adopted a new strategy according priority to high-level advocacy,
providing technical advice and guidance to the technical electoral support team,
electoral committees and women leaders, ministries and goodwill ambassadors to
advance the implementation of the quota.
29. As part of their advocacy with regard to the quota, women leaders, on 31 May,
petitioned the Federal Government, federal member state authorities and the
international community, expressing disappointment with the lack of an
implementation mechanism and calling for guidelines to achieve the quota, including
reserving seats for women.
30. On 25 July, the Prime Minister appointed a 13-member advocacy committee,
with women accounting for 12 of the members, to advocate the attainment of the
quota.
31. My Special Representative and my Deputy Special Representative continued to
spearhead high-level advocacy with political leaders and decision makers and have
been holding strategic and technical-level meetings with women leaders, including
the Federal Government and federal member state ministers, civil society actors and
women’s leaders, to inform advocacy efforts. The United Nations also supported local
resource mobilization to enhance advocacy by women actors and leaders, including
ministries, civil society and gender advocates. The Organization provided briefings
to donors on resources requested by federal and state ministries responsible for
women’s affairs on 23 June and 6 July and reached out bilaterally to donors and other
potential partners to encourage increased funding for women’s political rights
advocacy.
2.

Youth empowerment
32. UNSOM continued to advocate that young people be included in political
processes and governance. To facilitate intergenerational dialogue on meaningful
participation in electoral processes, peacebuilding and reconciliation, the Mission, in
collaboration with the Bringing Unity, Integrity and Legitimacy to Democracy
programme and a youth-led local civil society partner, convened a dialogue on youth
political participation on 16 and 17 June. The dialogue, which brought together 100
youth activists, political aspirants, civil society leaders and decision makers, resulted
in recommendations to advance youth inclusion in the implementation of the
agreement of 27 May and wider State-building efforts.
33. The United Nations continued to support the Ministry of Youth and Sports in
developing the country’s second national youth policy. The policy, which will
incorporate youth and peace and security elements, will enable the Federal
Government, federal member states and other stakeholders to tackle barriers that
perpetuate the exclusion and marginalization of youth and advance conditions
conducive to promoting young people’s rights and opportunities.
34. Following the UPSHIFT social innovation and entrepreneurship boot camps
held from 14 to 18 February, a group of 44 adolescents and young people, including
20 female participants, are incubating their businesses with the support of the United
Nations Children’s Fund. In addition, the Fund provided support in 179 cases of
children and young people in conflict with the law in Puntland. The individuals are

6/16

21-10604

S/2021/723

undergoing screening, assessment and registration and will receive life skills -based
education to obtain the knowledge and skills necessary for empowerment, self-esteem
and decision-making.
35. On 26 June, the United Nations Population Fund awarded eight youth start -ups
in Boosaaso grants of $2,000 to $4,000 each. The start-ups, which are working in
areas such as fisheries, fashion design and hospitality, had undergone a three-month
incubation process and were assisted with their company registration. With the
support of the European Union, the initiative awarded grants to 66 start -ups in 2021
and will continue to create decent jobs and contribute to sustainable peace for the next
three years.
3.

Development coordination
36. The United Nations aid coordination project, which supports the
implementation of the aid architecture, was due to end on 30 June, but was
exceptionally extended to 31 December 2021 to allow for the establishment of a new
project, scheduled to be implemented by December 2024. The project is aimed at
making the refined aid architecture operational in a cost-effective manner and
strengthening the engagement of federal member states.
37. Together with the Federal Government and international representatives, the
United Nations established a high-level humanitarian-development-peacebuilding
triple nexus steering committee and will support the implementation of working
groups dedicated to strategic issues, such as combating corruption, environment and
durable solutions.
38. On 2 June, a “Somaliland” development cooperation forum took place in
Hargeysa, which led to an agreement to re-establish the High-level Aid Coordination
Forum and to develop a draft partnership framework, although some work remains on
hold pending negotiations on the clauses of the framework requested by the
authorities in Hargeysa.
39. On the environmental front, in collaboration with the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, UNSOM is supporting a mediation initiative in
Hirshabelle with a focus on environmental factors and youth inclusion. A draft
strategy document has been prepared, and environmental mediation sessions are
expected to be held at the end of 2021.
40. In July, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
United Nations Environment Programme launched a new programme on nature -based
solutions, including the use of fast-growing, strong-rooted trees for bank stabilization
to address flooding in Hirshabelle and provide long-term solutions to reduce flooding.

IV. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
41. During the reporting period, UNSOM recorded 276 civilian casualties,
comprising 125 people killed and 151 injured, compared with 116 and 144,
respectively, during the previous period. Al-Shabaab remained the single largest
perpetrator of civilian casualties, responsible for 188 casualties (68 per cent),
followed by 37 casualties (13 per cent) attributed to unknown actors, 25 by clan
militias (9 per cent), 20 to state security forces (7 per cent) and 6 to international
forces (2 per cent).

21-10604

7/16

S/2021/723

42. Al-Shabaab publicly executed 19 civilians, including a woman, after self appointed “courts” accused 18 of them of spying for foreign forces and 1 of murdering
two civilians. On 22 May, Al-Shabaab amputated the right hand of a male civilian for
theft in the Aadan Yabaal district, Shabelle Dhexe Region.
43. The Somali authorities arbitrarily arrested and detained 115 individuals,
including 8 suspected Al-Shabaab members, 2 suspected Da’esh members, 27 clan
elders and 6 journalists. On 27 June, the Puntland Security Forces executed 21 men
convicted of being members of Al-Shabaab by firing squad in Gaalkacyo, Garoowe
and Qardho. On 24 May, the military court of first instance in Beled Xaawo, Ged o
Region, sentenced two former Somali police officers to death after they were found
guilty of killing a male and a female civilian on 6 January. Both had legal
representation and were given 30 days to appeal. Seventeen death sentences were
issued by courts in Puntland and Jubbaland.

B.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
44. In line with the human rights due diligence policy, UNSOM continued to
monitor the conduct of non-United Nations security forces and support the
implementation of risk mitigation measures to enhance compliance. Pursuant to the
recommendation made by the Security Council in its resolution 2568 (2021), UNSOM
and UNSOS continued their engagement with the AMISOM leadership to strengthen
technical cooperation and support for the Somali National Army to effec tively
implement the policy recommendations.
45. On 5 and 6 June, UNSOM conducted a refresher training course for 37 members
of the Somali Police Force under the mobile vehicle checkpoint project managed by
the Mine Action Service. In addition, from 27 to 30 June, UNSOM and the United
Nations Office for Project Services, in collaboration with the European Union
military mission to contribute to the training of Somali security forces, conducted a
four-day training session in Mogadishu on good governance and accountability for 20
Ministry of Defence and 35 Somali National Army officials. The training covered an
overview of human rights law, humanitarian law, children and armed conflict, human
rights due diligence policy mitigation measures and conflict-related sexual violence.
On 25 May, the Minister of Defence approved a human rights policy for the Somali
national armed forces, in which their critical role in the promotion and protection of
human rights was reaffirmed, resolution 1960 (2010) recognized, and full awareness
and compliance of all Somali National Army troops with regard to preventing all
forms of conflict-related sexual violence urged.

C.

Children in armed conflict
46. As at 31 July, the country task force on monitoring and reporting on grave
violations against children had reported 674 grave violations against 530 children
(408 boys and 122 girls). A total of 246 children were recruited and used, 188
abducted, 173 killed or maimed and 54 subjected to rape or other forms of sexual
violence. Eight attacks on schools and five denials of humanitarian access were
verified. Of the violations, 443 were attributed to Al-Shabaab, 102 to unknown
perpetrators, 49 to clan militias and 63 to Federal G overnment and federal member
state armed forces. During the same period, 23 incidents of deprivation of liberty
affecting 34 boys and three girls were verified and attributed to the Somali Police
Force (19), the Somali National Army (13), Puntland police, Jubbaland police (5),
Puntland Security Forces and Jubbaland forces (2 each), Galmudug forces and
Galmudug police (1 each).

8/16

21-10604

S/2021/723

47. On 21 June, UNSOM trained 30 staff of the Ministry of Defence on the
protection of children affected by armed conflict. On 23 June, it coordinated the
meeting of the National Children and Armed Conflict Working Group to review the
implementation of the 2019 road map to expedite the implementation of the action
plans on ending and preventing the recruitment and use and the killing a nd maiming
of children.

D. Prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
48. UNSOM verified four incidents of conflict-related sexual violence, affecting
five women and two girls, through the monitoring and reporting arrangement. In two
cases, the perpetrators were unknown, while of the other two incidents one involved
a member of a clan militia and the other a civilian. Two incidents occurred in Shabelle
Hoose and the other two in Banaadir Region. On 14 May, five members of a clan
militia allegedly wearing Somali Police Force uniforms and working with the
Dayniile District Administration raped three women and attempted to rape two others
in the Dayniile district of Mogadishu. The Somali Police Force arrested three
suspects. On 29 May, the Office of the Attorney-General requested the Banaadir
Regional Court to conduct a medical examination on the suspects for biological
evidence and to take DNA samples. The samples were transported to the Garoowe
forensic laboratory, the only one in the country, for further analysis. The results are
pending.

V. Humanitarian situation
49. The combined impact of drought and floods driven by climate change has
exacerbated the protracted humanitarian crisis, displacing hundreds of thousands of
people, jeopardizing access to safe water and contributing to an increase in water borne diseases. By early May, at the onset of the gu rains, drought conditions had
spread to more than 80 per cent of Somalia. Meanwhile, rains triggered flooding that
affected 400,000 people in 14 districts, of whom 101,300 people were displaced.
50. Owing to inadequate levels of precipitation from those rains, up to 2.8 million
people, or a fifth of the population, are projected to face acute food insecurity and
hunger in the coming months. Dry conditions are also expected to contribute to crop
losses and deterioration in pasture and water availability in some areas.
51. The rapid shifts from severe droughts to flooding serve as a reminder that
Somalia is extremely vulnerable to climate change and recurrent climatic shocks. To
mitigate the impact of climate change, task forces were established in Hirshabelle and
Jubbaland to bring together humanitarian and development actors to tackle the
problem. The positive efforts to improve coordination in Hirshabelle notwithstanding,
flooding led to the displacement of 66,000 people in Jawhar and 21,000 in
Beledweyne.
52. Cases of acute watery diarrhoea and cholera have spiked. Since January, 2,761
cases have been reported from 22 districts in Hirshabelle, South -West State and
Banaadir Region. Since mid-May, hospital admission rates in Banaadir have risen,
with 410 people admitted between 16 and 30 May, compared with 299 between 1 and
15 May, representing an increase of 36 per cent.
53. Displacement stemming from conflict events has also escalated. Since January,
more than 523,000 people have been forced to flee their homes, 66 per cent (347,000)
as a result of insecurity, with nearly 207,000 temporarily displaced in Mogadishu
owing to the election-related violence in April. Furthermore, women and girls, who
21-10604

9/16

S/2021/723

face an increased risk of sexual violence and harassment, made up 50 per cent of the
displaced population. In South-West State, following a directive from non-State
armed actors to vacate 42 villages in April, more than 29,700 people were displaced
to the town of Xuddur. In June, a verification of 25 sites hosting nearly 52,000
internally displaced persons in Garoowe found that 56 per cent of them were at risk
of forced eviction.
54. Humanitarian access remained a major challenge. At least 145 access-related
incidents were reported from January to 13 July, including 27 between 1 June and
13 July. Following discussion by the humanitarian country team on enabling access,
and with the support of the World Food Programme, in June the humanitarian
community was given access to a United Nations Humanitarian Air Service aircraft
for an initial period of 90 days to conduct joint United Nations and partner assessment
and access missions. As at 31 July, nine missions had been conducted, to Gaalkacyo,
Dhuusamarreeb, Xuddur, Bardaale, Caabudwaaq, Afmadow, Hobyo and Wajid.
55. The increasing humanitarian needs notwithstanding, funding levels remain
alarmingly low. As at 31 July, only $310 million had been provided for the 2021
Humanitarian Response Plan, equivalent to 28 per cent of the total require d. The
funding forecast for 2021 is the worst in the past six years.

VI. Comprehensive approach to security
56. The Somali National Army and AMISOM, with UNSOS support, continued to
plan for the security transition in line with the Somali transition plan and the joint
force reconfiguration plan agreed upon by the Somali National Army and AMISOM
in April.

A.

Operations
57. Planning for operations to secure the main supply routes as part of Operation
Badbaado II continued. Regular briefings have been provided through the Military
Coordination Group meetings under strand 2A of the comprehensive approach to
security. The Somali National Army also announced increased operations in Shabelle
Dhexe and Shabelle Hoose. On 6 July, the Somali Police Force deployed 150 Darwish
to support the “hold” phase of Operation Badbaado I in Jannaale and Awdheegle. For
Shabelle Dhexe, the Hirshabelle State Ministry of the Interior presented a
stabilization plan, which was discussed with Hirshabelle State security stake holders.
58. The Mine Action Service supported AMISOM and the Somali security forces in
mitigating the threat of improvised explosive devices by providing five threat analysis
reports, along with six analytical reports supporting AMISOM concept of operati ons
development, operational strategy formulation and capacity-building planning for the
Somali security forces. The Somali National Army reported significant success in
disrupting capabilities of Al-Shabaab to make improvised explosive devices.

B.

Institutional capacity-building
59. The implementation of the federated policing system continued. The South-West
State Police Training Centre in Baidoa was completed by the Joint Police Programme
on 7 June. On 29 June, Puntland State approved its police selection, vetting and
recruitment guidelines. The Jubbaland technical committee on the implementation of
the new policing model received support to reconvene on 25 and 26 July, during which
the revision of the Jubbaland State police strategic plan was co mpleted.

10/16

21-10604

S/2021/723

60. The joint security sector governance programme, delivered by UNSOM and
UNDP, closed on 30 June after 30 months. The $10.5 million programme was funded
by the European Union, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and UNDP. It was followed on 1 July by a one-year initiative funded by
UNDP, the security sector reform initiation plan, which provides a bridge towards the
next generation of UNSOM-UNDP security sector programming in 2022. It retains
investments made under its predecessor and offers substantive support for the Somali
transition plan, electoral security and the implementation of the Somali national
security architecture.
61. UNSOM and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia
supported the strengthening of collaboration between the Federal Government and
federal member states through a network of focal points on women in the maritime
sector. An action plan to enhance women’s employment, education and economic
opportunities in the sector was developed and will be presented to the international
community in October to identify potential funding support.
62. The Federal Government and UNSOM and UNDP launched a one-year project
on Somali security and women and peace and security, funded by the Departm ent of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, on 4 June to help to advance the role of women
in security institutions and further the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda in the sector. The project is intended to identify barriers to wom en’s
recruitment, retention and promotion, as well as map women’s representation in the
security and defence sectors to establish national institutional mechanisms and
recommend policy reforms.
63. On 10 May, a technical-level steering committee recommended amended
workplans for the joint justice and joint corrections programmes for approval,
including the reallocation of funds for emergency repairs at the Boosaaso prison.
Training activities to increase the capacity of 103 Custodial Corps personnel and 15
prosecutors and paralegals were conducted in Hargeysa, Hirshabelle, South -West
State, Jubbaland and Puntland.
64. The Mine Action Service provided victim assistance, risk education and gender
and diversity training for 12 personnel (9 men and 3 women) of the Somali Explosive
Management Authority to strengthen national coordination and monitoring capacity
for mine action interventions. It also provided support to the Authority in developing
a national policy and operational standards for assistance for victims of explosive
hazards.

C.

Support activities
65. On 29 June, the steering committee for the joint prevention and countering of
violent extremism pilot project evaluated the operationalization of the national
strategy and the possible way forward, the project having closed at the end of June.
Discussions are continuing on holding relevant outreach in the newly recovered areas
to better understand drivers and promote the potential community-based reintegration
of disengaged Al-Shabaab fighters.
66. In the framework of the national programme for the treatment and handling of
disengaged combatants, the five rehabilitation centres for low -risk former Al-Shabaab
fighters remained operational. As at 24 June, 355 male and 170 female benefici aries
were in the centres, while 157 men and 102 women had graduated from them in 2021.
67. The Mine Action Service delivered 1,664 in-person explosive ordnance risk
education sessions to 2,087 women, 1,280 men, 1,414 girls and 2,304 boys most at
risk from explosive ordnance throughout Somalia (except in Juba Dhexe).

21-10604

11/16

S/2021/723

VII. United Nations Support Office in Somalia assistance for the
African Union Mission in Somalia and Somali security forces
A.

Support for African Union Mission in Somalia operations
68. UNSOS supported AMISOM in the closure of the Marian Guwaay forward
operating base in South-West State on 20 June. The closure is part of reconfiguration
planning to free up troops to provide more effective security on the main supply
routes.
69. The report of the AMISOM board of inquiry investigating the accident involving
the Ugandan Aviation Unit attack helicopter on 5 February was submitted to the
African Union Commission for consideration. Uganda is replacing the helicopter.
70. UNSOS continued with its AMISOM forward operating base wellness
programme in all sectors and delivered field defence stores to Beled Amiin in sector
1, Buulobarde and Jalalaqsi in sector 4 and Gololey and Jawhar in sector 5.
71. Following the decision to repatriate eight oversized contingent-owned vehicles
belonging to the Ghanaian formed police unit that could not be transported from
Mogadishu to Baidoa, the transport contract was awarded. The vehicles are expected
to arrive in Ghana by mid-August.
72. UNSOS operated and maintained 45 wastewater treatment plants and seven
waste management yards and synchronized an additional diesel-powered generator
house into the camp system. Wastewater recycling systems continued to provide
non-potable water to irrigate plants and lawns and clean Mission vehicles in all
sectors. On 5 June, 900 tree seedlings germinated from the UNSOS base camp nursery
in Mogadishu were planted within the camp to mark World Environment Day. UNSOS
procured 50 barrel-type incinerators that will be deployed to all AMISOM forward
operating bases.
73.

As at 25 June, the balance of the AMISOM trust fund was $2.8 million.

74. UNSOS supported the rotation of Burundian troops in May, rotating 1,742
troops out and 1,756 troops in.
75. The Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support visited Somalia and
Ethiopia between 11 and 19 July. He held meetings with the Governments, the African
Union Commission, AMISOM and international partners on the logistical s upport
provided to AMISOM and the Somali security forces by the United Nations.
76. The Head of UNSOS continued her annual outreach to partners and held a
meeting with the African Union Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and
Security, Bankole Adeoye, in May to brief him on UNSOS operations. She also held
separate meetings with troop- and police-contributing countries to coordinate support
for AMISOM contingents.
77. The Mine Action Service, with assistance from UNSOS, trained 1,139
AMISOM and African Union uniformed police personnel to enhance their capability
to locate and destroy improvised explosive devices and operate safely within a threat
environment. The Service contributed to the safety and security of strategic
infrastructure by deploying 26 explosive detection dog teams, working with 52
detection dogs to conduct searches of 23,841 pieces of luggage, 51,129 vehicles,
98 buildings, 22,000 m 2 of building areas and 5,252,635 m 2 of open areas throughout
the sectors.
78. The Mine Action Service supported 132 AMISOM convoys across all six
sectors, giving 132 predeployment and post-deployment briefings. It also supported
12/16

21-10604

S/2021/723

AMISOM in conducting 280 searches along the main supply routes, of which 18 were
positive. AMISOM improvised explosive device disposal teams trained and equipped
by the Service destroyed 10 devices in situ along those routes.

B.

Support for Somali security force operations
79. The Head of UNSOS held meetings with the Somali leadership, including the
Senior Security Adviser in the Office of the Prime Minister, the Director-General at
the Ministry of Defence, the Commander of the Somalia National Armed Forces and
the Commissioner of the Somali Police Force, to agree on cost -saving options that
would help to prolong support for the Somali security forces as efforts are made to
replenish the dwindling trust fund.
80. UNSOS continued to provide logistical support to the 13,900-strong Somali
security forces. As at 25 June, the balance in the United Nations trust fund in su pport
of the Somali security forces was $1.9 million, sufficient to sustain UNSOS logistical
support for Somali National Army at the current reduced rate until July and for the
Somali Police Force until November. The Head of UNSOS, on 18 May, wrote to the
international community and held meetings with the representatives of France,
Germany, Ireland and Norway on support for AMISOM and the Somali security
forces. On 28 July, the Head of UNSOS and the Somali Minister for Defence provided
a joint briefing to the diplomatic community on the dire situation of the trust fund and
appealed for additional funding to sustain support for the Somali National Army
beyond August.
81. The Mine Action Service, with UNSOS support, handed over specialized
equipment to five Somali National Army route search teams and continued
specialized training to search for and dispose of improvised explosive devices for 11
Somali National Army teams (99 members). The service also trained four Somali
National Army headquarters members in the use of mapping software and equipment.

VIII. United Nations presence
82. United Nations entities remained present in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Berbera,
Boosaaso, Dhooble, Dhuusamarreeb, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe, Hargeysa,
Jawhar, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. As at 31 July, 395 international staff and 1,362
national staff were deployed throughout Somalia.

IX. Observations
83. The recent political developments are encouraging, and I welcome the
agreement of 27 May and the continued dialogue by the Federal Government and
federal member state leaders on the implementation of the electoral process. Many
challenges remain, however, and I urge the Somali leaders to expeditiously implement
the agreements of 17 September 2020 and 27 May, so as to hold credi ble, transparent
and inclusive elections without further delay, and to resolve contentious issues in a
spirit of consensus and cooperation in the interest of the people and the nation.
84. The renewed commitment of the Somali leadership to the State-building agenda,
as laid out in the annex to the agreement of 27 May, is commendable. It should allow
progress to be made on crucial national priorities, including the constitutional review
process. The State-building goals in the agreement of 27 May are ambitious and
require sustained dialogue and strong collaboration between the Federal Government
and federal member states, with support from the international community, if they are
21-10604

13/16

S/2021/723

to be achieved within the agreed time frame. I reiterate the importance of achieving
progress on the wider rule of law framework, which is essential to advancing State building priorities.
85. I am concerned that a specific mechanism for implementing the minimum quota
of 30 per cent for the parliamentary representation of women in relation to the
upcoming electoral process is yet to be identified. Although the commitment of the
Somali leadership to the quota, for both parliamentary chambers, is laudable, it
remains imperative that the commitment be translated into practice. That women
accounted for 24 per cent of those elected in 2016/17 was crucial in the advancement
of women’s political rights, and it is paramount that the gains achieved be safeguarded
and expanded.
86. More needs to be done to advance women’s rights and equal repre sentation by
creating an enabling environment for women’s participation in political processes and
decision-making, as well as wider peacebuilding initiatives. The Federal Government
and federal member states should ensure that women’s rights are codified in the
revised constitution and other legal frameworks and all stakeholders and partners
should enhance their support for the advancement of the women and peace and
security agenda. I call upon the Somali authorities to urgently accelerate the
finalization and implementation of the national action plan on women and peace and
security and to ratify and implement the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms
of Discrimination against Women.
87. I am alarmed by the increased sexual and gender-based violence and the fact
that many Somali women and children remain trapped in a cycle of violence, a
situation that requires urgent attention from the authorities and international partners.
I welcome the Puntland Cabinet’s approval, on 10 June, of a bill on zero tolerance of
female genital mutilation, by which that harmful practice that undermines the rights
and health of young girls and women will be criminalized. I encourage the Federal
Government to fulfil its commitment to implementing the joint communiqu é and
accelerate the adoption of the new national action plan for ending sexual violence in
conflict.
88. The announcement by Somalia and Kenya of the restoration of diplomatic
relations and the reopening of their embassies is encouraging. I hope that thos e
developments lead to the full re-establishment of friendly relations between the two
nations, which are pivotal for peace and stability in the region.
89. The implementation of the Somali transition plan remains hampered by electoral
controversies, and the process to generate appropriate Somali security forces remains
uncertain. The timely implementation of the plan and the national security
architecture, aimed at building a capable federal security sector, is critical if it is to
move to the full transition of security responsibilities from AMISOM to the Somali
security forces. I therefore reiterate my previous calls upon the Somali leadership to
enhance efforts to develop predictable and sustainable modalities to generate
capabilities for the Somali security forces and to accelerate transition-related
operations and the integration of regional forces.
90. The development and endorsement of a human rights policy for the Somali
national armed forces mark a positive step towards implementing the reforms to
which the Somali leaders committed themselves at the London Conference on
Somalia on 11 May 2017, which include enhancing the human rights protection
system. The policy is aimed at ensuring compliance by the Somali National Army
with national, regional and international obligations on human rights protection. I
urge the authorities to ensure its implementation in alignment with the Somali
commitments under international human rights law and encourage the adoption of

14/16

21-10604

S/2021/723

relevant operational measures and resources to support its concrete implementation
by military personnel.
91. The depleted state of the trust fund in support of the Somali security forces poses
significant risks to efforts to sustain progress in delivering vital peace and security
tasks mandated by the Security Council. The interruption of the logistical support
provided by UNSOS to the forces through the trust fund could compromise the
implementation of the transition plan. I therefore urge donors to contribute generously
to the trust fund.
92. I remain deeply concerned about the alarmingly low funding levels of the 2021
Humanitarian Response Plan, which is only 28 per cent funded halfway into the year.
The lack of funding could expose up to 3 million children, women and men, already
in dire need of humanitarian assistance, to the risk of repeated displacement, violence,
hunger and disease. I implore the international community to urgently provide the
funding necessary to save lives in Somalia.
93. Recurrent climatic shocks continue to have a negative impact on the population,
with dire consequences for the humanitarian situation. During the reporting period,
more than 80 per cent of the country experienced drought conditions owing to poor
gu rains, while some districts were flooded. To advance durable solutions to cyclical
flooding and drought, it is crucial that the national water strategy be adopted and
implemented to support nexus-centred interventions that mitigate vulnerability to
climate change and build resilience against future shocks.
94. The response by the authorities and health-care workers to the COVID-19
pandemic has been fundamental to mitigating the impact. Nevertheless, sustained
international support is required. I express my gratitude to all partners for their
support for the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access initiative and appeal for continued
support in ensuring sufficient provision for the national vaccination campaign.
Progress in the roll-out of vaccinations remains highly uneven, and I call upon the
international community to ensure that those most affected by conflict and insecurity
are not left behind.
95. I am grateful to the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the European Union, Member States, non -governmental organizations
and other partners for their continued support for peacebuilding and State -building in
Somalia. I pay tribute to the personnel of AMISOM and the Somali security forces
for their bravery and sacrifices in establishing a peaceful a nd stable Somalia. I
strongly condemn the recurrent attacks by Al-Shabaab, which represent a clear
strategy to undermine the State-building progress achieved. The United Nations
remains fully committed to supporting the authorities in their fight against v iolent
extremism. Those attacks should not deter the population and the Government from
remaining on their path towards peace, stability and prosperity.
96. Lastly, I thank my Special Representative, James Swan, and the United Nations
staff in Somalia for their tireless efforts during this critical period.

21-10604

15/16

S/2021/723

16/16

21-10604
