72

General Aa11embly-Seventeenth Session

expressed the belief that a third International Conference
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy should be held,
Recalling the benefits that have flowed from the two
International Conferences on the Peaceful Uses of
Atomic Energy, organized by the United Nations and
held at Geneva in 1955 and 1958,
Believing that the expeditious and effective application of atomic energy to peaceful purposes should be
actively promoted,
Recognizing that internati_onal ~ee~ings pro:7id~ eff~ctive opportunities for the dissemmat10n of scientific mformation on the application of atomic energy to
peaceful purposes,
Noting that, by 1964, six years will have elapsed since
the last International Conference on the Peaceful Uses
of Atomic Energy,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General1 6 evaluating the Second United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in
relation to the holding of similar conferences in the
future, and in particular the views expressed by the
United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee in paragraph 15 of that report,
Convinced that, because of improved dis~emination
of knowledge of the peaceful uses of at_o~1c e_ner~y,
a technical conference considerably more limited m size
and cost than those held in 1955 and 1958 would be
adequate,
Believing that such a conference would now be
desirable,
1. Declares its continued interest in promoting the
application of atomic energy to peaceful purposes ;
2. Declares that a third International Conference
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy would be
advantageous in achieving these object!ves and sh~uld
accordingly be convened under the aegis of the Umted
Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee, in co-operation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency and in consultation with interested
specialized agencies :
(a) To prepare plans and proceed with arrangements
for a third International Conference on the Peaceful
Uses of Atomic Energy to be held at Geneva for ten
calendar days in the autumn of 1964;
( b) To provide for a conference c~nsiderably more
limited in size and cost than those held m 1955 and 1958
and at a minimum expense to the United Nations;
( c) To report to the General Assembly at its
eighteenth session so that the necessary funds for such
a conference may be approved for inclusion in the
United Nations budget;
4. Invites the States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency to participate in the
Conference and to include among their representatives
individual experts competent in the field of atomic
energy.
1179th plenary meeting,
29 November 1962.
16 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 25, documents A/4391 and Add.1.

1771 (XVII), Appointment of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Acting in accordance with the recommendation of the
Security Council of 30 November 1962,17
Appoints U Thant as Secretary-General of the
United Nations for a term of office ending on
3 November 1966. 18
1182nd plenary meeting,
30 November 1962.

1786 (XVII). Revision of the Agreement be-tween the United Nations and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization

The General Assembly,
Noting a communication from the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations 19 which envisaged an amendment relating to article II of the Agreement between the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, so as to eliminate the need for that organization
to consult with the Economic and Social Council on
applications for membership in that organization of
States not Members of the United Nations,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 865 (XXXIII) of 4 April 1962 by which
the Council approved the deletion of article II of the
Agreement between the United Nations and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and recommended to the General Assembly that
it should approve that amendment of the Agreement,
Approves the deletion of article II of the Agreement
between the United Nations and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
1190th plenary meeting,
8 December 1962.

1800 (XVII). Report of the Security Council
The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16 July
1961 to 15 July 1962. 20
1192nd plenary meeting.
14 December 1962.

1810 (XVII). The situation with regard to the
implementation of the Declaration on the
granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples, and
its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 by
17 Ibid., Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 18, document A/5322.
18 See note on item 18, p. 63.
19 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-third Session, Annexes, agenda item 18, document
E/3588.
20 0 fficial Records of the General Assembly, Seventeenth
Session, Supplement 1Vo. 2 (A/5202).

73

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Committee

which it established a Special Committee of seventeen
members on the implementation of the Declaration,
Conscious of the fact that the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples
and the subsequent establishment of the Special Committee have raised great hopes everywhere, in particular
among peoples which have not yet attained independence, for the elimination of all forms of colonialism
and foreign domination without delay,
Having considered the report of the Special
Committee, 21
Noting with profound regret that, in spite of the
efforts of the United Nations, the provisions of the
Declaration have not been fully implemented in a large
number of territories and that, in certain cases, even
preliminary measures have not yet been taken to realize
its objectives,
Deeply concerned by the negative attitude and the
deliberate refusal of certain administering Powers to
co-operate with the Special Committee,
Reaf]irming its conviction that any delay in the implementation of the Declaration constitutes a continuing
source of international conflict, seriously impeding international co-operation and creating in many regions of
the world increasingly dangerous situations likely to
threaten international peace and security,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples for the work it has
accomplished;
2. Takes note with approval of the methods and
procedures which 1:he Special Committee has adopted
for the discharge of its functions ;
3. Solemnly reiterates and reaffirms the objectives
and principles enshrined both in the Declaration contained in resolution 1514 (XV) and in resolution
1654 (XVI);
4. Deplores the refusal of certain administering
Powers to co-operate in the implementation of the
Declaration in territories under their administration;
5. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to cease forthwith all armed action and repressive
measures directed against peoples who have not yet
attained independence, particularly against the political activities of their rightful leaders ;
6. Urges all administering Powers to take immediate steps in order that all colonial territories and
peoples may accede to independence without delay in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5 of the
Declaration ;
7. Decides to enlarge the membership of the Special Comm_i~tee established by resolution 1654 (XVI)
by the add1t10n of seven new members to be nominated
by the President of the General Assembly ;
8. Invites the enlarged Special Committee:
(a) To continue to seek the most suitable ways and
means for the speedy and total application of the
Declaration to all territories which have not yet attained independence ;
( b) To propose specific measures for the complete
application of the Declaration ;
21 Ibid., Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 25, document A/5238.

( c) To submit to the General Assembly in due
course, and not later than its eighteenth session, a
full report containing its suggestions and recommendations on all the territories mentioned in paragraph 5
of the Declaration ;
( d) To apprise the Security Council of any developments in these territories which may threaten international peace and security ;
9. Requests all Member States, especially the administering Powers, to afford the Special Committee
their fullest co-operation ;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Special Committee with all the facilities
and personnel necessary for the implementation of the
present resolution.
1195th plenary meeting,
17 December 1962.
•

•*

The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of
paragraph 7 of the above resolution, appointed seven additio11al
members of the Special Committee on the Situation 'With
regard to the Implementation, of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples as
follows: Bulgaria, Chile, Denmark, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast
and Sierra Leone.22
Accordingly, the Special Committee is composed of the folio-wing Member States: AUSTRALIA, BULGARIA, CAMBODIA,
CHILE, DENMARK, ETHIOPIA, INDIA, !RAN, IRAQ, ITALY, IVORY
COAST, MADAGASCAR, MALI, POLAND, SIERRA LEONE, SYRIA,
TANGANYIKA, TUNISIA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, URUGUAY, VENEZUELA and YUGOSLAVIA.

1811 (XVII). Question of Zanzibar
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter VI of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,21
concerning the situation in Zanzibar,
Having conside1·ed the views of the petitioners submitted to the Special Committee,
Taking note of the statements made by the representatives of the administering Power before the
Special Committee,
Guided by the provisions of the Declaration on the
granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960 and by resolution 1654
(XVI) o{ 27 November 1961,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the political
achievements of the people of Zanzibar ;
2. Takes note further of the declared policy of the
administering Power with respect to the independence
of Zanzibar ;
3. Requests the administering Power to take immediate steps for the implementation in Zanzibar of the
provisions of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, and requests
all concerned to make arrangements for the holding of
elections on the basis of universal adult suffrage;
4. Appeals to all the people of Zanzibar to achieve
national unity, having in view the independence of
Zanzibar at the earliest date ;
22 See

A/5397.
