S/PV.7850

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7850th meeting

Friday, 23 December 2016, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-45852 (E)
*1645852*

S/PV.7850

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.

sanctions to help end the culture of impunity and
reduce — at least — the violence. We are grateful to
those who supported this effort.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/1085, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
France, New Zealand, Spain, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Angola, China, Egypt, Japan, Malaysia, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received seven votes in favour, with eight
abstentions The draft resolution has not been adopted,
having failed to obtain the required number of votes.
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Ms. Power (United States of America): This
should not have been a contentions draft resolution
(S/2016/1085). The United States proposed a draft
resolution meant to show that the architects of
mass atrocities and those who defy the demands
of the Security Council day in and day would face
consequences. We urged members of the Council to
stand with South Sudan’s people, who are suffering
immesely due to the actions of their leaders. And
we urged that we use an arms embargo and targeted
2/12

23/12/2016

Some Council members decided to prevent the
Council from acting, from heeding the pleas of the
Secretary-General, who has been appealing for these
steps for more than a year. History is going to be
a very hard judge of their decision. The atrocities in
South Sudan and the displacement into neighbouring
countries are increasing every day. A number of false
arguments have been made in recent days, and I would
just like to address them head-on.
Some have said that this draft resolution should
have imposed either an arms embargo or targeted
sanctions, but not both. They argued that putting
both the arms embargo and the designations into the
same draft resolution was costing us votes and that
we might be able to get the draft resolution adopted
if we just submitted a clean arms embargo or clean
designations. That is just false. We told every abstaining
country — all eight abstainers on the arms embargo
and the designations — that we were completely open
to doing a clearn arms embargo or clean designations
to try to get at the culture of impunity and the leading
architects of theviolence. In response, we were told that
a change of that nature would not earn us a single vote.
We engaged every member who abstained in the voting.
Let nobody say, in retrospect, “Had only the Americans
put forward half of what they included in that draft
resolution, we would have been fine”. That is false.
Secondly, some have said — and this is a memorable
quote for me — “We need actions not sanctions”. That
is an exact quote. But the representative who said that
and all the other abstainers proposed no actions. Not
one of them came forward despite repeated pleas from
me personally and everybody who is part of the United
States Mission and is working on this issue. No one came
forward to say, “Okay, do not do this, but let us do this
instead. Here is an idea. Here is something that we can
rally behind”. Instead what the abstainers have rallied
behind is treading water, and it does in fact constitute
the definition of insanity, which is to do the same thing
over and over again and expect a different result.
The road to how we got here, I believe, illustrates
that. After another serious outbreak of violence in
July, the Security Council made a set of demands (see
S/PV.7730). We demanded unfettered access for all
people in South Sudan. Some 1,830,000 people are
16-45852

23/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

internally displaced in South Sudan, and approximately
4.8 million people — more than half the country — are
severely food insecure. When we made those demands,
and the Government of South Sudan failed to comply.
We demanded that the Government of South Sudan
stop blocking peacekeepers from the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) from carrying
out their mandate. We saw in person and heard from
contingent commanders and troops that they needed
written permission 48 hours in advance to be able to
move in convoys to protect people, even though they had
a civilian-protection mandate. We therefore demanded
that the movement be improved and increased with
freedom of movement. The Government of South Sudan
failed to comply.
We authorized the immediate deployment of a new
UNMISS regional protection force to help improve
security around the capital. The Government failed to
comply. The situation then grew worse on our watch,
and we regularly received briefings from United Nations
folks who were doing their best to sound the alarm. We
heard on television, radio and online sources a dramatic
increase in vile rhetoric wherein people were inciting
ethnic tensions, as Government officials did little to
stop it, despite muzzling the media in a whole series of
other respects. Soldiers began preparing in very overt
ways for large-scale attacks, including, at least, 4,000
militia recently staged in the Equatorias.
The Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Head of the Commission on Human
Rights in South Sudan and the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide all
issued their warnings. They came here, and the lights
flashed red — not yellow and certainly not green. It
does not happen in the Security Council very often
when a string of United Nations officials comes and
describes the gravity of what lies ahead. The SecretaryGeneral used his last appearance here (see S/PV.7846)
on the subject of South Sudan to appeal to us to take
heed of his warning and that of all of his team. Three
thousand people on average have fled South Sudan into
Uganda every single day this month. Is that because
the situation is getting better or is stable? With 3,000
people fleeing every day and fearing for their lives, that
is why we felt that we had to bring this draft resolution
to a vote. It has been hanging around. We have tried to
solicit textual input and changes and said that we are
flexible while, again, we heard nothing in reply.

S/PV.7850

Had it been adopted, this draft resolution would not
have been a panacea. We are not naive. It would have
not solved the underlying political crisis at the heart of
what has divided South Sudan, but the arms embargo
would have had some significant effects. It would have
made it impossible for the Government of South Sudan
to continue to use the precious resources at its disposal
to buy heavy weapons armaments. Would their have
been smuggling — an issue I heard raised by a lot of
Council members? Of course, there would have been
smuggling, but we would have significantly reduced
arms sales by United Nations Member States to a fellow
United Nations Member State that, instead of feeding
its people, is amping and arming up for a conflict that
is becoming increasingly ethnic in nature.
The individual sanctions targeted three individuals
Paul Malong, Riek Machar and Michael Makuei with
asset freezes and travel bans. People asked what good
would asset freezes and travel bans really do? Those
are three leaders with lengthy résumés for fuelling
violence. They have stoked ethnic conflicts, unleashed
violence against civilians and, especially in the cases
of Mr. Malong and Mr. Makuei, attempted to portray
UNMISS as a party to the conflict. Members of the
Council have all seen the rhetoric. Many of them have
soldiers who are on the ground in South Sudan. Those
soldiers are more vulnerable because of the threats
and the caricatures that those individuals have put out
concerning UNMISS, while conveying that the Mission
is just a tool of the opposition. That is a vulnerability
for all of our people who are present on the ground
whether they be aid workers, diplomats, private citizens
or peacekeepers.
The adoption of the draft resolution would have
shown that, at least when it came to the people who were
doing the most to stoke the atrocities and the violence,
there would have been costs. Would the designations
have changed the world? The answer is no, but does
sending a signal and message of impunity — as we
have doing every day that we have not voted on those
designations, even though we know the record of the
individuals involved — do so? A record of impunity and
that inability to impose a cost as a Council is a green
light, and that is a green light with which everyone who
abstained in the voting of this draft resolution is going
to have to live.
What is the alternative? I know people on the
Council care a lot about South Sudan. Many of us
travelled together to the region a couple of times over

16-458523/12

S/PV.7850

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the past year. Is the alternative just to trust that South
Sudan’s leaders are going to change course? There are
some really principled people in the South Sudanese
Government, and they are outnumbered or outranked.
There are such individuals. We all talked to them. We
know that there are people of good will who would like
to change course, but, unfortunately, not least because
of the actions of two of the people whom we designated
in the Government, that has proven to be something
that the Government is not prepared to do. Do we
just then sit on our hands until the Government calls
off the militia and stop some of the most significant
sexual violence that he have seen in any conflict in our
life times?
The Council members who did not support this draft
resolution are taking a big gamble that South Sudan’s
leaders will not instigate a catastrophe. If those Council
members are wrong — and every report that we have
heard in this Chamber suggests that they are — it is
the people of South Sudan who will pay an unbearable
price. It was not an easy decision for us to propose
this draft resolution. We debated it deep into the night
because having a draft resolution that is not adopted,
of course, is not how one wants to spend one’s day. I
believe that the South Sudanese people were watching
for the outcome of this vote, and we knew the signal that
this would send. At a certain point, drifting along and
internalizing the constraints imposed by those Council
members who do not want to take action in the face of
the violence, that is not an option. We learned that from
Rwanda, Srebrenica and chapters past.
The next time that soldiers and armed groups
fire on civilians, the next time that the Government
prevents peacekeepers from going on patrol, which has
probably already happened during the time that I have
been speaking, and the next time that a village goes
hungry because the Government withholds permission
for an aid delivery, each of us will need to find a way to
justify our response. The leaders of South Sudan should
not misinterpret this vote. All of us will be watching
closely what happens on the ground. The abuses will
continue to be publicized. We will continue to hear
appeals from the United Nations about what it feels it
needs in order to reduce violence on the ground. We will
continue to be relentless in demanding accountability,
and we will be ready to return to the Council to vote
again on the proposed arms embargo and targeted
sanctions as soon as those who did not support action
today come to understand the human costs of imposing
4/12

23/12/2016

no cost for attacking civilians, for importing massive
amounts of arms instead of feeding one’s people and for
not pursuing the cause of peace.
All of us have the opportunity to make an
explanation of vote today. I would be very grateful to
those who abstained in the voting to clarify what it will
take and what they are for that we have not already tried.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Three
years ago, almost to the day, the conflict in South
Sudan began. In those three years, civilians have been
the target of unspeakable violence and abuse, amply
documented by the United Nations, the African Union
and civil society organizations. The situation in South
Sudan continues to be one of the worst in the world.
The humanitarian consequences are tragic and the
needs of the population are staggering. The security
situation remains very volatile and, over the past
weeks, the Security Council has considered the risks
of retaliation and intensification, as well as violence
and mass atrocities. The special session of the Human
Rights Council, held last week in Geneva, underscored
our collective concern over the grim state of affairs.
In that context, France deeply regrets that the
draft resolution submitted by the United States could
not garner the necessary support in the Council to be
adopted. As is well-known and as we have expressed
on several occasions in this Chamber, France has long
supported an arms embargo on South Sudan. We regret
that it was not proposed earlier, when it could have
enjoyed broad support from the Council. In our eyes,
such a measure is fully warranted by the imperative
of protecting civilians. The steady inflow of arms into
South Sudan fuels violence by creating the illusion that
a military solution to the conflict is possible. In the
hands of the enemies of peace, those weapons facilitate
the commission of the worst abuses against civilians. It
is the responsibility of the Council to do all that it can
to reduce that risk and the arms embargo would surely
have helped.
The embargo could have also helped the political
process by changing the equation for those who
favour a military solution. It could have been a push
for peace. Its contribution to reducing violence could
have brought about a favourable environment and
conciliatory political dialogue. As the Council has
affirmed repeatedly, a lasting solution to the violence
in South Sudan can only be political and an embargo
could have helped.
16-45852

23/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

A few days ago, the Council unanimously renewed
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (see PV.7840). As the population of South Sudan
is at the mercy of violence and abuse, we hope that the
Council will once again unanimously decide to come to
their aid. Let us be aware of our shared responsibility to
prevent a new cycle of mass atrocities in South Sudan,
as the Secretary-General has warned us about, and
to bring about a positive dynamic. Today’s vote only
highlights the need for the Council to remain mobilized
to work for peace and security in South Sudan.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Today, the Security
Council had a chance to show that we would no longer
tolerate business as usual in South Sudan. Tragically,
for the people of South Sudan, we have been unable
to do so. For a long time it has been clear to many
of us in the Chamber that a different approach was
needed, that different pressure needed to be brought
to bear. Despite repeated promises, repeated atrocities,
repeated warnings of ethnic violence, the fighting has
continued to rage and the fragile peace agreement has
continued to sour.
That is why the United Kingdom has long advocated
for an arms embargo on South Sudan. Today, we had a
chance to curb the flow of weapons and to save lives.
It is why we advocated targeting those individuals who
have fuelled the violence — individuals at the top of
both the Government and the opposition. We had a
chance today to show those individuals that there are
very real repercussions for their role in that war. But
instead, we have done nothing. We have done nothing
despite knowing what is really at stake. We can all
recall Adama Dieng’s grave warning to this Council
just two weeks ago. He spoke of hateful rhetoric, of
ethnic divides. He spoke of possible genocide. If the
dire situation in South Sudan spirals into that tragic
place, we will all need to examine our consciences.
And Adama’s warning was just the tip of the iceberg.
We should not forget that atrocities have already been
committed in South Sudan. Sites established for the
protection of civilians have instead been the scenes of
murder, robbery and rape. Millions have uprooted their
lives and fled their homes. Families have been destroyed
and tens of thousands have been killed in a country that
went from one civil war to another. We have done nothing
to reduce the number of weapons at the disposal of those
who would choose to commit those unspeakable acts.
We have welcomed the repeated promises and offers of
the Government and the opposition to stop fighting and

S/PV.7850

to work towards a political process. We welcomed the
Government’s announcements to conduct an inclusive
national dialogue and we welcomed their commitment
to the deployment of a regional protection force.
But the reality does not reflect kindly on those
promises. In reality, the United Nations Mission
continues to face chronic restrictions. In reality, the
humanitarian situation has gotten worse, not better and
people are suffering. In reality, they are voting with
their feet. Up to 6,000 people per day fled for Uganda
this month.
That is the reality that we needed to change. Words
are not good enough. We must now see concrete action
resulting from those promises. Today we had a chance
to take a small step towards changing this reality, and
yet we have been failed to do so. Inaction today does not
abscond us all of our responsibilities. In fact, it places
an even heavier burden on us. The Security Council,
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and all parties to the conflict in South
Sudan have a responsibility to redouble our efforts for
peace in the year ahead. The people of South Sudan
have asked for it for long enough.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has followed closely the situation in South Sudan. My
country is committed to expeditiously restoring peace
and stability to South Sudan so that the people there
can enjoy peace dividends as soon as possible. Recently
President Salva Kiir announced the launching of a
national dialogue and the unconditional acceptance of
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) held a summit on South Sudan and issued a
communiqué. The international community should
seize this opportunity to push for various bodies in
South Sudan to continue with the implementation of
a peace agreement in order to return to the track of
finding a political solution. The leading role of IGAD
in mediating the South Sudan issue should be supported
so that peace, stability and development can be realized
as soon as possible.
We hold that there should be prudent action with
respect to sanctions and we believe that sanctions
should serve the interest of an overall political solution.
We are not in favour of using sanctions to exert
pressure on developing countries. The transitional
Government of South Sudan has demonstrated the
political will to implement relevant Council resolution

16-458525/12

S/PV.7850

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and joint communiqués. The IGAD communiqué
does not support the imposition of an embargo or
sanctions. The legitimate aspirations of IGAD and
African countries must be fully respected. Council
actions should be conducive to the political solution of
the South Sudanese issue, helpful to the work of the
mediation and good offices of IGAD and the African
Union and must contribute to maintaining the unity
of the Council. There needs to be prudent action with
respect to embargoes and designations in order to avoid
complicating the situation even further in South Sudan.
China has consistently supported the peace
process and provided active assistance to South
Sudan in its nation-building and stability. Recently,
theSpecial Representative of the Chinese Government
on African Affairs visited South Sudan and the region
to encourage the relevant actors to engage with one
another in peace negotiations. China is willing to work
with the international community to continue with its
constructive role in efforts towards enduring peace and
stability in South Sudan.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia, likw many other delegations, abstained
in the voting on the Security Council draft resolution on
expanding the sanctions regime against South Sudan.
That is because there are profound concerns about the
content of the document and the work conducted on
it. We think that it is abnormal when serious work on
settling the situation in the South Sudan is undermined
by the senseless use of such sanctions. But that is
typical of the sort of geopolitical engineering that the
Western countries have been using against South Sudan
and other countries. In the past, it was used against the
united Sudan in order to dismember it into two States.
We have a question for the delegation of the United
States. How does that delegation assess United States
activities on this issue? Having been unsuccessful in
South Sudan, the United States is now attempting to use
the Security Council for its own purposes, including
through the pointless expansion of sanctions. We do
not want to share the responsibility for the disastrous
consequences of such a short-sighted policy. We are
also against the high-handed, unceremonious conduct
of the sponsors of the resolution. By putting it to a vote,
they have not just ignored the opinion of a number of
Council delegations, they have also disregarded the
decisions of regional players, which have stated that new
Security Council restrictions were counterproductive
for the peace settlement process. They were also not
6/12

23/12/2016

bothered by the legitimate concerns of South Sudan’s
troop- and police-contributing countries, which quite
rightly have misgivings about the negative impact of
new sanctions on relations between the host country
and the Blue Helmets.
The sponsors do not want to acknowledge the
progress and cooperation achieved between Juba and the
United Nations. President Kiir has categorically agreed
to receive the Regional Protection Force. There has
been serious progress in the peace settlement process,
including the successful work of the Transitional
Government of National Unity and its practical steps to
launch inclusive, national dialogue and an amnesty for
Machar’s supporters. Once again, the sponsors of the
draft resolution closed their eyes to all of that.
We would also like to point out the inconsistency in
the American delegation’s interpretation of the priorities
of United Nations peacekeeping. At the Security
Council meeting on 20 November 2015 on the future
of United Nations peace operations, which included a
discussion of the report of the Secretary-General on the
outcomes of the United Nations peacekeeping review
(S/2015/682), the representative of the United States
stated that,
“We agree with the Secretary-General that political
settlements that promote peaceful and inclusive
societies and help advance human rights are key
to preventing conflict and interrupting cycles of
violence. We have a vested interest in ensuring
that, in those places where we have deployed
peacekeeping missions, we are equally engaged in
advancing the political process” (S/PV.7564, p.12).
It is doubtful that sanctioning the leaders of South
Sudan and of the opposition would facilitate the
building of a more inclusive society or the forging a
political process. On the contrary, such steps would only
exacerbate the animosity between the various ethnic
groups and the escalation of tension. We would also
like to point out that in resolution 2327 (2016), which
extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, the sponsors defined the Mission’s
task to facilitate the political process as being the last
priority. They did not heed the proposal of a number of
delegations to make it at least a second priority.
In sum therefore, we would like to express our
satisfaction about the responsible position taken by a
large number of Security Council members not to allow
today’s destructive draft resolution on South Sudan
16-45852

23/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to be adopted. In so doing, we managed to prevent
the emergence of new problems in the settlement
process and in relations between the host country, the
peacekeeping Mission and the international community
as a whole.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): The issue of the arms
embargo in South Sudan has been the subject of intense
debate in recent months. While it is a matter of urgency,
some delegations continuously advocate second-chance
diplomacy. Ukraine is all in favour of using diplomacy
as the primary path towards the resolution of the conflict
in South Sudan. However, we have a couple of simple
questions. How many more second chances should the
parties in South Sudan be given to stop the deliberate
killing of civilians, the rape of women and girls, and the
incitement to ethnic violence? How many more towns
and villages must be burnt before the Council reaches a
consensus on further action?
South Sudan is on the verge of chaos. The conflict
has touched almost every South Sudanese family,
ruining hopes for a peaceful future. To give just one
example — the town of Yei in the south-west was once
considered one of the safest places in South Sudan, but
not any more. Once bustling streets are now deserted,
schools and hospitals closed, and stores and markets
looted. Government soldiers patrol neighbourhoods
with Kalashnikovs in their hands. No-go zones are
controlled by rebels. More than half of the town’s
population has fled, and those who remain live in a fear
of being murdered, raped, arrested or disappeared.
Is that something that the international community
chooses to tolerate in the twenty-first century? Are we
ready to ignore yet another looming human tragedy that,
if not stopped, can lead to irreparable consequences.
The answer is obvious. We must not let the South
Sudanese people share the grief of Srebrenica, Rwanda
or Aleppo.
With that in mind, Ukraine voted in favour of
the resolution. We are fully conscious that it does not
represent a solution in itself. However, we are convinced
that the arms embargo and additional targeted sanctions
would reduce the ability of the parties to continue
fuelling the conflict in South Sudan. It would help to
silence the already procured military equipment and
stop the spending of desperately needed financial
resources on new weaponry. The arms embargo is not a
punishment, but a prerequisite and a tool for peace. We
regret that the Council was not able to use it.

S/PV.7850

Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan shares the deep concern
regarding the ongoing violence and the serious
humanitarian situation in South Sudan. It should be
noted, however, that there has been some progress
since late November, most notably the 25 November
decision by the Council of Ministers of the Transitional
Government, which consented to the full and immediate
deployment of the Regional Protection Force, and
President Kiir’s 14 December speech to the Parliament
on an inclusive national dialogue. We are encouraged
by the demonstration of political will by the President.
Such commitments would be meaningless if their
implementation were delayed, and, in that case, it is
the South Sudanese people who would suffer. What is
absolutely necessary is for the Transitional Government
to swiftly translate those commitments into concrete
actions in order to prevent large-scale violence and for
it to cooperate fully with the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, including by expediting the deployment
of the Regional Protection Force.
Japan believes that it would be counterproductive
to introduce additional sanctions measures at a time
when the Transitional Government is making some
positive moves. The Council must continue to engage
with the Transitional Government. Japan believes that
there is still room for diplomatic efforts aimed at urging
the Transitional Government to make further progress.
All the parties and actors can play a significant role,
individually or collectively.
Our Prime Minister’s special envoy visited Juba
just this week to urge action by the South Sudanese
leadership, including President Kiir, on those issues.
We will continue to make such efforts. Japan remains
strongly committed to the well-being of the people
of South Sudan and to the country’s long-term
development. Japan will continue to contribute to South
Sudan’s peace and security.
Concrete actions on the part of the Transitional
Government are key. The international community,
including the Security Council, will closely monitor the
situation on the ground. We should also recall resolution
2327 (2016), including paragraph 10, which the Council
adopted unanimously. Japan decided to abstain on
today’s draft resolution for the aforementioned reasons.
Japan’s abstention today should not be interpreted as an
endorsement of the status quo or an attitude of wait-andsee. The Council should remain seized of the matter.

16-458527/12

S/PV.7850

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Just a week ago, we
all were here in the Council Chamber, having just
unanimously adopted resolution 2327 (2016). The
unanimous adoption of that resolution demonstrated the
Council’s strong support for the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and our resolve on South Sudan. They
were tedious negotiations, but our collective desire to
find consensus prevailed. Our collective aim was to
support the Transitional Government of National Unity
of South Sudan towards restoring lasting peace and
stability in the country.
The Council is strongest when it speaks in one
voice. After the unanimous adoption of resolution
2327 (2016), we would have hoped for more concerted
efforts by all Council members to support the full
implementation of the resolution.
Malaysia commends the leadership role and
solidarity shown by the regional partners, namely, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), in mediating dialogue towards
restoring peace and stability in South Sudan. These
regional partners have continued to play an instrumental
role by engaging the parties in the political process
and pledging support to the Regional Protection Force
despite the challenging circumstances.
In this context, IGAD had clearly stated that
dialogue, reconciliation and commitment by all South
Sudanese parties to implement the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan are required for permanent peace and stability in
South Sudan. It is unfortunate that the perspective and
positions of IGAD, as well as those of the partners and
countries in the region, have not been taken on board.
Furthermore, we are appreciative of the South
Sudanese Government’s ongoing efforts and its decision
to fully and unconditionally implement resolution 2304
(2016) and its joint communiqué with the Security
Council, as well as the recent announcements by
President Kiir to convene an inclusive national dialogue.
These are positive developments. It would have been
better and more productive if the Council had seized
these opportunities and devoted more time and energy
to working with the South Sudanese parties towards
realizing these commitments.
Malaysia believes that united Council resolutions
could be built upon to ensure greater success on South
Sudan. This is, sadly, glaringly lacking today. It is
therefore with much regret that Malaysia was compelled
8/12

23/12/2016

to abstain today. Having followed the developments in
South Sudan closely, we believe that it is ever more
important for Council members to remain united in
charting a comprehensive and effective strategy to
support the efforts of the South Sudanese authorities
and to implement the peace agreement, protect civilians
and restore peace and stability in the country.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation deplores the fact that the Council has once
again failed to reach a united position concerning a key
question that falls under the mandate of the Security
Council to on the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Less than a week ago, we managed to adopt
unanimously resolution 2327 (2016), which dealt with
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan following very difficult
negotiations. The Council sent an important message
to the parties to the conflict, and we deemed that an
important step in order to put an end to the attacks that
have been ongoing for more than three years now.
Certain countries are asking that the Council be
united, but these same countries are hardly willing
to take into account the considerations and concerns
expressed by other countries, including the countries in
the region, which are the ones that are most concerned
and are in the best position to assess the very delicate
situation in the region.
The presidents of the countries members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
also refused the sanctions on the basis of the fact that
sanctions would not contribute to a solution.
The resort to threats such as those contained in
the draft resolution submitted today (S/2016/1085) has
already proved to be ineffective in putting an end to
crises in the Sudan and elsewhere. Such measures will
not change reality at all and certainly not contribute
to improving the situation of civilians in South Sudan.
But this is an easy solution, and some prefer such
solutions to genuine efforts that could strengthen
dialogue and help to resolve the crisis. Some prefer
such solutions to efforts to address the causes of
conflicts in order to resolve them; they prefer them to
efforts at comprehensive reconciliation and the creation
of a national identity that would unite all the people of
South Sudan.
16-45852

23/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Our abstention does not mean that we implicitly
approve of the abuses committed in South Sudan, nor
does not mean that we are unaware of the scope of the
humanitarian crisis. We are perfectly aware of the scope
of the crisis, and we are working to put an end to it. We
call upon all of the parties in South Sudan to assume
their full responsibility to alleviate the suffering of
their fellow citizens, and we call upon them to fulfill
the aspirations that accompanied the emergence of their
young country.
I should like to reiterate here that the patience of the
international community and the understanding shown
by some regional parties vis-à-vis the specificities of
the situation in South Sudan should in no way be viewed
as consent in connection with the deaths of innocent
people and human rights violations.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): After considering the
draft resolution (S/2016/1085), our delegation decided
to abstain, without prejudice to the fact that we believe
that the current situation in South Sudan requires
urgent, decisive, coordinated and consensual action on
the part of the Security Council in order to tackle the
situation effectively and comprehensively, so as to help
to stabilize the situation and achieve a lasting peace
and to ensure the socioeconomic development of the
brotherly people of South Sudan.
However, with respect to sanctions, everyone
is aware of our delegation’s principled position. In
that respect, I would like to reiterate that Venezuela
considers such measures as a tool and not as an end
in themselves. Such instruments can have a positive
impact only if they are intrinsically linked to a clearly
defined political strategy.
In the case of South Sudan, our delegation believes
that such a strategy does not exist, as was pointed out
by the Secretary-General in one of his most recent
reports. We therefore believe that not only should
we pool our efforts in order to revitalize the political
process in the country, but we must also move forward
in drawing up a clear political strategy in order to tackle
comprehensively the conflict that has ravaged the
country for the past three years, in close coordination
with the country and other organizations in the region.
We also agree with the unanimous position of the
countries of the region in their recognition of the need
to prevent the situation on the ground from escalating.
In our opinion, had we adopted this draft resolution, we

S/PV.7850

would have run the risk of, inter alia, moving in that
direction. Without a negotiating process being held, a
proposal was made to target one of the main parties
to the peace agreement, which serves as a framework
for the resolution of the crisis in South Sudan, as
was expressed by the Security Council in the press
communiqué issued on 18 November and in the recently
adopted resolution 2327 (2016) renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. It is very
unlikely that we would call for the full implementation
of the agreement and at the same time wish to impose
specific sanctions on one of the signatories. There is
no link between sanctions and the political strategy to
resolve the crisis.
The same applies with the attempt to impose an
arms embargo on South Sudan. Even though we concur
that there is a significant flow of illicit arms into
the country, many of those weapons have been there
since the beginning of the conflict. We believe that
we should favour, among other things, the adoption of
effective disarmament measures and the cantonment
of troops, taking into account the transitional security
provisions that are included in the peace agreement
that the Security Council has underscored should serve
as the basis for resolving the conflict in South Sudan.
Furthermore, we have serious reservations about the
overall effectiveness of an arms embargo as a tool for
putting an end to the illicit flow of weapons, bearing in
mind the experience in other conflict situations.
In reiterating today our position that we should
promote an African solution to African problems, we
endorse the unanimous position of the region on this
matter that the imposition of an arms embargo or
sanctions on South Sudan would not offer the solution
that is sought in our efforts to achieve a lasting peace
and the stability of the country. What is needed is rather
a dialogue, a reconciliation and the commitment of the
parties to implement the peace agreement with the
support of the region and the international community.
Lastly, our delegation is convinced that our African
brothers, in particular the people of South Sudan, will
understand our position. We regret the fact that the
spirit of unity, which should characterize the work of
the Security Council, once again was not able to be
achieved in this case. We hope that future discussions
will assist in achieving consensual approaches that
could truly have a positive impact on the situation on
the ground.

16-458529/12

S/PV.7850

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Martins (Angola): Like other members,
Angola abstained in the voting on draft resolution
S/2016/1085, which sought to target sanctions and an
arms embargo against the Government and authorities
of South Sudan. Recently, the Government of South
Sudan has continued to show its commitment to the
implementation of the joint communiqué between the
Transitional Government of National Unity and the
Security Council on the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force. And in our latest Council discussion
on the topic, which took place on 19 December
(see S/PV.7846), Angola noted with appreciation
the steps taken by the Government to support the
operationalization of the Force.
Angola welcomes the decision that President Kiir
recently announced to launch a national inclusive
dialogue. At this stage, the Council, instead of moving
in the direction of applying sanctions, should continue
to monitor the decisions announced and encourage the
Government to move forward on that path. Several
positive developments were recorded in the various states
of the country, such as the approval of the deployment
sites in Central Equatorial. We believe that in due time,
again through dialogue, the parties, namely, the United
Nations and the Government of National Unity, will
agree on the necessary arrangements and agreements.
In our view, sanctions against South Sudan must
not be the priority of the United Nations. Rather, the
United Nations should focus in South Sudan more
on supporting the political dialogue with the aim
of implementing the peace agreement. That would
be in line with the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which underscored that an
arms embargo or sanctions on South Sudan would not
provide the requisite solution leading to permanent
peace and stability in the country. IGAD stressed again
that what is required is dialogue, reconciliation and the
commitment by all the South Sudanese parties to fully
implement the peace agreement. The African Union
has also adopted the IGAD position. We feel that the
Council should reinforce and encourage that position.
Angola is fully committed to the path of sustainable
peace and stability through dialogue, which is a better
way to solve conflicts, including this particular conflict
in South Sudan. For that reason we abstained in the
voting on the draft resolution.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
abstained in the voting on draft resolution S/2016/1085,
10/12

23/12/2016

not because we favour inaction or we are questioning
the abuse that has been committed, but rather because,
while condemning the human rights violations and
other violations that are continuing to be perpetrated
by all the parties in the South Sudanese conflict, we
are convinced that in its quest for stability, that country
needs a sustainable peace. In our opinion, such an
approach requires an ongoing investment on the part of
the Security Council, which we have already witnessed
through the several actions that it has taken during the
year, including the visit by the Council in the month of
September, and the visit just made by the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan. But
we need a united approach, above all, one that is in
close coordination with the organizations and countries
of the subregion. I am thinking, in particular, of IGAD
and its members, which have an important role to play.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes and strongly
encourages the efforts of IGAD and the countries of the
subregion. I am thinking in particular of the recent visit
that made by President Museveni of Uganda to Juba to
encourage the South Sudanese authorities to put an end
to their hostilities and to focus on the political process.
We also believe that, given the humanitarian urgency
and the importance of protecting civilians, we have to
act effectively. We are convinced that, as the Security
Council, we must begin a dynamic and constructive
dialogue with the Transitional Government of National
Unity. We encourage it to fulfil its commitments, as
soon as possible, to relaunch a national dialogue and to
deploy the Regional Protection Force. But that dialogue
must also be conducted with the other subregional
organizations, such as IGAD and the African Union,
and it should deal with the main aspects of stabilization
in South Sudan, namely, the implementation of the
peace agreement, security-sector reform, the protection
of civilians, human rights and the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
Once again, we believe that it is our responsibility
to support the people of South Sudan, who are, after
all, the ones who suffer most from the current situation.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of draft resolution S/2016/1085.
We are aware of the grave humanitarian, human rights
and security situation that South Sudan is experiencing
as a result of a profound political crisis, and of the
fact that those responsible for that crisis are the main
political and military leaders. We regret that the draft
16-45852

23/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7850

resolution put to the vote today could not garner the
necessary amount of positive votes for its adoption.
My delegation believes that, given the critical current
situation in the country, the implementation of the
measures provided for in the draft resolution would
have helped to bolster political dialogue and avoid
further loss of civilian lives.

expressed by some that an arms embargo and targeted
sanctions would upset any political process. However,
in our view, those measures would only help create the
conditions for peace on the ground and would, in turn,
support the political process when it gets underway.
Yet, right now we are seeing a lot more fighting and
killing than talking.

As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said in the
Security Council on Monday, 19 December, an arms
embargo “would diminish the capacity of all sides in
the conflict to wage war” (S/PV. 7846, p. 2). Without
the embargo, South Sudan would continue to be in
permanent confrontation. An arms embargo would
also clearly contribute to stopping the proliferation of
weapons around the country, which, given the current
situation of instability and insecurity, has proven to
be a risk factor and an ongoing threat to the civilian
population. As we have already said, the embargo
would have facilitated dialogue and negotiation and,
moreover, would have allowed the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan to carry out its
work with more guarantees.

We have been warned by the United Nations
of the possibility of much graver developments.
Ignoring those warnings and preserving space for a
currently non-existent dialogue seems to us to not
make a lot of sense. We are concerned that what we
are seeing today is another example of a country where
a Council-mandated mission is operating under very
difficult conditions. The country is doing just enough
to satisfy the Council — doing the minimum to avoid
the imposition of measures that the Council itself
had forecast, but not demonstrating any meaningful
commitment to changing the dangerous course upon
which it has embarked. As New Zealand leaves the
Council, we urge Council members not to allow
differences over the draft resolution to distract from
and prevent unified and effective leadership on the
critical issues that face the people of South Sudan and
the peacekeeping mission on the ground.

Uruguay reiterates that the Government has the
primary responsibility for protecting its own citizens. It
must provide such protection regardless of its citizens’
ethnic origin or political affiliation. Therefore, the
political leaders of South Sudan must act responsibly
and reject any incitement of violence, while at the same
time committing themselves to the path of dialogue.
On that point, we urge all parties to join in a process
of inclusive and transparent dialogue, with a view to
achieving reconciliation and peace in the country so as
to put an end to the long suffering of its inhabitants.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
voted in favour of today’s draft resolution. For many
months, New Zealand has argued that an arms embargo
on South Sudan is needed as part of the international
response to the continuing conflict. It is also a measure
that has been strongly and repeatedly called for by the
Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations for over a year. We are
very disappointed that the Council has failed to respond
to those requests.
We recognize that an arms embargo will not resolve
the conflict. However, it will go a long way towards
addressing the overabundance of weapons, which are
being used against civilians. It undoubtedly further
fuels the conflict. We also recognize the concern

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Spain.
Spain voted in favour the draft resolution, in which
we proposed the establishment of an arms embargo on
South Sudan. We believe that such a measure, which
was requested by the Secretary-General, is absolutely
necessary in order to provide a response to the security
and humanitarian situation, which has been described
by experts as catastrophic and unsustainable. We have
been defending such measures for some time, and we
regret the fact that we were not able to adopt them.
The arms embargo is a necessary measure but,
unfortunately, it is not enough. There are signs that
the conflict is running the grave risk of becoming an
ethnic war. The Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, warned us about a month
ago about the risk of genocide. I would like also to
reiterate that my delegation has never felt that sanctions
were an end in themselves. Rather, we simply believe
that sanctions would reduce violence on the ground.
Lastly, a week after the adoption of resolution 2327
(2016), in which we renewed the mandate of the United

16-4585211/12

S/PV.7850

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), Spain
would like to reiterate its appeal for the urgency of
proceeding to the deployment and full implementation
of the Regional Protection Force. We take note of the
commitment assumed by the Transitional Government
of National Unity, but we must now transition from words
to actions, and we must do so immediately. It is crucial
for UNMISS to be able to operate without restrictions
in order to comply with its mandate, particularly with
respect to the protection of civilians and the safe and
unhindered distribution of humanitarian assistance.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): At the outset, let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and members of
the Security Council for giving me another opportunity
to address the Council on this important issue of an arms
embargo and targeted sanctions against my country.
The reasons given for the threat of an arms embargo
and sanctions were the frustration and impatience of
the international community with the lack of progress
in the implementation of the peace agreement.
In my previous statement to the Council, I
reported on the positive efforts and actions that the
Government is undertaking in order to address the
many challenges that the country is facing, as well as
on the implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions, including the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force (see S/PV.7840). In addition, on
19 December, His Excellency Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit,
President of the Republic of South Sudan, further to his
launching of a national dialogue, issued a presidential
order that formed the National Dialogue Steering
Committee, which is composed of varied personalities
and will advise the President and the members of the
Council on how to embark on the peace process. All of

12/12

23/12/2016

the recent commitments made by my President point in
a more encouraging direction. Therefore, I think that
the tabling of the draft resolution is unfortunate.
We were hoping that at this critical juncture, when
the Transitional Government of National Unity is doing
everything to implement Security Council resolutions
and the deployment of the Regional Protection Force,
the Security Council would engage the Government of
South Sudan constructively instead of issuing threats
of the imposition of an arms embargo and targeted
sanctions. It is very unfortunate that individuals who
are critical of the peace process were targeted and listed
for sanctions by the draft resolution. That action reveals
a lack of good faith and only serves to further aggravate
matters and invite controversy, potential disagreement
and hostility. In truth, harmony and cooperation are
naturally what the situation calls for.
As we have repeatedly said, punitive measures
may tend to harden positions rather than increase
cooperation. We have always argued that an arms
embargo seeks to further weaken the Government and
strengthen the various militant and armed groups for a
number of historical reasons, including the long civil
war, which left arms in the hands of civilians, porous
borders, which make it difficult to control the illegal
in-flow of small arms and light weapons, and, as stated
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/951), the
proliferation of armed groups in the country with their
own distinct agendas.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the commitment
of my Government to the full implementation of the
peace agreement and to working with all stakeholders,
including members of the Security Council and the
international community, in order to bring peace and
stability to the people of South Sudan. I would also like
to take this opportunity to thank the members of the
Security Council who engaged with us constructively.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

16-45852
