UNITEL3 NATIONS

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-SIXTH

REC

. .. . .. . .

YEAR

MEETING: 24APRIL 1981

2272””

..I

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agencla/2272) . . . . , , , . . . . . . . ; . . , , , , . , , . . . . . . , , . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . .*.,,.,,.,,.,.*........,.*.....,...........*..

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434) , , , . t *. . , , , . . * * *. , . . . . . . . . * * . . . . . . . . . . * *. * , , . . , . * *. *. . * * .

1

SlPV.2272

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention ol’ such a symbol indicates B reference to R United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Sor>~A~~/n~~nr.rof the I)fl>c-id R~~wtd.~ of 11tc~Swrtrily
C.‘otlm~il. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of R~~,sol~~tior~s O/ICI
l3wi.rion.r
qf’ ~hr S’wtlrirj~
C’ott~tcdl. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2272nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 24 April 1981, at 11 a.m.
Presi&nt: Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).
PresE1rt:
The representatives of the following States:
Chins,France,German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan,Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia,Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
UnitedKingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
UnitedStatesof America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2272)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14434)
The meeting ws clrlled to order nt noon.
Adoption of the agenda
The ngendo ws cuiopted,
Thesituation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 From the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434)

1, The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisionstaken at previous meetings [2267th to 227/st
~~feeff%sl,I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Canada, Cuba,
DemocraticYemen, Ethiopia, the Federal Republic of
Germany,Guinea, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Romania, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Togo, the United
Republicof Tanzania, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia and
Zimbabweto participate in the discussion without the
right to vote,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Benynkia
Mr. J orge (An&u),
Mr. Kaiser (BanladeshI, Mr. Houng~~vou (Benin), Mr, CorrCu da Costa
@rflZit), Mr. Morden
(Cannd~),
Mr, Malmierca
(Cuba), Mr. Ashrnl (D emocratic Yemen), Mr. GedieGiorgis W%opia), Mr. Jelonck (Federal Republic of
Gerf?~aflyj, Mr. Coumbnssa (Guine(r), Mr. Rrro (Indict),
Mwia),

Mr-

Kloumclcltt?la~i~l

(Itjt/onc.sro)

ilfr.

5Sllr,(fI

(‘1.

(Jonutica), Mr. Kltsinna (Kenya), Mr. Lobo (Mozcrmbique), Mr. Bnba (Nigeria), Mr, Marinescu (Romanicr),
Mr, Niasse (Senegal), Mr. Conteh (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Fourie (South Africa), Mr, Balasubramaniam
(Sri
Lank(t), Mr. Akakpo-Ahianyo
(Togo), Mr. Salim
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Vrhovec (Yugoslavia), Mr. Kamanda wu Knmnnda (Zaire), Mr. Goma
(ZcrnrbicrI and Mr. Mangruende (Zimbabwe) took the
plcrees reserved for them at the side of the Council
shiunber,

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Burundi, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Pakistan in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussionof the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitaiion of the President, Mr. Simbananiye
(Burundi), Mr. Burl~~in (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) and
Mr. Shcrhi [Pakistan) took the places reservedfar them
ot the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision taken at the 2267th meeting, I invite the President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the
delegation of the Council to take places at the Security Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka
(President of the United Nations Council for Namibiu)
cmd the other members of the delegation took places
tu the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision taken also at the 2267th meeting, I invite Mr, Peter
Mueshihange to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President,
took u place at the Council table.

Mr. Mueshihange

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter dated
23 April [S//44.56] from the representatives of the
?+tli!;cf*.T~miia and Uganda, which reads as follows:

“We, the undersigned members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that the Council
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Johnstone Makatini,
representative
of the African National
Congress
of South Africa (ANC), during the course of the
Council’s consideration of the item ‘The situation in
Namibia’. ”

aud rebuilding the nation, This has greatly inspired the
Namibian people in their valiant fight for national independence and liberation. With their morale and confidence thus boosted, and under the leadership of the
South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO),
they are now intensifying various forms of struggle,
including armed struggle, to deal ever-heavier blows
to the South African colonial authorities.

6. If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Council
agrees to this request.

12. The question of Namibia has become the most
salient issue in the decolonization
struggle now. The
African countries and people, and indeed the people all
over the world, strongly demand the immediate termination of the illegal occupation and colonial rule of
Namibia by South Africa. They advocate early independence for Namibia through the implementation
of
the relevant United Nations resolutions and plan. The
OAU, the front-line African States, Nigeria and other
countries concerned, as well as the United Nations,
have made tremendous efforts to this end. The Conference of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries, meeting at New Delhi in February,
the thirty-sixth ordinary session of the OAU Council
of Ministers held at Addis Ababa earlier this year and
the extraordinary
ministerial
meeting of the Coordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries
which concluded a few days ago have all sternly
condemned the South African racist rkgime for its
intransigent
position and strongly demanded comprehensive mandatory sanctions against that rhgime.
They have also called for the speedy implementation
of the relevant United Nations resofutions and plan
regarding Namibian
independence,
All this goes to
show that the Namibian
people’s quest for their national aspirations enjoys abundant support and is a
part of the historical tide which no force on earth can
$urn back.

If was so decided.

7. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to document S/14457,
which contains the text of a letter dated 23 April from
the representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the President of the
Security Council.
8. Mr.

LING

Qing (China)

(intc~~~tation

from

Chinese): Mr. President, I wish at the outset and in the

name of the Chinese delegation to congratulate you
heartily on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I have no doubt that
you will discharge the responsibilities of this high office
with distinction. I would also like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Florin for his contribution as President of
the Council last month.
9. We feel greatly honoured by the presence here of
so many Ministers for Foreign Affairs from friendly
African and other non-aligned countries and wish to
express our warm welcome to them.
10. The question of Namibia is a major issue confronting the world today. Consideration of this question by the Council at this time is most appropriate
and highly significant. We have listened carefully in the
past couple of days to the important statements made
by the distinguished Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
various African countries who, entrusted by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and speaking on behalf
of the African countries and people, have voiced strong
indignation at the South African racist authorities’
persistent obstruction and sabotage of the implementation of the United Nations resolutions and plan regarding Namibian independence. At the same time,
the Ministers have presented a number of positive and
sound proposals for an early settlement of the Namibian question. The Chinese delegation fully endorses
the just position and reasonable demands enunciated
by the Ministers on behalf of the African States and
people.

13. The South African authorities should be held
solely responsible for the failure thus far to implement
the relevant United Nations resolutions and plan for the
independence
of Namibia.
Those authorities
have
resorted to double-dealing
on this matter during the
past three years. They advanced all sorts of absurd
pretexts to drag out the negotiations while intensifying
military provocation and threat against the front-line
African States. Meanwhile, they stepped up an “internal settlement”
plan by fostering the so-called
internal parties which are nothing but their puppets,
in a vain attempt to stage a sham independence of the
bantustan-type,
thus trying to prolong their illegal
occupation
of Namibia.
This was precisely what
motivated the South African authorities when they
blatantly sabotaged the Geneva meeting last January.
14. These motives and underhand tactics of the South
African racist regime represent the major stumblingblock in the way of Namibian
independence.
That
rCgime should therefore be sternly censured, and
sanctions should be imposed on it. It should be emphatically pointed out here that the United Nations and
all justice-upholding
countries and people of the world

11. A little over a year ago, the people of Zimbabwe
finally achieved independence after a long and arduous
struggle. Since the birth of the Zimbabwean Republic,
the Zimbabwean people, led by Prime Minister Robert
Mugabe, have scored remarkable successes in consolidating their independence, healing the wounds of war
2

have made relentless efforts to achieve a peaceful
settlement of the question of Namibian independence, However, there is a limit to COnCeSSiOn
and
tolerance.Should the South African authorities regard
the forbearance Of the internatiOnal
COITUlNInity
as a
signof weaknessand persist in their intransigent position, then they would be grossly miscalculating the
situation. Recently, the South African racist rkgime
appearsto be counting on the support and connivance
ofcertain Western Powers in continuing its abominable
racist and colonialist policies and perpetuating its
illegal occupation of Namibia. However, world opinion
aswell as far-sighted people in the Western countries
have clearly indicated that any support for or condoning of the position of the South African racist
rhgime would only antagonize the broad massesof the
African people and inflate the arrogance and truculence
of the racists. This will lead to greater turbulence in
the region and provide an opening for intervention and
expansionby hegemonist forces from the outside. The
great people of Africa, including the Namibian people,
cannotbe bullied. No one can turn the tide of history.
TheSouth African racist regime would be lifting a rock
only to crush its own feet if it persists in its intransigency.

was endorsed by its resolution 435 (1978), SOas to
enable the Namibian people to attain genuine independence on the basis of territorial integrity and unity.
At the sametime, strong measures, including the mandatory sanctions stipulated in Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, should be taken against
the recalcitrant racist rCgime of South Africa. AS the
African countries have repeatedly pointed out, the
five Western Powers that drew up the United Nations
plan for Namibia [S/12636] bear a responsibility which
cannot be shirked for ensuring the implementation of
the plan. We support this justified and reasonable view
of the African countries.
17. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Sri Lanka. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.
18. Mr. BALASUBRAMANIAM
(Sri Lanka):
Mr. President, let me at the outset thank you, and
through you the members of the Security Council, for
affording Sri Lanka the opportunity to participate in
this debate.
19. To you, Mr. President, my delegation extends
its best wishes. To reach Ireland from Sri Lanka one
has to cross many seas and many oceans, but your
emerald isle and my island of gems have always maintained close and friendly relations. Your diplomatic
skill, sense of balance and ready wit, not to mention
the traditional luck of the Irish, will stand you and the
Council in good stead in this difficult debate.

15. The Namibian people may still face obstacles
on the road of their advance, but they have acquired
abundant experience in their struggle. We are convincedthat, under the leadership of SWAP0 and with
the extensive support of the countries and people of
Africa and, indeed, the whole world, the Namibian
peoplewill ultimately fulfil their national aspirations
and win genuine independence as long as they close
their ranks, intensify various forms of struggle and
dispelall interference and sabotage by outside forces.

20. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sri Lanka,
Mr. Shahul Hameed, was to have been with us today
in accordance with the mandate entrusted to him and
a number of other distinguished Ministers for Foreign
Affairs by the extraordinary ministerial meeting of the
Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries
held last week at Algiers. Mr. Hameed had to return
to Colombo after the ministerial meeting at Algiers
for a meeting of South Asian States which Sri Lanka
has been hosting this week. This, as well as some other
important engagements, has unfortunately accounted
for his inability to reaffirm personally in this forum the
unqualified and unflinching support of Sri Lankafor the
struggle of the people of Namibia for freedom and
justice.

16. The Chinese delegation enunciated its comprehensive position on the question of Namibia on
30January 1981[2263rd wzeefing] during the Security
Council’s consideration of the Secretary-General’s
report on the result of the Geneva meeting and again
on 4 March during the General Assembly debate on
the Namibian question at its resumed thirty-fifth
session.’ We would like to reaffirm here that the
ChineseGovernment and people have always firmly
supportedthe Namibian people in their just struggle
for national independence and liberation and sternly
condemned the South African racist rCgime for its
illegal occupation of Namibia and stubborn refusal to
implementthe relevant United Nations resolutions. We
endorse all the correct views and proposals of the
African countries. The international community
shouldtake effective measures to compel South Africa
to implement the relevant resolutions of the General
Assemblyand the Security Council, We deem that the
Council should accept the justified demands of the
African countries. It should call on the international
communitYto give greater support to the just cause of
the Namibian people. It should, without any further
delay3enforce in its totality the United Nations plan
for the settlement of the Namibian question, which

21. It is not my intention to make a long statement.
A number of preceding speakers have, with greater
eloquence than I can aspire to muster, presented the
unimpeachable case for the people of Namibia and the
righteousness of their struggle against racist oppression, injustice and servitude.
22. Whatever the discussions now taking place in
other forums regarding the future of Namibia, one
cannot overlook the fact that since 1966Namibia has
been the clear responsibility of the United Nations,
It is within that framework that the Council adopted
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978), spelling out the
3

27, Speaker after speaker in this debate has reiterated
the call of the Algiers communique regarding the
imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions
against South Africa. If all other efforts at a peaceful
solution are stalled or blocked, there is no alternative
left but comprehensive mandatory sanctions. The call
for comprehensive sanctions tends to raise objections
from certain quarters, but it cannot be denied that
this question, with all its implications, would not have
arisen if sufftcient pressure had been brought to bear
upon South Africa to implement the United Nations
plan.

details of what is for convenience described as the
United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.
Despite its limitations, despite the severe beatings the
plan has had to bear, it still remains, as the communique of the extraordinary ministerial meeting held
at Algiers calls it, “the only valid framework for a
peaceful transition” to independence [S/14458, annex,
para. 91.

The people of Namibia and SWAPO, their sole
and authentic liberation movement, have given more
than a chance to that plan. Leaving aside a number
of other decisive and forceful options, SWAP0 accepted the assurances of South Africa that it would
implement the plan. As the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Niger pointed out earlier in the debate
[2267th meeting], it is thanks to SWAP0 that the worst
has not happened in Namibia. SWAPO’s patience
and statesmanship should not be exploited to delay a
peaceful settIement of the Namibian question or to
help South Africa to entrench its illegal occupation
more deeply in Namibia.

23.

28. History has shown that the selection of a genuine
spokesman to represent the people of a colonial Territory in negotiations relating to their independence
has always been a complex process. I am glad to see
that it is the representative of SWAPO, the acknowledged voice of the people of Namibia, who is seated
at this table. It is necessary to be alert to the danger
of small groups of individuals being persuaded to act
as agents for the colonizer against the interests of their
own people.

24. The contact group of Western States must genuinely Iive up to its responsibilities to implement the
United Nations plan, which was based on its proposals.
The group must effectively exert the considerable
leverage that it enjoys with South Africa to persuade
South Africa to heedthe voice of reason and to honour
that country’s once-declared commitment to the
United Nations plan, not only in the interests of the
people of Namibia but also in the interests of peace
and security in southern Africa. If the United Nations
pIan is now repudiated, revised or compromised
beyond recognition in order to accommodate a small
intransigent minority which has shown contempt for
the United Nations, that would not only affect the
credibility of the Western Powers with regard to their
policies in southern Africa but also affect their standing
in a wider area of international negotiations and commitment. Calls for peaceful solutions sound hollow
when, at the same time, brutal police action, repression, torture and killings by the regime continue.

29. While thanking the Council for its patient hearing,
I would conclude by stating that Sri Lanka cannot
accept the prolongation of illegitimacy in Namibia.
We cannot accept the continued oppression of the
Namibian people.
30. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Democratic Yemen. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
31. Mr, ASHTAL (Democratic Yemen): Mr. President, my delegation is gratified to be participating
in this debate under your wise leadership. We have
already remarked your qualities as a skilful and judicious diplomat hailing from Ireland, a country with a
long anti-colonial tradition.
32. May I also congratulate Ambassador Florin,
who successfully presided over the work of the Council last month.

25. South Africa has advanced a rather strange
argument that the United Nations shows partiality
and bias and therefore cannot be trusted to implement
its own independence plan for Namibia, South Africa
seems to have forgotten that the United Nations is in
fact the acknowledged voice of the international community. For a small racist caucus to accuse the entire
international community of being biased, while it
deludes itself that it has a monopoly on fair play and
justice, is indeed a perversion of truth,

33, It is rather unfortunate that this debate on the
situation in Namibia opened with an ominous procedural haggle. Not surprisingly perhaps, we were
witness to a calculated manoeuvre to confer legitimacy
on the so-called DTA (Democratic Turnhalle Alliance),
a puppet party created by South Africa. At best it was
an attempt to undermine the authenticity of SWAPO,
the universally recognized representative of the
Namibian people. At worst it was an act of bad faith
by those Powers which claim to promote an internationally accepted settlement that would secure the
independence of Namibia.

26. The non-aligned countries, which met at Algiers
last week, were keenly ahve to attempts to distort the
nature of the question of Namibia, which is specifically
a problem of decolonization and of illegal occupation.
What we are dealing with is not a clash between conflicting ideologies but a struggle between freedom and
oppression.

34. Predictably enough, South Africa retorted by
saying that the Security Council was no different from
any other United Nations organ in its bias in favour
of SWAPO. Indeed, the United Nations, faithful to its
4

principles and ideals, is biased against South Africa.
For how can it afford to be impartial between the
colonizer and the colonized, the oppressor and the
oppressed, the aggressor and the victim of aggression?
Yet South Africa has the audacity to invoke the precepts of democratic practice on the international
level, while it practises the hateful system of upnrtheid at home-and the home of the indigenous black
majority at that.

40. The fact that a number of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs from non-aligned countries have come to
address the Council and to call for the application of
comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South
Africa should be seen in the light of the dangerous
situation evolving in South Africa. For too long the
Western Powers have advocated patience. Now is the
time for the Council to act resolutely in response to the
overwhelming call of the international community.

35. Namibia is a case of outright colonialism and
illegal occupation. Attempts to distort the nature of
thequestion of Namibia serve only to prolong the agony
of a people subjected to systematic repression and
plunder. For nearly a hundred years, the Namibian
people languished under the yoke of colonialism, with
all its ugly manifestations. I need not delve into Namibia’s painful history, in which the United Nations
was itself involved, I should like, however, to invoke
the moral obligation of the United Nations and its
SecurityCouncil to put an end to this injustice and to
allow the Namibian people to exercise its inalienable
right to independence and statehood.

41. As current Chairman of the Group of Arab States
at the United Nations and on its behalf, I should like
to express our unreserved support for the decision
taken at the extraordinary ministerial meeting of the
Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries,
held at Algiers, to request the Security Council to
apply mandatory comprehensive sanctions, including
an oil embargo, against South Africa, as provided for
in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
42. We reiterate once more our most emphatic
support for, and solidarity with, SWAPO, the sole
and authentic representative of the Namibian people.

36. The apar’theicl regime of South Africa could not
have defied the whole international community and
continued its illegal occupation of Namibia had it not
been for its allies and partners in the pillage of Namibia’s resources and the exploitation of its people.

43. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris Mr. Clovis
Maksoud, Permanent Observer for the League of Arab
States, to whom the Council extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure at
its 2268th meeting. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

37. The activities of the transnational corporations
in Namibia are well documented. Those Western
Powers whose interests will be undermined by the
decolonizationof Namibia can very well afford to wait
until the next election here or there, or the next meeting
hereor there. But the Namibian people cannot wait to
raise their national flag and live in liberty and peace.
There are too many South African soldiers in Namibia
to wreck the peace, and too many international corporations to steal the wealth of the Namibians.

44. Mr. MAKSOUD: Mr. President, I should like to
express to you, and through you to the members of the
Security Council, the deep appreciation of the League
of Arab States for having extended this invitation to
us, thus providing us with the opportunity to identify
ourselves with our sister regional organization, the
OAU, and with the aspirations and the struggle of the
people of Namibia, I should like furthermore to express
to you the deep and strong friendship and affinity that
we have for the people of Ireland, especially because
of the noble contribution which you have made diplomatically, as well as in human terms, to the fulfilment
of the mandate of the United Nations in the south of
Lebanon.

38. It is that combination of Western military strategic advantage and Western economic interests that
actsto buttress the Pretoria regime against the international public consensus that colonialism in Namibia
mustbe ended.

45. We have listened to the deliberations of the
Security Council, and it seemsthat we are compelled
again to face a situation in which the United Nations
is dealing once again with an intransigent, racist
regime which believes that it can render itself unaccountable to the world community while at the same
time trying to make the world community answerable to
its aggression.

39. The continuing illegal occupation of Namibia
is not only a destabilizing factor in southern Africa;
indeed, it constitutes a breach of international peace
and security. Having established its massive military
Presencein Namibia, South Africa is launching from
that Territory constant armed attacks against neighbouring countries. The Security Council has on many
occasionscensured those acts of aggression against
Angola, Mozambique, Zambia and Botswana. Moreover, South Africa is feverishly expanding its nuclearcapabilities, with the collaboration of Israel, with
which it shares a common policy of colonial domination. The military incursions of South African forces
into neighbouring States can only be compared to the
recurring Israeli attacks on southern Lebanon.

46. The Security Council, seized of this crisis, is
determined to disabuse the racists, the occupiers and
the colonialists of that conviction. The League of
Arab States and the Arab world in general have for
many years had experience on their own territory of
an intransigent, racist entity seeking to discredit the
United Nations and international consensus. They
5

51. On behalf of the League of Arab States, I should
like to thank the Council for this opportunity to address
it and to declare again the solidarity of the Arab people
with the people of Namibia in expediting the process
of their independence and self-determination,
as well
as enhancing the credibility of United Nations resolu,
tions and the effectiveness of its machinery.

know that such racist occupying countries seek also
to place barriers in the path of the United Nations
not only by trying to undermine its credibility, but by
questioning its effectiveness.
47. At this juncture, therefore, the experience of the
Arabs is joined with the experience and the Struggle
of the people of Namibia, because the similarities are
so glaring between what the people of Namibia face and
what the people of Palestine are facing, not only in the
very nature of their unfolding liberation struggles, but
also in the very identity of the behaviour which characterizes both Israel and South Africa in trying to
render the United Nations inoperative.

52. The PRESIDENT:
The last speaker is the repre,
sentative of Romania, whom I invite to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
53. Mr. MARINESCU
(Romania) (i/lrerpretntio~~
fiorn French): Mr. President, may I first of all convey
to you and to all the members of the Security Council
my gratitude for your having agreed to my country’s
request to participate in this important series of Council meetings and to reaffirm its position on the problem
of Namibia. At the same time, it is a particular pleasure
for me to congratulate you warmly as representative
of Ireland and a distinguished diplomat on your assumption of the presidency of the Council this month.
Our congratulations
go also to Ambassador Florin,
representative of the German Democratic Republic, on
the exemplary manner in which he discharged his
important functions in March.

48. It is that identity of purpose, that similarity of
experience, that similarity in the nature and the pattern
of those we confront, that has cemented further the
unity of our struggle, the closeness of our empathy, the
mutuality of our understanding. Is not the attempt to
question the representivity of SWAP0 by proliferating
representatives of the people of Namibia aimed at
making the people of Namibia, as well as the international community, lose its sense of focus and forget
the fact that SWAP0 is not only an ideological group,
that it is not only the representative of the Namibian
people in the same way that the Palestine Liberation
Organization is the representative of the Palestinian
people, but that it is the framework of the Namibian
people, the symbol of the people’s unity and of the
clarity of their purpose? Any attempt to circumvent
that representivity becomes an exercise in futility and
a contribution to the destabilization of the region.

54. The deadlock which still persists in the United
Nations efforts to bring about the independence of
Namibia,
as well as the aggravation of the situation
in southern Africa following the acts of aggression and
the adventuristic
policy of the South African racist
rCgime, has aroused the profound concern of the international community.

49. Have we not seen that time-tables have been
spelled out in detail without any time framework being
established, because ambiguity in the phasing of the
right of self-determination has been the means by which
to distort the function of self-determination?
That is
whq:,
when we identify ourselves with the people of
Namibia in their legitimate struggle for self-determination and independence, we realize that they are in the
vanguard of those confronting the last bastions of
racism in the modern world. Any attempt to be permissive with those entities that deny the people of
Namibia their rights, any attempt to buy more time
for them further to distort the struggle and deflect the
international community from shouldering its immediate responsibilities, must be met with an insistence
on the part of the world body-and
it is so met on the
part of the world community-that
the comprehensive
mandatory sanctions not only are a penalty for denying
a People its right to self-determination
but, in dealing
with racists and colonialists, are an incentive to them
to comply with the Charter of the United Nations and
the laws of the Organization.

55. This concern, which has been emphasized by the
failure of the Geneva meeting-a
failure for which
South Africa alone is responsible-has,
over the last
six months, led to a series of new political and diplomatic actions designed to find ways of overcoming
existing obstacles and of implementing
without further
delay the inalienable right of the Namibian people to
national independence.
56. Be it the Conference of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs OFNon-Aligned
Countries at New Delhi, or the
resumed thirty-fifth
session of the United Nations
General Assembly, the summit meeting of front-line
States at Luanda or the extraordinary
ministerial
meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the NonAligned Countries at Algiers-a
meeting at which mY
country was represented by a delegation-all
those
important
meetings have one element in common:
legitimate
concern and determination
on the part Of
the vast majority of States to find a solution to the grave
situation persisting in Namibia which imperils peace
and security in Africa and in the world.

50. It is by this fortifying of the international consensus that we can determine that objectivity
and
impartiality are not a position equidistant between truth
and falsehood, between right and wrong, between
the oppressor and the oppressed, between the racists
md the people who believe in human equality.

57. That concern and determination have been accurately reflected in the broad participation,
at a very high
political level, in the work of the present series 0’
Council meetings and in the particular interest shown ifl
6

this debate by Members
world public Opinion.

of the United

Nations

and

tinuation of the illegal occupation of Namibia and the
attempts of the South African racist rCgime to prevent
the affirmation of the Namibian people’s right to a fret
and sovereign existence was reiterated by Presidem
Nicolae Ceausescu during the recent visit to Romania
of Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of SWAPO,

58, For its part, Romania considers these meetings
of the Council a supreme effort to achieve a breakthrough in the situation and open the way to the early
independence of Namibia.

66. The President of Romania reaffirmed the militant
solidarity of the Romanian Government and people
with the just cause of the Namibian people and thei]
determination
to continue in the future supporting
its struggle, under the tried and tested leadership of
SWAPO, for the exercise of the inalienable right to a
free and independent existence,

59, Indeed, the present international
situation and
the conditions in which the Council is considering the
problem of Namibia require US t0 put an end to procrastination, to the creation of obstacles and to the
manoeuvres aimed at blocking the Namibian people’s
accession to independence. We must no longer accept
the state of paralysis of the effcirts to implement the
United Nations plan for Namibia.

67. It has always been clear to us that, in the face OI
the obstinate position and the illegal actions of South
Africa, the Namibian people is fully entitled to have
recourse, under the leadership of its legitimate representative, SWAPO, to all political, diplomatic
and
other means of struggle, including armed struggle, in
order to realize their legitimate aspirations to freedom
and national independence. After many years of
valiant struggle, SWAP0 naturally emerged as the most
authentic representative of the Namibian people. No
formula for bringing independence to Namibia can
therefore be viable without taking into account the
decisive role of SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people, recognized by the
United Nations,

60, Little more than a month ago, the General Assembly adopted a number of resolutions on Namibia
[r.es&ltjons 35/227 A to F], reaffirming the Namibian
people’s inalienable
right
to self-determination,
freedom and national independence, and calling upon
Member States and all United Nations organs to
discharge their responsibilities
fully and take resolute
action to that end. South Africa’s response is well
known: not only has there been no sign of change in its
racist policy or in its brutal denial of the Namibian
people’s right to independence,
but, indeed, that
policy is becoming ever more arrogant, threatening
and aggressive.
61. That is why the Council is duty bound to come
back to the problem of Namibia and, above all, to consider the specific initiatives and measures which must
be taken to ensure implementation
of the United
Nations plan.

68. While encouraging a political solution for the
Namibian problem, in accordance with the United
Nations plan, we believe that sustained effort and broad
support on the part of democratic and progressive
forces throughout ‘the world in many countries and all
continents, including from the outset my own country,
are designed to help the people of Namibia to circumvent the manoeuvres of the South African racist
authorities and win their independence.

62. As has been amply stressed, that plan, which
took SO much time and effort to work out and won
the unanimous support of the Security Council, contains all the necessary elements to bring about a just
aad equitable solution to the Namibian problem.

69, In providing multilateral support to the Namibian
people and its national liberation movement, Romania
is associating itself with the sustained efforts of the
African countries and all the non-aligned countries to
promote the cause of the independence of Namibia.

63, The people of Namibia, the African countries and
all other countries in the world quite rightly expected
that plan to be implemented
without delay, and one
ofthe last vestiges of colonialism thus to be eliminated.
All those actions, however, including the tireless
efforts of the Secretary-General,
came up against the
obstructionist and delaying tactics of South Africa and
the aggressive policy of a rCgime which defies all the
n11esof international law, morality and reason and
which is a constant destabilizing factor and a threat
10 peace.

70. Many representatives of African and other countries who have spoken before me in this important
debate have traced the history of the heroic and lengthy
struggle of the Namibian people for self-determination
and of the efforts of the United Nations to put an end
to the racist and colonialist rCgime of occupation and
oppression maintained by South Africa.
71. If we in turn recall that 15 years ago the United
Nations assumed direct and sole responsibility
fur
Namibia and its people, it is not simply because we
want to go into history for its own sake; it is above all
to stress that, through that act which was of such
tremendous political and juridical importance, not only
the Organization
but also its Member States have

64s More than ever before, the Security Council must
---whether it likes it or not-face
its responsibilities
vis-i-Vis the Namibian people and the maintenance of
international peace and security.
65* The Profound concern of the Romanian people
Overthe tension created in southern Africa by the con7

undertaken to work to lead the Namibian people to the
exercise of its right to self-determination
and real
independence. Consequently, ajust and equitable solution in keeping with the legitimate interests of the
Namibian people can be found only within the framework and with the participation of the United Nations
and in accordance with its decisions.
72. The plan drawn up in Security Council resolutions
385 (1976), 435 (1978) and 439 (1978), in which a tremendous amount of effort has been invested by a large
number of States, constitutes the universally recognized and entirely valid framework for bringing
about the peaceful transition of Namibia to independence. The efforts of the Council and of the international community as a whole must be focused on the
immediate implementation of this plan.
73. In our view, if there is true commitment to an
acceptable solution of the problem of Namibia on the
basis of the United Nations plan, this commitment must
be manifested in the attitude taken towards the implementation of this plan and in the efforts aimed at compelling South Africa to give up its position of defiance
by utilizing all appropriate means to that end.
74. The solution of the Namibian problem must
have as its point of departure the legitimate rights and
the will of the Namibian people. Neither political,
economic or strategic considerations nor the existing
tension in the present international situation should
sidetrack our efforts from the unanimously accepted
goal: the independence of Namibia in accordance with
the inalienable right of its people to decide on its own
destiny.
75. Similarly, no “internal solution” imposed by
a colonial apartheid occupation regime which has the
arrogance to represent itself as a bulwark of democracy
can be accepted as an impediment to the full exercise

of this right by the Namibian people and the implementation of the United Nations plan.
76. The overriding interests of peace and security
and the defence of international legality call for all
countries-in
particular the five Western countries
of the contact group, whose role in working out this
plan is well known-to support effectively the action of
the Security Council in order to prevail upon the South
African Government to commit itself without delay to
the implementation
of the plan for Namibia.
77. In the Romanian delegation’s view, the Security
Council, by virtue of the responsibilities entrusted to
it, is today in duty bound to consider the most energetic
measures provided for by the Charter of the United
Nations and commensurate with the gravity of the
situation in southern Africa in order to prevail upon
South Africa to abide by the decisions and the resolutions of the Council and the General Assembly and
eliminate the opposition and the obstacles which have
been posed to the free exercise of the inalienable rights
of the Namibian people.
78. For its part, in solidarity with the just cause of the
Namibian people, Romania intends to continue to
work together with other countries for the implementation of United Nations decisions with regard to
Namibia,
so that the Territory can become independent.
The meeting rose nt 1 p.m.

NOTE
’ CjfficiolRecords
Plcnnry
Meerings,

of the

Gencrul

107th meeting.

Assembly,

Thirty-jifih

Session,
