United Nations

S/PV.6531

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6531st meeting
Tuesday, 10 May 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-33032 (E)

*1133032*

S/PV.6531

civilians, including massive displacement within and
across borders.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
should like to invite the representatives of Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Botswana,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cuba, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Norway, Peru, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Valerie Amos, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights and Head of the New York Office of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Valerie Amos.
Ms. Amos: I will focus my remarks today on the
pressing need to ensure more effective protection for
civilians in the conduct of hostilities.
The deliberate targeting of civilians or other
flagrant disregard for their well-being in violation of
international humanitarian law during hostilities results
in hundreds being killed, injured, maimed and
traumatized every week. Recent events in Libya and
Côte d’Ivoire are the latest examples of this, but other
situations also demand our attention. This initial failure
to respect the law is almost always the precursor to
further violence, suffering and trauma inflicted upon

2

In the six months since my last briefing (see
S/PV.6427), we have witnessed an unprecedented
series of crises in parts of the Middle East and North
and sub-Saharan Africa. I am concerned at the violence
levelled against civilians in Bahrain, Yemen and, more
recently, Syria, and at the loss of life and other human
rights violations. In Syria, reports of the deployment of
tanks and of the shelling of residential areas are
alarming.
Of particular concern, however, was the
deterioration of the situations in Libya and Côte
d’Ivoire into armed conflict. There have been serious
allegations of violations of the rules regulating the
conduct of hostilities in both these countries. As I
reported to the Council yesterday in my briefing on
Libya (see S/PV.6530), civilians continue to be killed
and injured by fighting between Government and
opposition forces, especially in Misrata and the
Western Nafusa mountains. Indiscriminate rocket and
mortar attacks on densely populated areas of Misrata,
as well as sniper attacks, continue to cause civilian
casualties. There are also concerns over civilian
casualties resulting from coalition air strikes.
The fighting in Misrata has limited the
population’s access to food, water and other basic
commodities. Medical facilities are short of supplies
and trained personnel. This is particularly troubling
given the continuous heavy fighting in the city, as are
reports of attacks on ambulances transporting the
wounded to these facilities. The shelling and mining of
Misrata port is also hampering efforts to supply
urgently needed aid and to evacuate those, including
the sick and wounded, who want to leave. I will
continue to call upon all parties to agree to a temporary
cessation of hostilities in Misrata on humanitarian
grounds, to allow those who wish to flee to do so, and
to enable humanitarian personnel to comprehensively
assess the situation and bring more aid.
In Côte d’Ivoire, November’s post-election crisis
degenerated into a conflict marked by increased
violence that seriously affected the civilian population.
Direct attacks against civilians, indiscriminate shelling,
sexual violence, and attacks against humanitarian
workers and peacekeepers have all been reported and
must be investigated without delay. There are still an
estimated 150,000 internally displaced people in

11-33032

S/PV.6531

western Côte d’Ivoire and a further 177,500 Ivorians
registered as refugees in several West African nations,
including nearly 160,000 in Liberia, though these
numbers change as people move back and forth across
the border.
At the height of the violence, humanitarian
workers experienced immense difficulty in accessing
people in need due to the fighting and to the
checkpoints and blockades established in Abidjan by
the parties to the conflict. These checkpoints and
blockades were often the scene of the harassment and
obstruction of humanitarian workers. The situation was
further compounded by attacks on United Nations
peacekeepers and the theft of humanitarian vehicles,
equipment and supplies. Humanitarian organizations
were forced either to limit their movements or to
suspend activities altogether. While the violence has
subsided, the humanitarian situation remains
precarious and our access to those in need in Abidjan
and elsewhere continues to be hampered by pockets of
instability due to violence by militias.
In Libya, the reported use of cluster munitions
and Grad rockets by Government forces in Misrata
marks the latest development in a broader pattern of
the use of explosive weapons in densely populated
areas by Government, as well as opposition and
coalition forces. In one incident alone on 14 April, an
attack involving Grad rockets reportedly killed a dozen
civilians and wounded many more as they queued to
buy bread. In Côte d’Ivoire, at least 25 civilians were
killed and more wounded in a single incident on
17 March in which a market was shelled in the Abobo
district of Abidjan.
Explosive weapons have an immediate and
indiscriminate impact, killing and injuring those caught
in the blast radius, including civilians, while the
damage to buildings and infrastructure hampers longerterm reconstruction and development. I reiterate my
call on parties to conflict to refrain from the use of
these weapons in densely populated areas.
While Libya and Côte d’Ivoire have recently
occupied the headlines, civilians in other conflicts
continue to be killed and injured as the parties fail to
comply with their obligations in the conduct of
hostilities.
In Somalia, civilians continue to bear the brunt of
fighting between militants and forces of the
Transitional Federal Government and the African

11-33032

Union. During 2010, over 7,000 civilians reported
weapons-related injuries in Mogadishu — the highest
number of civilian casualties in a decade. Children
accounted for 20 per cent of those injured.
In eastern Democratic Republic of Congo,
conflict persists, with direct attacks against civilians by
foreign and Congolese armed groups. Some elements
of the national security forces continue to be
implicated in these violations. Sexual violence,
including rape, remains a defining characteristic of the
conflict. At the end of 2010, some 1.7 million people
remained internally displaced, 1.3 million of them in
the Kivus. In the north-east of the country, the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) continues to pose a grave
threat to civilian populations, as well as in
neighbouring Central African Republic and southern
Sudan. During the first quarter of this year, 107 LRA
attacks — which routinely include the killing, rape,
beating and abduction of civilians — were reported
across the three countries.
In southern Sudan, following the relative stability
of January’s referendum, the security situation has
deteriorated sharply. Intercommunal conflict and
clashes between the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
(SPLA) and increasingly active militia groups have
reportedly killed over 1,100 people, the majority
civilians, and displaced over 116,000. Reports indicate
that SPLA soldiers have targeted or fired
indiscriminately at civilians and burned and looted
homes. In Darfur, fighting between Government and
rebel forces remains a major source of insecurity and
displaced an estimated additional 70,000 people during
the first three months of this year.
In Colombia, civilians continue to be affected by
the armed conflict and the actions principally of
guerrilla groups and new armed groups that have
emerged following the demobilization process. These
groups continue to use landmines and improvised
explosive devices, with over 150 civilians killed or
injured by such weapons in 2010. Civilians have been
killed and injured in attacks against military units
located in and around homes and schools. The
Government estimates that over 111,000 people were
forcibly displaced last year due to the conflict, bringing
the total number of internally displaced persons to 3.6
million.
March and April of this year witnessed an
escalation in violence in Gaza and southern Israel, with

3

S/PV.6531

one Israeli child killed and three Israelis injured.
Fifteen Palestinian civilians, including six children,
were killed and 104 injured, 37 of them children.
In Afghanistan, over 7,000 civilians were killed
or injured in 2010 — an increase of 19 per cent over
2009. Anti-Government elements were reportedly
responsible for over 5,000 of those deaths and injuries.
Military operations by pro-Government forces
accounted for some 800 civilian casualties. Improvised
explosive devices and suicide attacks in civilian areas
continue to cause large numbers of civilian deaths and
injuries. The Taliban’s declaration on 1 May of the start
of a spring offensive is of great concern.
The recent report of the Secretary-General’s
Panel of Experts on Accountability in Sri Lanka found
that some 40,000 civilians may have died in the final
stages of the conflict and that credible allegations
existed of human rights and humanitarian law
violations by both parties to the conflict. Some of those
violations may amount to war crimes and crimes
against humanity. International law requires that these
allegations be properly investigated.
When it comes to protecting civilians in the
conduct of hostilities, the picture is stark. It will
remain so in the absence of determined efforts by
parties to conflict to comply with the law. Clear and
binding rules regulating the conduct of hostilities exist.
It is the willingness of parties to conflict to respect and
ensure respect for those rules, including through the
rigorous pursuit of accountability, that is absent.
Enhancing compliance with international law,
particularly in the conduct of hostilities, is the first of
the five core challenges identified in the last two
Secretary-General’s reports on the protection of
civilians (S/2010/579 and S/2009/277). As those
reports made clear, aside from the fundamental
responsibility on all the parties to conflict themselves,
the Security Council too has a responsibility to
promote compliance: first, by using all available
opportunities to condemn violations and to remind
parties of, and demand compliance with, their
obligations; secondly, by applying targeted sanctions
against the leadership of parties that routinely violate
their obligations to respect civilians; and, thirdly, by
promoting accountability, including by mandating
commissions of inquiry to examine situations where
concerns exist regarding serious violations, with a view
to identifying the perpetrators and ensuring their

4

prosecution at the national level, or referring the
situation to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Council’s responses to the crises in Libya
and Côte d’Ivoire have raised questions that need to be
addressed. First, in terms of consistency of approach,
resolution 1970 (2011) on Libya essentially followed
the course laid out by the Secretary-General in the
reports to which I have just referred. The Council
condemned the violations, demanded compliance with
the law, imposed the arms embargo and targeted
sanctions and referred the situation to the ICC. The
latter action in particular is believed to have prompted
some in positions of power in Libya to reflect on their
role in the violence and, subsequently, to defect from
the Government. It is not clear whether the imposition
of similar measures in regard to Cote d’Ivoire, and at
an earlier stage of the crisis, might have prompted
similar action by influential individuals and prevented
the further deterioration of the situation.
The adoption of resolution 1973 (2011) on Libya
and the authorization and subsequent use of force and
other measures to protect civilians has prevented
civilian deaths and injury. But it has also raised
concerns in terms of the potential undermining of the
protection of civilians agenda and its important role in
providing a framework for action in future crises. In
addition to complying scrupulously with international
humanitarian law, the implementation of the Council’s
decision must be exclusively limited to promoting and
ensuring the protection of civilians.
The events of the past few months have provided
a compelling reminder of the fundamental and
enduring importance of the Council’s protection-ofcivilians agenda. Moreover, they have underscored the
need to ensure that the commitments therein, as
expressed in the five thematic protection-of-civilians
resolutions and the aide-memoire (see S/PRST/2010/
25), translate into concerted Council action in response
to violations of the law as we have seen in Côte
d’Ivoire and Libya, Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia.
Demanding compliance with the law and
enforcing such demands through targeted sanctions are
critically important actions that the Council can take to
enhance compliance. The Council also has a key role in
promoting genuine accountability for serious
violations, the absence of which serves to encourage
rather than deter violations. The Council must be

11-33032

S/PV.6531

comprehensive and consistent in its approach and
consider all situations requiring attention and action.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Amos for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alain Le Roy.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I would like to
thank the Security Council for this opportunity to brief
it on the recent efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to better protect civilians in
the framework of the seven peacekeeping operations
with such a mandate, which daily respond to constantly
evolving challenges. There have been several
significant developments since the Council last debated
this issue, on 22 November 2010 (see S/PV.6427).
We have of course maintained regular dialogue
with Member States on this important issue, and in
particular with the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations — the so-called Committee of Thirty Four
(C-34). This year, the Committee has held several
useful in-depth discussions on this issue. We have
developed a strategic framework for the protection of
civilians that includes the use of the political process to
provide protection, protection against physical violence
and the medium- and long-term establishment of an
environment in which the rights and security of
civilians are protected. The C-34 has taken stock of the
progress that has been made, in particular in the areas
of training, supporting missions in developing
strategies to protect civilians and identifying the
necessary resources and capacities to carry out
mandates to protect civilians. We have been
encouraged to continue to work with missions to
improve our implementation of protection mandates, in
particular by improving coordination both at
Headquarters and in the field and by evaluating how
tools such as benchmarks can help to measure the
progress made in protecting civilians.
With regard to direct physical protection by
peacekeeping operations, it seems to me important to
point out that, during the deliberations of the Special
Committee, some Member States expressed concerns
with regard to relations between missions and host
Governments when it comes to protecting civilians.
Those concerns focused on host Governments’ primary
responsibility to protect civilians, as well as no the fact
that peacekeeping operations are there to support the
authorities of the host country to that end. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations continuously

11-33032

reiterates that Security Council mandates for the
protection of civilians do not take the place of
sovereign responsibilities. The protection of civilians
is, and will continue to be, primarily the responsibility
of the host Government. Allow me to give some
examples in that regard.
In Côte d’Ivoire, as the Council is aware, the
United Nations Operation implemented the robust
provisions of resolution 1975 (2011), which required
the use of all necessary means to prevent the use of
heavy weaponry against civilians. As in the past, the
Mission today continues to carry out its clear mandate
to protect civilians.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
continues to improve its methods — through temporary
bases, its well-known joint protection teams, its liaison
officers to various populations groups and many other
means — to provide additional and improved
protection to civilians on a daily basis. In the past
month, the Mission has achieved a certain degree of
success in combating impunity for those who
perpetrate violence against civilians.
Similar efforts are being undertaken in the other
missions with protection-of-civilian mandates, namely,
in Liberia, Haiti, Lebanon, South Sudan and, of course,
Darfur. With regard to the latter, members may perhaps
have taken note of the recently improving access by
humanitarian workers to the Jebel Marra region.
(spoke in English)
As we plan for the United Nations role in South
Sudan, we see that the protection of civilians will play
an important role in the context of supporting State
authority. With the primary objective of strengthening
the capacity of the nascent Government of South Sudan
to assume its sovereign responsibilities, and taking into
consideration the requirement to protect civilians in
what is still a potentially volatile security environment,
we have looked at how the successor to the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) could provide
the required support during this critical time.
The Mission’s potential role in protecting
civilians is not about replacing the Government of
South Sudan’s responsibility in this respect, but about
assisting it to protect civilians where it does not have
the capacity to do so. In this regard, many elements,
including civilian peacekeepers, have a critical role to

5

S/PV.6531

play. We count on members of the Security Council
and other Member States to ensure that the successor
mission to UNMIS will have the adequate
capabilities — inter alia, in terms of mobility and
engineering — to fulfil this important mandate.
Supporting host Governments to ensure that their
civilians are protected in the immediate aftermath of
conflict is, as we all know, an immensely complex
endeavour. On our end, we are working closely with
our missions, as well as with the Member States that
contribute troops and police to them, to improve both
our understanding and our implementation of
protection of civilian mandates. To this end, we have
now finalized guidance to assist missions in developing
comprehensive protection of civilians strategies and
developed scenario-based protection of civilians
training modules, and we will soon be consulting with
troop and police contributors on a detailed matrix that
identifies the resources and capabilities required for the
implementation of protection of civilians mandates. We
will be undertaking additional initiatives to ensure that
this work translates into improved protection in the
areas in which we work.
These efforts must be complemented by the
Council’s sustained political support. The protection of
civilians in United Nations peacekeeping operations is
often carried out in extremely challenging
circumstances, in many cases with tremendous political
complexities. Ultimately, the protection of civilians is
assured by stable political outcomes, and the Security
Council’s role in ensuring that parties stay on the path
to peace is always critical. The Council’s role in
helping us to ensure that we have the right and
adequate capabilities to implement this kind of
mandate is, of course, critical. The Council’s
unflagging support in these situations is a sine qua non
if we are to take forward our mandated tasks and
improve the lives of civilians whom we are deployed to
support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Leroy for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: I appreciate this opportunity to
address the Security Council on the issue of ensuring
greater protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict, on behalf of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Since this matter was last discussed at
the Council, in November 2010, the dramatic unfolding

6

of events in the Middle East, North Africa and Côte
d’Ivoire has clearly illustrated that the denial of human
rights — including civil, cultural, economic, political
and social rights — is a root cause of discord, unrest,
violence and, ultimately, armed conflict. Protecting
human rights prevents conflicts, and accountability for
violations of human rights breaks the cycle of violence.
Let me start by turning to three situations where
the United Nations has no peace mission but where
there is an immediate risk to human life or a need to
establish accountability for human rights violations.
The first of these is Libya. Concern for the safety
of civilians in Libya led this Council to authorize all
necessary measures to protect civilians and to refer the
situation to the International Criminal Court. In order
to minimize civilian casualties, it is critical that all
parties to the conflict fulfil their obligations to confine
any attacks to military objectives.
In a related effort to establish accountability, the
Human Rights Council mandated an international
commission of inquiry to investigate alleged violations
of international human rights law. Supported by a
secretariat led by the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR), the commission of
inquiry recently concluded investigative missions to
Libya, Egypt and Tunisia. The commission will submit
its report to the Human Rights Council next month.
In Syria, we must prevent the ongoing violent
suppression of mass protests from plunging the country
into a full-fledged armed conflict. At the request of the
Human Rights Council, our Office is preparing to
dispatch a mission to Syria to investigate alleged
violations of international human rights law. A
preliminary report will be provided to the Human
Rights Council in June, and full findings in September.
Also in the context of the fight against impunity,
we welcome the recent release of the report of the
Secretary-General’s Panel of Experts on accountability
in Sri Lanka, which concludes that there are credible
allegations of a wide range of serious violations of
international law committed by both Sri Lankan
Government forces and Tamil Tigers in the final stages
of the conflict. We urge the Government to implement
the measures recommended by the Panel in order to
bring relief to victims and advance longer-term
reconciliation. We fully support the recommendation to
establish an international mechanism to monitor

11-33032

S/PV.6531

national investigations and undertake its own, as
necessary.
I would now like to mention briefly several other
situations of current concern, where United Nations
missions mandated by this Council already exist but
where civilians remain at risk and where the question
of accountability for violations of human rights
requires attention.
The first is Côte d’Ivoire, where we remain
concerned about reports of sporadic fighting between
pro-Gbagbo militias and the Forces Républicaines and
of associated civilian casualties, including in the
Yopougon district of Abidjan, where on Friday the
human rights division of the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire found 68 bodies in several mass
graves. The Government of President Ouattara must
urgently adopt measures to restore the rule of law
throughout Côte d’Ivoire and to investigate and
prosecute all those responsible for the recent and
ongoing violations, regardless of their political
affiliation.
The international commission of inquiry on Côte
d’Ivoire that was mandated by the Human Rights
Council arrived in the country on 4 May. It will
conduct field investigations across Côte d’Ivoire and
neighbouring countries and will present its findings to
the Human Rights Council in June. OHCHR has
established a secretariat to assist the commissioners,
comprised of staff from our Office, the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and UN Women. As
requested in Security Council resolution 1975 (2011),
the report of the commission of inquiry will be
transmitted to this Council.
These accountability measures must be
accompanied by further reconciliation efforts.
President Ouattara has requested OHCHR to advise the
Government on the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation commission, and we are in contact in
this respect.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
follow-up to the recent mapping report, the
Government is preparing to establish a special chamber
to investigate serious violations of international law,
including mass killings, sexual violence and
displacement, and to prosecute the perpetrators.
However, as we have recently discussed with the
Minister of Justice, the current draft law needs to be

11-33032

amended to guarantee the inclusion of a sufficient
international component and to protect the
independence and integrity of the process.
Let me now touch upon two further situations
ahead of the Security Council’s upcoming mission. In
the case of Somalia, there is an urgent need to identify
ways to strengthen protection of civilians in a highly
insecure environment, including through reinforcing
the capabilities of the existing peacekeeping forces on
the ground. In the case of South Sudan, in defining a
new mandate, detailed information on the human rights
situation in all parts of the country should be taken into
account. Equally important is the inclusion of robust
language on human rights protection and promotion.
Let me conclude. In recent years, almost every
integrated peace mission has included a human rights
component, appropriately reflecting our shared
conviction that the maintenance of peace and security
depends upon respect for human rights. This positive
development must continue. The human rights
components contribute to the protection of civilians in
numerous ways, including through monitoring, public
reporting and building the capacity of national
authorities to strengthen respect for human rights and
the rule of law. As far as sexual violence is concerned,
the scale of the problem requires reinforced efforts. In
accordance with the letter and spirit of Security
Council resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010),
OHCHR is in discussion with all relevant United
Nations partners regarding the possibility of women
protection advisers being located within the human
rights components.
Finally, let me commend this Council for its swift
and decisive actions to promote the protection of
civilians and to ensure accountability, which have
undoubtedly helped to prevent further violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Wherever the Council establishes or renews the
mandate of a peace mission, it is important to take into
account the human rights situation. OHCHR stands
ready to provide such information through the various
Security Council mechanisms, especially the Security
Council’s informal Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Šimonović for his briefing.
Given the large number of representatives who
wish to take the floor, I would urge all speakers to

7

S/PV.6531

speak succinctly and to circulate the full versions of
their statements. I would like to remind all speakers
that brevity and clarity often go hand in hand.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Amos, UnderSecretary-General Le Roy and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Šimonović for sharing their thoughts with the
Council today.
Civilian protection has taken on a new
significance in recent months as worrying security
situations and reports of human rights abuses in a
number of countries continue to attract worldwide
attention. Such situations warrant decisive action by
the United Nations and the wider international
community. In time, thorough investigations of abuses
should take place and all those responsible must be
held accountable for their actions.
Many of the concerns raised during the course of
today’s briefings are shared by the United Kingdom.
On Libya, the case for taking action to protect the
civilian population remains compelling. Al-Qadafi’s
regime is still inflicting severe violence on Libya’s
civilian population. The United Kingdom has been
consistently clear that the action being undertaken by
the coalition forces is to protect the civilian population
on the ground in Libya. Security Council resolution
1973 (2011) provided a legal basis for that action,
expressly authorizing the use of force to protect
civilians. We are ensuring carefully that our actions
accord with the Security Council resolutions and our
other international obligations and that they are
designed precisely to protect civilians and to minimize
civilian casualties.
This year, the United Kingdom supported
resolutions of the United Nations Human Rights
Council on both Libya and Côte d’Ivoire, which
established commissions of inquiry into alleged human
rights abuses in the two countries. In both cases, we
believe that all abuses of human rights should be
thoroughly investigated and the perpetrators held
accountable.
All parties to a conflict have obligations to
respect international humanitarian law and to permit
humanitarian organizations access to affected civilians.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the United Kingdom strongly

8

supports the robust posture of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and its approach
in implementing its mandate to prevent the use of
heavy weapons and to protect civilians during the
recent crisis. We believe that UNOCI took a pioneering
step in increasing its level of responsibility for civilian
protection, and, of course, it did so with the
authorization and support of this Council.
Despite the best efforts of the Syrian Government
to suppress media coverage, we have witnessed the
repeated and deliberate targeting of civilians and the
use of tanks and other heavy weaponry against
peaceful protesters. The United Kingdom utterly
condemns the violence perpetrated by the Syrian
security forces against civilians who are expressing
their views in peaceful protests. We welcome the
resolution passed by the Human Rights Council during
its sixteenth special session, which unequivocally
condemned the use of lethal violence on peaceful
protesters by the Syrian authorities.
Allow me to take a few moments to consider
some topics that no longer feature as prominently
under the spotlight of the world’s media.
We welcome the report of the United Nations
Panel of Experts on Sri Lanka and its comprehensive
investigation into allegations of violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law by
both sides during the military conflict, which ended in
May 2009. We hope that the Government of Sri Lanka
will respond constructively to the recommendations in
the report, given the suffering of civilians during the
conflict and the need for a process of national
reconciliation.
In Burma, the United Kingdom remains deeply
concerned about reported attacks on civilians by the
Burmese army in ethnic minority areas. We call upon
the Burmese army and ethnic militia to make every
effort to protect the civilian population and to bring to
account those responsible for human rights abuses
against them.
We need to redouble our efforts to ensure that
humanitarian access is not impeded. We know that
restrictions on access and attacks against aid workers
are two of the biggest challenges in delivering
humanitarian aid in the twenty-first century.
Unfortunately, from Libya to the Sudan and from Syria
to Côte d’Ivoire, access by humanitarian agencies to

11-33032

S/PV.6531

the most vulnerable has been hindered, and lives have
been lost as a result.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
work of the United Nations peacekeepers, whose job is
to help protect vulnerable civilians around the world. I
am sure that all of us here today will want to express
our thanks for their continuing efforts.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Ms. Amos, Mr. Le Roy
and Mr. Šimonović for their briefings.
The issue of the protection of civilians holds a
prominent place on the Security Council’s agenda. We
welcome regular discussion of the topic and the close
attention to the various aspects of the protection of
civilians when setting up and extending country
mandates. We also consider useful the recent initiative
of Brazil on holding consultations on all questions of
protection on the Council’s agenda. In our view, that
helps the Security Council to develop a comprehensive
approach to the issue of protecting civilians and to
avoid duplication in the work of the various bodies of
the Secretariat.
Despite all the efforts to protect civilians,
thousands of people die during conflicts, as before.
Moreover, the majority of civilian casualties are
children, women and the elderly, who are generally
considered vulnerable groups. Recently, our attention
has focused on a number of country situations where
the issue of the protection of civilians is particularly
acute. I am referring primarily to Afghanistan, Libya
and Côte d’Ivoire.
We resolutely condemn premeditated attacks on
civilians, as well as civilian deaths resulting from the
indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force, which
is a flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law. We advocate thorough investigation of such
incidents and punishment of the perpetrators. That also
applies to the activities of private security groups,
which quite often violate the rights of the civilian
population. Under the norms of international law, the
responsibility for the actions of such groups lies with
the States that hire them. In that regard, we welcome
the recent decision of the United Nations Human
Rights Council on drawing up a draft international
legal document on the human rights aspects of the
activities of such security groups.

11-33032

Certainly, the Governments of States involved in
conflicts bear the primary responsibility for protecting
the population living on their territory. At the same
time, all parties to armed conflict are responsible for
the security of civilians. The activities of the
international community should assist national efforts
in that area. Moreover, undertaking such international
measures, in particular those involving the use of force,
is possible only with the authorization of the Security
Council, in strict compliance with the United Nations
Charter and within the framework established by the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
In the light of the ambiguous experiences in
protecting civilians during peacekeeping operations
sanctioned by the Security Council, we believe that it
is necessary once again to clearly reaffirm that it is
unacceptable for United Nations peacekeepers to be
drawn into armed conflict and, in effect, to take the
side of one of the parties when implementing their
mandate.
The noble goal of protecting civilians should not
be compromised by attempts to resolve in parallel any
unrelated issues. In that regard, we share the concern
expressed today by Ms. Amos with regard to the
situation in Libya. The statement by a representative of
the coalition with regard to resolution 1973 (2011) is
not in line with the reality.
In conclusion, we would like to mention one
other issue that, in our view, is important. We believe
that the protection of civilians is crucial not only
during the acute phase of an armed conflict. Following
the cessation of active hostilities, the phase of political
settlement and peacebuilding begins. At that time,
civilians frequently fall victim to various armed
groups, looters and forces that have not yet disarmed.
We believe it extremely important to avoid the
emergence of distinct security vacuums during the
period of transition from armed conflict to
peacebuilding. Ensuring the security of the civilian
population during the peacebuilding period is primarily
the responsibility of the relevant State. The task for the
United Nations is to provide active support in
establishing law-enforcement structures to counter
crime.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s debate on the
protection of civilians, which in our view is very
timely and relevant. I would also like to thank the

9

S/PV.6531

Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO),
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos and Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović for their useful
briefings and statements. Indeed, in my opinion, the
very presence here of representatives of those three
organs of the United Nations allows us to place our
discussions and debate in the right context.
It has been India’s consistent view that the
foremost responsibility of every State is to protect its
population. In fact, one of the cardinal provisions of
the Indian Constitution is that the right to life is one of
the fundamental rights of all citizens, from which no
derogation is permissible, even in times of emergency.
India has demonstrated its commitment to that
right at the international level as well. India has
contributed more troops to peacekeeping operations
than any other Member State. Our troops and police
officers have been at the forefront of turning this
Council’s word into deed. They were protecting
civilians long before the term became common usage
in the Council. More than five decades ago, Indian
soldiers defended the civilians of the Congo as part of
the United Nations mission. Our contribution continues
today in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
other United Nations missions.
We have remained at the cutting edge of many
United Nations operations in places where civilians
were under threat. Today, we have a female formed
police unit — the first such formation composed
entirely of women — in the United Nations Mission in
Liberia. Thus, India brings to this table a quantum of
experience in actually protecting civilians in
peacekeeping missions that is unique in its relevance,
variety and depth.
We have also participated actively in the
normative debates of the Council and the General
Assembly on protection issues. In that tradition of
constructive engagement, a seminar held recently in
New Delhi broke new ground in drawing from the
operational experience of peacekeepers to further
evolve that agenda. I am very glad to see that our
colleague from DPKO was present in New Delhi at the
time of that seminar.
An enormous amount of the Council’s attention
has been focused recently on protection issues, with the
Council adopting a number of resolutions and
statements on the protection of civilians and related
issues of violence against women and children in

10

situations of armed conflict. In bringing those
protection issues within the purview of matters relating
to international peace and security, the Council has
placed them squarely at the centre of the conflict
resolution and peacekeeping agenda. That intense focus
has, in some situations of conflict, shifted attention
from the tried and tested methods of mediation and
negotiation that are the staples of conflict resolution.
When applied as a basis for Security Council
action, efforts to protect civilians must respect the
fundamental aspects of the United Nations Charter,
including the sovereignty and integrity of Member
States. Any decision to intervene that is associated with
political motives detracts from that noble principle and
needs to be avoided. Also, the response of the
international community must be proportional to the
threat, involve the use of appropriate methods and
make adequate resources available.
It is important that the principle of protecting
civilians be applied in a uniform manner. In the case of
conflict, all sides need to abide by it. We must also be
clear that the United Nations has a mandate to
intervene only in situations where there is a threat to
international peace and security. Any decision of the
Council to intervene must be based on credible and
verifiable information, which in turn requires much
greater information flows when the Council is seized
of a situation.
In that context, I cannot but ask the question:
Quis custodiet ipsos custodies? Who watches the
guardians? There is a considerable sense of unease
about the manner in which the humanitarian imperative
of protecting civilians has been interpreted for actual
action on the ground.
Let me now turn to the question of protecting
civilians in peacekeeping missions. In the view of my
delegation, the central issue in the implementation of
the protection agenda is the question of resources. The
resources that are being made available to current
peacekeeping operations so as to fulfil those ambitious
objectives are simply insufficient.
It is also important that expectations regarding
the work of peacekeepers be realistic and take into
consideration the multiple resource constraints under
which they function. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, has one peacekeeper for every
1,500 square kilometres. The Mission lacks enabling

11-33032

S/PV.6531

assets to allow the existing complement of
peacekeepers to move and deploy in the areas of
operation. The manner in which those Missions are
being made to operate on shoestring budgets and being
constantly asked to do more with less does not augur
well. All efforts of the Council to further the protection
agenda will come to naught if that resource gap is not
addressed.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
that force is not the only way of protecting civilians. It
should be only the measure of last resort and be used
only when all diplomatic and political efforts fail.
There can be no substitute for national will and
national efforts in creating an environment where
civilians are secure. The efforts of the Council and the
international community must be directed at assisting
national authorities in developing those capabilities.
That is the only sustainable method of protecting
civilians because, as I said at the beginning of my
statement, the foremost responsibility of every State is
to protect its civilians.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): We commend the French
presidency for holding today’s important debate. We
are grateful to Under-Secretaries-General Valerie Amos
and Alain Le Roy and Assistant Secretary-General Ivan
Šimonović for their presentations. We welcome the
opportunity for the Council to exchange views with the
wider membership on the transformation of the civilian
protection landscape over the past few months.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of the crucial challenges of our time. In the
Security Council and other forums, Brazil has sought
to contribute to the United Nations efforts in that area.
Last February, during the Brazilian presidency of the
Security Council, we organized a meeting aimed at
considering all dimensions of the protection agenda
(see S/PV.6479).
The protection of civilians is a humanitarian
imperative. It is a distinct concept that must not be
confused or conflated with threats to international
peace and security, as described in the Charter, or with
the responsibility to protect. We must avoid
excessively broad interpretations of the protection of
civilians, which could link it to the exacerbation of
conflict, compromise the impartiality of the United
Nations or create the perception that it is being used as
a smokescreen for intervention or regime change. To
that end, we must ensure that all efforts to protect

11-33032

civilians be strictly in keeping with the Charter and
based on a rigorous and non-selective application of
international humanitarian law.
Whenever possible, the protection of civilians
should be pursued through peaceful and preventive
means. Those include dialogue with the local
populations,
compliance
with
international
humanitarian law, coordination with humanitarian
actors and diligent monitoring and reporting. In some
cases, coercive measures may be necessary to protect
civilians. Nevertheless, the use of force must always be
a last resort. We must take the greatest care to ensure
that our actions douse the flames of conflict instead of
stoking them.
When the Council does authorize the use of force,
such as in the case of Libya, we must hold ourselves to
a high standard. The Council has a responsibility to
ensure the appropriate implementation of its
resolutions. Force must be used carefully, with due
regard for the principle of proportionality and in strict
accordance with the terms of the authorization. The use
of force to protect civilians does not abrogate
international law, but underlines the need for strict
adherence to it.
Moreover, just as peacekeepers must be
accountable for their actions and omissions in the
cause of protection, Member States, too, must be clear
on how they are fulfilling the mandate they have
received from the Council. In the same vein, the use of
force by peacekeepers to protect civilians must be
carried out with utmost restraint. This is necessary to
ensure that blue helmets are not perceived as parties to
the conflict. Avoiding such a perception is crucial for
the continued success of peacekeeping. Trust in the
Organization’s impartiality is indispensable for it to
constructively contribute to sustainable political
solutions to conflict, which is the ultimate goal of
United Nations peacekeeping.
Protecting civilians is one of the most important
ways in which the Organization gives expression to its
ultimate objectives, as set out in the Charter. The
United Nations has made great strides in this area, both
in the Council and in other forums. Going forward, we
must continue to advance the protection agenda,
focusing on the five core challenges identified by the
Secretary-General in 2009.
Brazil supports a consensual, non-selective
approach to ensure the protection of civilians around

11

S/PV.6531

the world. In the Council, in the General Assembly and
in the field, we remain committed to finding solutions
to the dilemmas of protection.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you, Mr. President for organizing this important
debate. I wish to extend my gratitude to UnderSecretary-General Amos, Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy and Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović
for their important, irreplaceable work and of course
for their valuable briefings at today’s meeting.
The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is one to which Bosnia and Herzegovina
attaches great importance. Unfortunately, serious and
constant violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law and deteriorating situations,
including systematic violence against civilian
populations, have continued during the reporting
period in many countries. Civilians are still, and too
often, targets in armed attacks and atrocities and are
victims of human rights abuses, in particular rape and
other sexual violence. It is the unfortunate and
unacceptable reality of our times that civilians continue
to be a main target for armed attacks and account for a
high number of casualties in conflicts.
Regrettably, in 2010 and during the first quarter
of 2011, we have witnessed a continuous and
significant increase in civilian casualties in a number
of countries, including Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia,
Côte d’Ivoire and Libya. The list certainly does not end
there. Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns such
violence and finds it both appalling and unacceptable.
In response to some of the violations that
occurred in the most recent period, the Security
Council took concrete steps relating to the protection
of civilians, the first one being the adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011), which authorized all necessary
measures to protect civilians in Libya, and the second
being the adoption of resolution 1975 (2011), which
imposed sanctions on former Ivorian President Laurent
Gbagbo and his circle and authorized the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire to prevent the use
of heavy weapons against the civilian population.
When it comes to the situation in Libya, we are
gravely concerned over the references in the recent
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court to serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights in the country. We
condemn in the strongest possible terms artillery

12

shelling and sniper fire aimed at civilians and civilian
buildings. In this context, we reiterate that full
implementation of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011) is of the utmost importance and that obligations
deriving from those resolutions are not optional.
With regard to the situation in the Ivory Coast,
we also reiterate our deep concern over the reported
serious violations of human rights and the use of
disproportionate force. We are alarmed by the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in the country,
where more than a million people have reportedly been
internally displaced and more than 100,000 had to flee
the country and find shelter in Liberia. We urge the
international community to redouble its efforts and
provide the much-needed humanitarian assistance.
Allegations of the existence of mass graves in the
country are worrisome and must be investigated. We
condemn the use of sexual violence as a means to
political ends and welcome the decision of the Human
Rights Council to establish an independent
international commission of inquiry.
We urge all parties to armed conflicts to fully
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law concerning the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We particularly underline the need to
combat impunity for perpetrators of violence against
civilians. The struggle against impunity is an integral
element in the protection of civilians that cannot be
addressed seriously without prosecuting those
responsible for serious crimes. Sanctions and other
targeted measures play an important role in overall
efforts, as well as in initiatives to improve compliance
with the law by non-State armed groups. The Security
Council should take every opportunity to send a
message that crimes committed against civilians are
unacceptable and that all perpetrators of grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will be brought to justice.
Conflicts remain the major cause behind the
increasing numbers of refugees and internally
displaced persons. In that context, we are deeply
concerned about the unsafe and too-often impeded
humanitarian access to populations affected by
conflict. We are also troubled by attacks against
humanitarian workers, which must be strongly
condemned. We believe that the Security Council
should take a more consistent and comprehensive
approach to addressing constraints on humanitarian

11-33032

S/PV.6531

access and should ensure accountability for grave
instances of denial of access.
The challenges facing the Council with regard to
the protection of civilians call for greater international
cooperation and better coordination between the
Council and other United Nations bodies and agencies.
To that end, additional efforts should be made to
prevent conflicts and their recurrence and to promote
early-warning systems and effective responses to
situations
that
specifically
threaten
civilian
populations. Although the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians lies with States and parties to
an armed conflict, the United Nations, with its
systematic approach to the protection of civilians, must
be, and is, at the helm of the global effort.
We believe that more comprehensive and detailed
information on the protection of civilians in countryspecific situations is needed. Measuring progress in the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates related to
the protection of civilians must be improved. We
support the recommendations of the Secretary-General
made in the most recent report asking for the
systematic application of the aide-mémoire on the
protection of civilians and active use of the Council’s
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians to
discuss peacekeeping and other mission mandates.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the utmost
importance to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I join previous speakers
in thanking our briefers today, and you, Sir, for
convening this timely debate.
In the last few months, civilians have been under
attack in several parts of the world. Civilians continue
to represent the majority of the victims of conflict.
They are not only affected by conflicts, but very
frequently are deliberately targeted by the different
parties. Women are too often subjected to sexual
violence used as a tactic of war. Children are too often
killed or maimed or used in armed conflict.
Widespread violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in times of war
contribute to fuelling instability, violence and conflict.
Portugal condemns all attacks directed against
civilians in Libya; in Côte d’Ivoire; in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where the Lord’s Resistance

11-33032

Army regularly carries out attacks against villages; in
Afghanistan or Iraq, where weapons and explosive
devices cause so much civilian suffering; or in Syria,
where intense violence has resulted in over 500 people
killed and thousands of others injured.
Learning from past situations such as Rwanda or
Srebrenica, it is clear that the Security Council must
pay persistent attention to the plight of civilians in
crisis and that it must act promptly when
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population
take place. When civilians are under threat, the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, must
respond.
We should recognize that the overall attention of
the Security Council to issues related to the protection
of civilians has been increasing. The Council has the
necessary normative framework and tools at hand to
guide its action in this area in an effective and
accountable manner. A number of peacekeeping
missions have been established with strong protection
mandates. Specific training courses have been
deployed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to enhance the understanding of the concept
of the protection of civilians. Local strategies and
improved engagement with the communities have been
devised, and all these tools have had a significant
impact on enhancing the protection of civilian
populations.
In his report to the Council last November
(S/2010/579), the Secretary-General referred to the
need to identify new and innovative ways to address
specific situations that are not on the agenda. We fully
agree. When the protection of civilians has been at
stake, we have found creative ways to bring the issue
to the attention of this body and to take action.
Resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) are perhaps
the most striking examples of swift action by the
Council to respond to a situation that was not formally
on its agenda but where civilians were targeted. But
more can be done — and more consistently — to
convey effective political signals using existing tools at
the disposal of the Council, such as press statements,
presidential statements, resolutions, briefings and
consultations.
Indeed, we need to be realistic. The prevention of
conflict is always the most effective way to protect
civilians. That explains why reliable early-warning
information on threats to civilians is crucial.

13

S/PV.6531

Preventive measures are core elements of resolution
1894 (2009) and important pillars of the responsibility
to protect. In this regard, we would like to underline
the value of practical but very effective preventive
measures that are now in place in a number of
peacekeeping missions to ensure timely action, for
instance telephone hotlines. But other measures can be
devised, including to support the efforts of civilian
populations to protect themselves, through education
and training programmes, while engaging State
authorities, who retain the primary responsibility for
protection.
Another aspect that is crucial — and that was
rightly examined in the Secretary-General’s report —
is the need to enhance accountability for violations of
humanitarian and human rights law. Countering
impunity, either by the action of international
institutions such as the International Criminal Court or
by the actions of national institutions, has a deterrent
effect at the national, regional and international level,
and is a fundamental tool to prevent further violations.
In this respect, Portugal would like to underline once
again the important role of the International Criminal
Court in fighting impunity for the most serious crimes
and encourages all efforts to promote the
universalization of the Rome Statute.
We would also highlight the crucial role that the
Human Rights Council is playing in the fight against
impunity. Two international commissions of inquiry, on
Côte d’Ivoire and on Libya, have recently been
dispatched to investigate human rights violations, to
establish the facts and circumstances of those
violations and, where possible, to identify those
responsible so as to make recommendations, in
particular on accountability measures. Another factfinding mission will soon be sent to Syria for the same
purposes. The Council will certainly benefit from the
work of those missions, which hopefully will
contribute not only to enhancing accountability but
also to promoting peaceful solutions to existing crises.
In conclusion, I wish to underline that a Council
that is better informed is also better prepared to take
effective action; hence the need for real-time
information regarding threats to civilians. With
sufficient credible and early information the Council
will be more able to use preventive diplomacy to
influence parties to conflict to comply with
international law and to make specific commitments
regarding civilian populations. It is now up to us to

14

seek such information and to ensure that the Security
Council acts consistently and with resolve to send a
political signal in demanding immediate compliance
with international humanitarian law to protect all
civilians — women, men and children — who are
directly targeted or are accidental victims of conflict.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Amos,
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović for their valuable
remarks today.
Let me begin by commending the work of the
United Nations and the brave local and international
United Nations staff, from peacekeepers to
humanitarian workers, who risk their lives to help
protect civilians in harm’s way. We should not
underestimate the challenges they face. All too many
regimes are still willing to use ruthless and
indiscriminate force in populated areas, and some
deliberately target civilians, humanitarian workers and
journalists.
Last November the Council debated how to
promote and improve methods to protect civilians (see
S/PV.6427). Just weeks later, the world witnessed the
extraordinary and ongoing courage of people in nations
across North Africa and the Middle East who found
their voices and were demanding to be heard. Many
have taken to the streets to exercise their rights of
expression despite, in some cases, brutal attempts at
repression.
On 17 March, the Council acted decisively to
protect innocent civilians in Libya (see S/PV.6498).
Responding to the Libyan people and the Arab League,
the Security Council authorized the use of all necessary
measures to protect civilians and civilian areas targeted
by Colonel Al-Qadhafi, his intelligence and security
forces and his mercenaries. That new resolution
(resolution 1973 (2011)) followed up on the unanimous
Council vote on resolution 1970 (2011) to refer the
situation in Libya to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court. Resolution 1970 (2011) underscored
the importance that the international community
attaches to assuring that those responsible for
widespread, systematic attacks against the Libyan
people are held accountable.
The international community must remain united
in the commitment to protecting civilians and civilianpopulated areas under threat of attack, to ending

11-33032

S/PV.6531

violence against the Libyan people and to defending
the universal rights we all share. The NATO coalition
operates within the mandate of resolution 1973 (2011)
to enforce the arms embargo and the no-fly zone and to
conduct a civilian protection mission. NATO makes
every effort to avoid civilian casualties.
In Syria we are concerned about the continued
reports of gratuitous violence against unarmed
demonstrators. We therefore welcome the mission by
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights to investigate alleged violations of international
human rights law. We call on the Syrian Government to
allow journalists and human rights monitors to
independently verify events on the ground, including
reports of indiscriminate attacks on populated areas by
Syrian forces.
We have seen real progress in efforts to protect
civilians, but in Darfur and elsewhere we still face
serious challenges. Let me highlight three key areas
where the Council plays a crucial role: improving
peacekeeping missions, assuring humanitarian access
in armed conflict and ensuring accountability.
First, on the role of peacekeeping, consider the
recent crisis in Côte d’Ivoire. The Security Council
consistently responded to escalating violence there by
urging the United Nations peacekeeping force to fully
implement its mandate to protect civilians under threat
of attack, culminating in resolution 1975 (2011). The
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire responded
robustly to neutralize the threat of heavy weapons. We
know that those actions saved many lives, based on the
substantial weapons caches discovered in and around
Abidjan.
We have seen progress, led by Member States in
concert with the Secretariat, to improve the tools,
guidance and resources to help United Nations
missions identify and address the threats to populations
in conflict zones. We must continue to learn from
experience and provide better support to missions,
including doing more to address sexual and genderbased violence. In difficult environments such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
has developed mission-wide protection strategies,
including establishing community liaison assistance
and joint protection teams to better protect civilians.
We welcome those efforts.

Humanitarian personnel around the world all too often
work in insecure conditions and lack access to
vulnerable populations. There are increasing reports of
attempts to intimidate humanitarian workers, impede
their movement and even target them directly. In
Darfur, the humanitarian community’s efforts to gain
regular access to those in need are being stifled by
Government restrictions on movement, particularly in
areas where the Sudanese Armed Forces are engaged in
hostilities or aerial bombardment. We must redouble
our efforts to end such obstructions to humanitarian
access and hold those responsible for these
obstructions accountable.
Finally, accountability remains essential to
ensuring an effective, transparent process of
reconciliation after the guns have gone silent. The
recent report from the Panel of Experts created to
advise the Secretary-General on Sri Lanka alleges
several violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law in the final stages of the conflict,
which may have resulted in the deaths of up to 40,000
civilians. We urge the Sri Lankan Government to
respond constructively to the report. Accountability
and reconciliation are inextricably linked. It is in Sri
Lanka’s interest to take concrete steps to promote
justice, accountability, human rights and reconciliation.
We have a window of opportunity to translate
recent Security Council cooperation on civilian
protection into lasting improvements in our response to
crises. We must seize it for all of our sakes, and for the
sake of the innocent men, women and children who
rely on our collective action to defend them.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): The
topic under discussion today calls on us to reflect
seriously on State and international responsibilities to
ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflicts on
the Security Council’s agenda, as well as the tools with
which to achieve it. The briefings and analyses by
Under-Secretary-General Amos,
Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy and Assistant Secretary-General
Šimonović illuminate the subject very well. We should
therefore remember that the Security Council has dealt
with the protection of civilians on several occasions
over the past decade. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the concepts embodied in resolutions 1265
(1999) and 1674 (2006), as well as in subsequent
resolutions and presidential statements.

Secondly, we must continue to facilitate
humanitarian access into areas of armed conflict.

11-33032

15

S/PV.6531

The current circumstances demand that the
actions that United Nations bodies, including the
Security Council, take to address a crisis are framed
consistent with international law, in order to ensure
their legality and legitimacy. We believe that this is the
best way to guarantee lasting solutions in those
situations where the Council must act. The protection
of civilians in situations on the Council’s agenda is a
matter that demands our commitment to concrete
measures such as those taken in recent months. In the
case of Côte d’Ivoire, for example, the mandate of the
peacekeeping Mission established by the Council
included explicit authorization for the Mission to use
any means necessary to counter the use of heavy
weaponry against civilians.
With regard to the situation in Libya, the
Council’s response to that crisis was phased and
gradual, starting with a statement to the press, followed
by a resolution (resolution 1970 (2011)) adopted under
Article 41 of the Charter, and concluding with a second
resolution, this time adopted under Chapter VII
(resolution 1973 (2011)). The true theme of both those
resolutions is thus the protection of civilians.
Moreover, we believe that it is essential to
strengthen the work of other bodies with regard to the
protection of civilians, such as the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and, in particular, the
Human Rights Council. Establishing effective
cooperation in this area between the Security Council
and other relevant bodies and agencies of the United
Nations can make the Council’s actions more
productive vis-à-vis the areas under its purview.
In that regard, recent international events have
prompted my delegation to reflect on the Human
Rights Council and its readiness to strengthen
mechanisms for prevention and cooperation with
States, in order to reinforce their own capacity to
protect civilians. We believe that work needs to be
done in order to ensure that governmental agencies are
aware of their responsibilities in this area and that they
are creating the institutions needed to ensure the
protection of civilians with a comprehensive and longterm vision, including those entities charged with
investigating and prosecuting abuses in individual
cases. We believe that the creation of the Human
Rights Council, less than a decade ago, has enabled us
to address strengthening national capacities to protect
civilians more creatively and cooperatively. To that
end, we must move from a confrontational approach

16

towards one of cooperation. Only by building national
capacity to deal with the duties and responsibilities of
national authorities to protect civilians will we be able
to make a long-term difference.
As is the case with other thematic issues
considered by the Council, this too should be subject to
further reflection in order to strengthen the cooperative
mechanisms that enable us to achieve substantial
results in situations where civilians are particularly
affected. One way of doing this would be to resort
more frequently to other bodies and agencies in the
United Nations system able to work on building
national capacities when States request it.
The Security Council, pursuant to the functions
assigned to it by the United Nations Charter, must
address threats to international peace and security. In
that context, my delegation would like to recall the
request of the Council in November 2010 that the
Secretary-General include more extensive and detailed
information in his reports concerning the protection of
civilians in armed conflict when reporting on specific
events on the Council’s agenda.
Colombia concurs with other Council members
that the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians belongs to each State. We therefore consider it
essential that international support be rendered in close
coordination with national authorities, in accordance
with the Charter and the norms of international law,
and with respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as well as for the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence. Any
initiative in this area should be mindful of the central
role played by Governments and relevant national
policies.
As Under-Secretary-General Amos mentioned in
her report, Colombia has suffered under the scourge of
a guerrilla group that has been described at the national
and international levels as a terrorist group, and which
has also been involved in illegal trafficking in drugs
and arms and has systematically attacked and
perpetrated deplorable acts against the civilian
population, using mines, bombs and explosives. With
international cooperation, for which we are grateful,
Colombian authorities are committed to a process that
is moving forward successfully in combating the
violence and providing redress for its victims. At this
very moment, we are in the final stage of enacting in
Colombia’s national Congress a law providing redress

11-33032

S/PV.6531

for victims and restitution of their lands, a reflection of
the Government’s commitment to protect and make
reparations to the civilian population.
We understand that there are exceptional
circumstances where the Council may be required to
act without consulting the authorities, either because
the authorities as such do not exist or because the
authorities themselves are the ones deliberately
threatening the lives of their own citizens. This
underlines the fact that each and every situation is
unique, which in turn implies that efforts made to
resolve humanitarian issues must address the specific
features of a situation.
Lastly, we call on the Members of the United
Nations and the Secretariat to consider the thematic
issues discussed by the Council as an opportunity for
strengthening other bodies established with specific
aims in view. We believe this can improve our
performance, particularly regarding the results we
stand to achieve in the long term concerning the
protection of civilians.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to you and your
delegation for organizing this open debate,
Mr. President. We also wish to thank Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, for their
briefings.
South Africa is fully committed to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and continues to support
a strengthened normative and legal framework for
enhancing such protection measures. We welcome the
concerted efforts of the international community to
protect civilians in armed conflict. Despite such
positive efforts and the progressive steps that are being
taken, scores of civilians in many regions of the world
are still harmed or maimed during armed conflicts,
from Afghanistan to Somalia to Libya to Côte d’Ivoire.
In this regard, we regret deeply that civilians, in
particular women and children, continue to account for
the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians (S/2010/579) made three
important additions to the five core protection
challenges identified in his 2009 report (S/2009/277).

11-33032

Advances in all of those core areas will contribute to
the international community’s fight against impunity,
improve humanitarian access and ensure consistency in
mandates for the protection of civilians. The Council
has made commitments concerning the protection of
civilians, particularly in the areas of peacekeeping,
humanitarian access, monitoring, information-sharing
and reporting.
In spite of a number of well-meaning Security
Council resolutions, presidential statements and
thematic mechanisms, the grim reality is that parties
engaged in conflict still have a long way to go in
fulfilling their responsibilities concerning civilian
protection. It is clear that the lack of political will and
complete disregard for the lives of civilians remains a
major obstacle to protecting civilians during armed
conflict. The Secretary-General observed in his report
presented to the Council in November 2010 that any
progress in the protection of civilians has been the
result of increased focus by international agencies on
the issue, not because armed groups are observing
international law.
We therefore call upon all relevant parties to
conflicts to put an end to such practices and recognize
that States bear the primary responsibility of protecting
civilians within their borders. That does not exonerate
non-State armed groups to conflicts. Non-State actors
have responsibility under international humanitarian
law to protect civilians and they must be held
accountable for violations. Accordingly, it is always
important to note that, while United Nations
peacekeeping operations should always adopt a robust
posture in implementing the mandates of the Council,
including the protection of civilian elements, they must
do so in an impartial manner. United Nations
peacekeeping operations should never be seen to be
siding with one party to a conflict, as that would
undermine the integrity of United Nations efforts.
The plight of women and children, in particular,
remains perilous and requires urgent attention. South
Africa appreciates the efforts of many Governments,
including those of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Chad, to combat sexual violence, as
demonstrated by the arrest of senior military officers
involved in crimes of conflict-related sexual violence.
The increased momentum in the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612 (2005) and 1960 (2010),
including on monitoring, information-sharing and
reporting, needs to be further accelerated.

17

S/PV.6531

In February, at the initiative of the Brazilian
presidency, the Council held informal consultations to
discuss protection-related items on its agenda, namely,
protection of civilians, children and armed conflict,
and women and peace and security. South Africa
supports this holistic approach, whereby these issues
are dealt with in a coherent manner. In that regard,
actions undertaken by the Secretariat should be
mutually reinforcing.
Over the past three months, we have witnessed
some important advances as the Security Council
adopted resolutions giving practical expression to our
collective desire to ensure civilian protection. These
resolutions have at their core the protection of
civilians, and South Africa supported these additional
measures for Libya and Côte d’Ivoire, respectively.
These resolutions have noble intentions focused on our
common desire to protect civilian lives.

international community to prevent armed conflict and
to support actions aimed at addressing the underlying
causes in an effective and sustainable manner, thereby
making the renewal of hostilities less likely.
In conclusion, progress in advancing the
protection of civilians will also depend on the
consistency with which the Council pursues this goal.
Selectivity gravely limits the credibility of the Council
in advancing protection of civilian mandates. This
Council cannot be seen to place the value of some
civilians above that of others. Proactive actions that we
have witnessed in Libya and Côte d’Ivoire have also to
be applied in cases such as Somalia.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me
thank today’s briefers for their valuable contributions.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Acting Head of the Delegation of
the European Union.

However,
we
are
concerned
that
the
implementation of these resolutions appears to go
beyond their letter and spirit. It is important that, as
international actors and external organizations provide
constructive assistance, they should nonetheless
comply with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter, fully respect the will, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country concerned, and
refrain from advancing political agendas that go
beyond the protection of civilian mandates, including
regime change.

Today’s debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict comes at a crucial moment. Only last
week, the International Criminal Court announced its
intention to indict three Libyan officials whom it holds
responsible for organized crimes against humanity
perpetrated against civilians in Libya. Following the
landmark resolution 1970 (2011), that is an important
step in enhancing accountability for violations of
international law and ending the so-called culture of
impunity.

In our view, such actions will undermine the
gains made in this discourse and provide ammunition
to those who have always been sceptical of the
concept. In the final analysis, the implementation of
these resolutions will determine whether our actions
have yielded the intended result of protecting civilians.

Regarding the responsibility to protect, let me be
clear — it is first and foremost the responsibility of
each State to protect its civilian population from
violence. However, the international community will
not turn a blind eye when there is a blatant disregard of
this obligation. That is a message that applies not only
to Libya; indeed, it goes beyond Libya.

Our efforts in protecting civilians will also be
undermined if our approach to conflict resolution is
limited only to addressing symptoms while ignoring
root causes. Such an approach will not help to find a
fundamental solution to the protection of civilians,
which, in the final analysis, can be guaranteed only by
capable States with strong democratic institutions. In
this regard, more focus should be directed to rule of
law reforms; democratization reforms; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; security sector
reforms; and post-conflict reconstruction and
development underpinned by early peacebuilding
programmes, inter alia. We must stress the need for the

18

Civilians continue to bear the brunt of violence in
armed conflict. Recent events in Côte d’Ivoire and
Libya reconfirm this fact in a tragic way. The
indiscriminate and excessive use of force against
civilians in all its various forms cannot and must not be
accepted by the Security Council and the international
community at large.
Let me briefly touch upon some of the situations
of particular concern to us. First, with regard to Syria,
we are deeply shocked by the violence and brutality of
the internal repression orchestrated by the Syrian
authorities against unarmed and peaceful protesters.

11-33032

S/PV.6531

The use of tanks and heavy artillery against the civilian
population in Dar΄a, Baniyas and other cities is deeply
worrying. The Syrian authorities clearly stand at a fork
in the road. We strongly urge the Syrian Government to
end its military repression of its own population and to
respect human rights. Those responsible for the killings
should be held accountable.
In order to make this message clear, we have
worked for the European Union to impose restrictive
measures against Syria and persons responsible for the
violent repression. These measures have come into
force today. The ongoing violence and the regional
implications also require that we continue to address
the situation in Syria in the Security Council.
On Afghanistan, we remain seriously concerned
about the intolerably high number of conflict-related
civilian casualties. The large majority of them are
caused by indiscriminate attacks by the Taliban, AlQaida and other violent armed groups. We would also
like to take note of the continued progress made by
Afghan and international forces in minimizing civilian
casualties.
The situation of the civilian population in
Somalia remains a cause of grave concern, as are the
ongoing activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army, in
particular the abduction of children in parts of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, southern Sudan
and the Central African Republic.
On Sri Lanka, Germany welcomes the report of
the Panel of Experts. The report reiterates the need for
accountability in that country. The findings of the
report should encourage the Government of Sri Lanka
to set up a credible investigation and accountability
process. We urge Sri Lanka to closely cooperate with
the United Nations in this regard.
Since the last open debate on protection issues in
November last year (S/PV.6427), the Security Council
has further developed its comprehensive normative
framework on protection issues. We note with
appreciation that four out of the current seven United
Nations peacekeeping operations with a protection
mandate have already developed comprehensive
strategies for the protection of civilians.
Heeding your call, Mr. President, and for the sake
of brevity, I will abridge my written statement and
conclude by drawing the Council’s attention to one
group of civilians with particular protection needs in

11-33032

armed conflict, namely, children. Children are sexually
abused, killed and/or maimed and sometimes even used
as suicide bombers by parties to a conflict. In armed
conflicts, schools and hospitals, which are essential for
the development and well-being of children, are
deliberately attacked and destroyed.
Together with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, with UNICEF
and other United Nations agencies, the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict — which I have the honour to chair — has
continued to make tangible progress in demobilizing
child soldiers and in enhancing compliance with
international law by State and non-State parties to
conflict. I urge the members of the Council, as well as
the wider United Nations membership to continue to
lend their valuable support to this common endeavour.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate.
The briefings we have received from UnderSecretaries-General Amos and Le Roy and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović add an important
practical focus to our discussion of this important
matter of principle, and we thank them.
Although the United Nations, and this Council in
particular, have been seized of protection issues for
several years now, as we have heard today, our actions
to date have not reversed the trend towards the
disproportionate suffering of civilians in situations of
armed conflict. It bears repeating that the primary
obligation to protect civilians affected by conflict lies
with national Governments and parties to conflict.
However, when they are unable or unwilling to fulfil
this obligation, the international community, in
particular the Security Council, must respond to the
plight of civilians in armed conflict.
In this regard, we recall the United Nations
efforts to implement resolution 1894 (2009), which
called for comprehensive information on protection of
civilians to be provided to the Security Council. While
improvements have been made, we still lack a
coordinated approach to information gathering and
monitoring to ensure that the full impact felt by
innocent civilians in conflict situations is appreciated.
This must be a priority, as forewarned is surely
forearmed.
Nigeria supports the use of the full range of
protection tools, including the provision of

19

S/PV.6531

humanitarian assistance, mediation and other
diplomatic interventions, arms control and the effective
rule of law. A thoughtful approach to understanding the
specific vulnerabilities of all civilians in a conflict
situation would lead us to the right combination of
these strategies, one reflecting the socio-economic
context of the conflict.
The protection of civilians goes to the very heart
of the Council’s mandate. I am therefore proud to note
that the international community has not been content
to stand idly by while civilians are targeted and caught
in the crossfire of conflict.
Our response to the conflict in Libya is using a
range of protection strategies in a non-peacekeeping
context. Multiple actors are working hard to provide
humanitarian assistance in the face of targeted attacks
on civilians and aid workers. Blocking humanitarian
access is not only a deplorable act, it clearly violates
the Fourth Geneva Convention. The dreadful scenes we
are witnessing in Misrata and elsewhere in the country
demonstrate the disregard for such pre-emptory norms.
Notwithstanding the efforts of the multiple
international humanitarian actors, the spectre of a
major food crisis and refugee crisis now looms. We
therefore demand that the Libyan parties take steps to
honour resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) and to
commit to a comprehensive ceasefire and a viable
political track.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the Ouattara Administration has
done much to ensure that Ivorian civilians remain
protected. However, the circumstances in that country
prove that the responsibility to protect survives fullscale conflict. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has reported that armed militias
continue to attack the population in the west of the
country and that insecurity is hampering humanitarian
access to those in need, including internally displaced
persons. Nigeria believes that peace can be achieved in
Côte d’Ivoire through a process of reconciliation, and
we support initiatives in that direction. We also look
forward to the outcome of the high-level inter-agency
assessment mission on the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire currently in Abidjan. We trust that
ongoing protection priorities will be at the forefront of
the final recommendations.
We can think of no better way to keep civilians
out of harm’s way than to prevent conflict before it
breaks out. Prevention is infinitely better than cure. We

20

therefore urge the international community to lend
greater support to the preventive diplomacy initiatives
of civil society and regional and subregional bodies
and efforts, such as the Economic Community of West
African States Observation and Monitoring System.
Such measures encourage stability and thereby reduce
the vulnerability of women, men and children caught in
conflict. In this way, we might protect civilians beyond
those on the agenda of this Council.
Finally, we must challenge ourselves to be
objective in our assessment of situations where
civilians need our protection. We must try for
consistency in our approach to the protection of
civilians in all situations of armed conflict and not be
held back or propelled by national interest, but by
justice and principle alone.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank the French delegation for having
convened this open debate. I also wish to thank UnderSecretaries-General Amos and Le Roy and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović for their statements.
China is deeply concerned about the safety of
civilian lives and property during armed conflict,
which have been negatively impacted and threatened.
We condemn acts of violence deliberately targeting
civilians in situations of armed conflict.
Today, I wish to underscore four points.
First, the strengthening of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict must strictly abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. The responsibility to protect civilians lies first
and foremost with the Government of the country
concerned. The international community and external
organizations can provide constructive assistance, but
they must observe the principles of objectivity and
neutrality and fully respect the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the
country concerned. There must be no attempt at regime
change or involvement in civil war by any party under
the guise of protecting civilians.
Secondly, in order to fundamentally address the
objective of the protection of civilians, more must be
done in the areas of conflict prevention and resolution.
The Security Council should as a priority engage in
preventive diplomacy and prevent or reduce conflict in
regions where there is turmoil. The Council should as a
priority urge the parties concerned to cease hostilities

11-33032

S/PV.6531

and achieve a ceasefire. Only by actively promoting a
political solution by peaceful means through dialogue
and negotiation can civilian casualties be minimized.
Military means are not an effective answer to these
issues.
Thirdly, strengthening the protection of civilians
in armed conflict must be done through implementation
of Security Council decisions in a comprehensive and
strict manner. The original intention of resolutions
1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) was to put an end to
violence and to protect civilians. We are opposed to
any attempt to wilfully interpret the resolutions or to
take actions that exceed those mandated by the
resolutions. In implementing the resolutions, efforts
must be made to avoid yet greater civilian casualties.
Fourthly, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict involves the development and evolution of the
norms of international humanitarian law, which should
be discussed in depth by the wider membership of the
United Nations in order to reach consensus. Conflict
situations vary, and there must be no one-size-fits-all
approach to the protection of civilians. Various parties
still hold divergent views on the responsibility to
protect, and the General Assembly should continue its
discussion on this matter.
The deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
operations alone cannot fundamentally address the
issue of the protection of civilians. In authorizing the
United Nations to protect civilians, the specific
situation of the country concerned, as well as the
capabilities of the United Nations, must be taken into
full consideration. United Nations peacekeeping
operations must continue to abide by the principles of
objectivity and neutrality and avoid taking sides in
local political disputes or even becoming a party to the
conflict.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and we thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened it. This debate is
taking place at a time when the world, in particular
Africa and the Middle East, is in a state of upheaval as
a result of crises whose humanitarian and human rights
consequences are of major concern to the Council.
We would like to thank Ms. Valerie Amos,
Mr. Alain Le Roy and Mr. Ivan Šimonović for their
respective contributions to our debate. We wish also to
express our deep appreciation and full support for the

11-33032

work that they and their teams are carrying out on the
ground.
During the most recent debate on this issue (see
S/PV.6427), the Council emphasized the need to
strengthen the aspect of the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations. Today we have an
opportunity to deal with the question in a
comprehensive manner, focusing on two key aspects:
in the framework of peacekeeping operations and in
emergency situations.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in Côte d’Ivoire and in Libya, as well as other
crises, has shown that the vulnerability of civilians in
crises continues to be marked by violence of increasing
intensity as a result of clashes and confrontations
between armed groups. Be it continuing, unpunished
violence and sexual abuse, violence related to the
exploitation of natural resources or violence resulting
from terrorist acts, Gabon has consistently condemned
all violence against civilians as well as all acts whose
victims are civilians. Such acts must not go
unpunished.
With respect to the protection of civilians in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, one of the
longstanding problems in that respect has been
insufficient funding and a lack of means of
communication, which has hindered the effectiveness
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) on the ground. We welcome the progress
made recently in that area, which has enabled
MONUSCO to ensure better protection for vulnerable
peoples.
With respect to the systematic violence carried
out against women and girls, we welcome the
investigations that are under way in the country, which
reflect the determination of MONUSCO and of the
Congolese Government to combat impunity.
The Ivorian crisis raised legitimate concerns
given the heavy price paid by civilians during the postelectoral situation. The implementation by the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) of
resolution 1975 (2011) made it possible to reduce the
scale of the massacres and to avert a widespread civil
war.
In the case of Libya, beyond Gabon’s support for
resolution 1973 (2011), we would like to reaffirm that

21

S/PV.6531

the objective of setting up a no-fly zone in the country
was the protection of the civilian population. We
remain concerned at the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, which has an impact on
civilians. We remain convinced that the establishment
of a ceasefire and the initiation of a concerted political
solution are important prerequisites for improving the
humanitarian situation and for more effectively
protecting civilians on the ground.
Recent crises make clear that we must continue to
seek effective solutions so as to face the immediate
challenges involved in ensuring the security and
physical protection of the most vulnerable civilians:
the need to ensure that the most vulnerable have access
to humanitarian aid, and the need to induce armed
groups to spare civilian populations. I should like here
to highlight our concern as to the increasing use of
explosive munitions in heavily populated areas.
I should like also to highlight two key elements,
which have already been mentioned by other
delegations.
First, there is a need to reaffirm the norms of
responsibility. It must be reiterated that the protection
of civilians in conflict is the responsibility of the States
and parties to the conflict, even if other actors are also
involved. Law alone cannot put an end to a crisis,
make it possible to emerge from such crisis or even
ensure the protection of civilians. It is first and
foremost our determination to enforce the law that will
make a difference. That where our responsibility as
members of the Security Council comes in, as was the
case recently with respect to Libya and Côte d’Ivoire.
The second element is the need to maintain the
impartiality and neutrality of humanitarian action. The
implementation of resolution 1973 (2011) shows how
difficult it is to carry out humanitarian work at a time
when a military operation aimed at protecting civilians
is under way. In such a context, it is important that
humanitarian actions remain neutral and impartial.
As we have highlighted in the course of previous
debates on this issue, the protection of civilians
requires new approaches that focus on awarenessraising and prevention. It is important to make agreed
norms and principles widely known and to ensure that
everyone is aware of the consequences of failing to
respect such norms and principles.

22

In conclusion, we cannot address the issue of the
protection of civilians without linking it to the causes
of conflict, which are often connected to issues related
to the democratization of States, good governance and
the establishment of the rule of law. Prevention of
conflict and mediation are the peaceful solutions to
which we should accord priority in our actions, so as to
create an environment that, in the end, will reduce the
risk of armed conflict and its disastrous consequences
for civilian populations.
Finally, I should like to stress the need to adapt
the mandates of peacekeeping operations to the
realities on the ground, and, above all, to ensure that
commensurate resources are made available for their
implementation.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate. I should also like to
thank Ms. Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. Le Roy, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Affairs; and Mr. Šimonović,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights and
Head of the New York Office of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Today wars and conflicts have encroached upon
safe, densely populated cities and villages. Every
citizen is now in the line of fire and can lose his or her
life, arbitrarily, at any time. Thus living far from the
threat of armed conflict has become an indispensable
humanitarian requirement for a safe and decent life.
That is the basic challenge that all individual States
and the international community as a whole must strive
to meet.
States are primarily responsible for protecting
their civilians and accountable for grave violations of
international humanitarian law. Thus, it is a top priority
for the international community to strive to support
national efforts in that regard. We recall here the
obligation of occupying Powers to protect civilians
under occupation and to safeguard the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the needy, pursuant to the
provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law, particularly The Hague and Geneva
Conventions. We reiterate our condemnation of the
ongoing Israeli blockade of Gaza and restrictions on
the delivery of humanitarian assistance thereto. We call
on the Security Council to assume its responsibility to
end that anachronistic practice.

11-33032

S/PV.6531

It is also important to provide reliable and up-todate information to the Security Council on imminent
threats to civilians at any time or place. Such
information allowed the Council to respond swiftly to
the need to protect civilians in Libya by adopting
resolution 1973 (2011). There is no doubt that the
adoption and timely implementation of that resolution
prevented a looming humanitarian disaster in Benghazi
and other areas in Libya. In that regard, we emphasize
the need for all parties in Libya to respect international
humanitarian law. We condemn the use of heavy
weapons and cluster munitions against civilians,
particularly in the light of the suffering experienced in
southern Lebanon due to Israel’s use of those brutal
weapons in its 2006 aggression.
Lebanon also stresses the need to hold
responsible the perpetrators of crimes against the
Libyan people. Indeed, accountability promotes
compliance with international law. The trial of those
responsible and the payment of compensation represent
the administration of justice and deter potential
violators. We wish in that regard to reiterate our
demand that Israel pay compensation for the material
and human losses incurred in the war it launched
against Lebanon in 2006.
While the Security Council’s actions against
Libya were exceptional and represented the last resort
in addressing an imminent threat, the Security Council
and the international community have means of
protection at their disposal. The sustainable protection
of civilians cannot be achieved unless we address the
root causes of conflict. The United Nations must
therefore spare no effort in promoting the political
settlement
of
disputes,
particularly
through
comprehensive dialogue, national reconciliation and
reintegration.
The rule of law is at the heart of protection. We
must strive to help States emerging from conflict to
build their judicial and security institutions and to
foster a culture of protection. Finally, the protection of
civilians should remain the focus of the international
community’s efforts. We have a collective
responsibility to protect the voiceless millions on
whom conflicts are imposed, to horrifying effect. We
hope that everyone will step up to the plate.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

11-33032

I thank Ms. Amos, Mr. Leroy and Mr. Šimonović
for their briefings. I associate myself with the
statement to be made by the Acting Head of the
Delegation of the European Union.
I wish to stress three points. First, when grave
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, war crimes and crimes against humanity are
committed, it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to intervene to end them. That is what we did
in Libya. The Security Council authorized the forces of
the coalition to protect civilians under bombardment
ordered by their leaders. By striking Colonel
Al-Qadhafi’s forces before they entered Benghazi,
France and its partners helped to prevent a massacre
there. By demining the port of Misrata, we enabled
humanitarian assistance to be delivered and civilians to
be evacuated.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the Security Council gave the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)
the resources it needed to fulfil its protection mandate.
By helping to neutralize heavy weapons being used
against civilians, UNOCI prevented the commission of
atrocities. We hope that the resolve UNOCI has
demonstrated will serve as a point of reference for all
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
should continue to intervene with equal resolve. We
must support the Congolese authorities in building the
capacity to ensure the effective, long-term protection
of civilians.
Secondly, France believes that the protection of
civilians and human rights is a priority in all situations.
We are determined to ensure that the Security Council
shall continue to take measures tailored to individual
situations. For instance, the Government of Syria is
firing on and besieging its own people, and resorting to
arbitrary
arrests
by
the
thousands,
forced
disappearances and torture. This must end.
Demonstrators, human rights activists and journalists
should be freed and freedom of expression respected.
The Government should cooperate with the
commission of inquiry of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and authorize
humanitarian access, including for the assessment
mission dispatched by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs.

23

S/PV.6531

Thirdly, the protection of civilians requires the
victims to receive justice. The main responsibility in
that respect falls to States, but the international
community should support or supplement their efforts
if they fall short. That is why the Government of Sri
Lanka should undertake independent and impartial
investigations into the alleged grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law
documented in the report of the Secretary-General’s
Panel of Experts, and those responsible should be tried.
The Government of Sri Lanka must implement the
other recommendations contained in the report and
continue to cooperate with the United Nations.
In Darfur, although the International Criminal
Court issued arrest warrants for crimes against
humanity and genocide, nothing has changed.
Humanitarian access continues to be impeded, civilians
continue to be bombed, and militias continue to
surround the refugee camps. That is unacceptable.
In recent months, the Security Council has
demonstrated its capacity to apply the principles of the
protection of civilians to concrete situations in which
civilians are threatened. We must pursue those efforts.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
shall be brief in order to expedite this debate. Allow
me to commend you, Sir, for having convened this
debate and to underscore the importance of the ideas
set forth in the briefings we heard at the start of this
meeting.
Within the United Nations, the concept of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict applies to
various situations, such as humanitarian activities,
including access for and the protection of humanitarian
personnel as they go about their work; peacekeeping;
peacebuilding; and situations arising out of
international criminal responsibility, among others.
In recent years, an in-depth and wide-ranging
conceptual and operational debate has taken place at
Headquarters on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict in the context of peacekeeping operations.
That has been the case not just in the Security
Council — an organ that has discussed this issue since
the days of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, in 1999 — but also among the entire

24

membership through the specialized and representative
bodies of the General Assembly.
Although mandates to protect civilians are
considered on a case-by-case basis, and while there is
genuine room for improvement, we cannot fail to
underscore that there has been much progress in
achieving greater consistency in implementing such
mandates and evaluating existing problems and
limitations and seeking solutions to them. In our view,
this is bringing about positive results in New York and
the field, some of which can be clearly discerned while
others are intangible.
How do we measure what we have avoided? How
do we quantify costs in human lives and the different
types of damages averted by the presence of the United
Nations with clear mandates to protect civilians? How
valuable and how influential are the political
agreements on this issue that various stakeholders,
including troop-contributing countries, have reached at
Headquarters in recent years? That is impossible to
calculate; however, there is no doubt that it entails very
valuable capital that we do not have the luxury of
squandering or imperiling. It is much easier to destroy
than to build anything, including trust.
We must therefore be very careful when it comes
time to carry out efforts in the context of a legally
binding instrument that carries the legitimacy of the
United Nations vis-à-vis the protection of civilians.
Similarly, while we favour moving ahead with the
debate on implementing the responsibility to protect,
without failing to acknowledge the intrinsic overlap
with the protection of civilians, we believe that it is
important that we be clear in our references to these
concepts and that we take into account the singular
nature of each one — which have distinct legal
characters and have followed clearly differentiated
discussion processes.
We do not for an instant forget that the ultimate
goal must always be to protect the physical, mental and
emotional integrity of the human beings under threat
today, but also those who will tomorrow depend upon
the presence or mandate of the United Nations to
ensure that their lives, integrity and dignity are
safeguarded. In that regard, my delegation would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate the urgent need for
all parties involved — at all times and in all
situations — to consistently and impartially preserve,
strengthen and respect the exact terms of the mandates

11-33032

S/PV.6531

of the Security Council and the norms of international
humanitarian law, which are the foundation upon
which rests the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
Having reached a propitious point when it comes
to the protection of civilians, what must we now do to
maintain that state in the current circumstances? This is
a question that all of us should ask ourselves. We
believe that it is crucial that we focus on addressing the
major practical challenges that have concrete impacts
on the ground.
From our perspective as troop contributors, there
is no more pressing and clear challenge than that of
bridging the enormous gap between protection-ofcivilian mandates and the necessary resources to
effectively carry them out. There is also much room for
improvement in the area of training, both during
pre-departure and post-deployment.
We are optimistic when it comes to improving
coordination among the various stakeholders on the
ground charged with implementing mandates, in the
context of the overarching protection strategies that
missions must develop. However, we believe that more
work must be done with local authorities and
communities in the area of managing expectations and
that of public communication and information
strategies. Those are aspects of the recommendations
that were formally adopted yesterday by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Moreover, it is always imperative to facilitate
access for humanitarian personnel and to ensure that
international humanitarian law is respected by all
parties concerned in every situation, so as to ensure
adequate security conditions for staff to carry out their
tasks.
At the same time, we reiterate that every human
response must be sustainable and take into account the
development perspective. In that regard, it is essential
to ensure the building of adequate capacities at the
national level.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that Uruguay
believes the agenda on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict to be a multidimensional one. It is
informed and sustained by more specific, although
closely linked, issues, such as, among others, those of
children in armed conflict and women and peace and
security. It is therefore essential to make progress in as

11-33032

coordinated a manner as possible in order to achieve
synergies, avoid duplication of effort and, as
effectively as possible, take advantage of the tools at
the disposal of the Organization in the field. That will
make possible greater coordination among all
stakeholders involved, which will lead to more
coherent responses in the protection of civilians —
especially for groups in vulnerable situations, who are
the most exposed and require greater efforts to secure
their effective protection. That will also make it
possible for us to focus more closely on post-conflict
tasks, such as the reintegration of victims whose rights
have been gravely violated and children who have been
affected by armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I, too, wish to express my
deep appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos for her briefing, which gives us a broad picture
of the challenges we face in the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. I also wish to thank UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain
Le Roy, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights, Mr. Šimonović, for their important
contributions to this timely debate.
Italy fully endorses the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the delegation of the European
Union and wishes to add a few remarks in its national
capacity.
The violence perpetrated against populations,
even women and children in some cases, in Côte
d’Ivoire, Libya, Yemen and, more recently, Syria is a
tragic reminder of the importance of protecting
civilians. Italy calls on all States and non-State actors
to abide by international humanitarian and human
rights law and has always been ready to help all parties
to a conflict to exercise their responsibility to protect
civilians.
Italy also wishes to recall that safe humanitarian
access is an indispensable part of international
humanitarian law. We are therefore concerned by the
severity and prevalence of existing constraints on
humanitarian access, as well as by the continuous risk
of attacks on humanitarian personnel.
Over the years, the United Nations has set up a
comprehensive system to prevent and monitor serious
violations of human rights and humanitarian law, as

25

S/PV.6531

well as to combat impunity and to take action when
violations occur. The international community is
accountable for making that system work. In that
regard, the Security Council has a crucial role to play
and must be ready to take prompt action against those
who undermine the commitment made by the heads of
State and Government in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document (General Assembly resolution
60/1) and reaffirmed in resolution 1894 (2009).
United Nations peacekeeping operations have a
significant impact on enhancing the protection of the
civilian population and must therefore focus every
effort on accomplishing that task, using all available
capacities. We believe that more systematic
mechanisms — such as indicators and benchmarks
relating to the implementation of Security Council
decisions on the protection of civilians — should be
put in place. We therefore welcome the fact that some
United Nations peacekeeping operations have already
adopted comprehensive strategies for the protection of
civilians and have developed benchmarks to measure
progress in achieving that goal. In addition, we
welcome the important progress made in this field
during this year’s session of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and in the Strategic
Framework for Drafting Comprehensive Protection of
Civilian Strategies in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, now finalized by the Secretariat.
There is no avoiding mention of the Libyan crisis,
also in the light of the important results obtained at the
second meeting of the Contact Group on Libya, held in
Rome on 5 May. With repeated attacks on civilians,
including women and children, the situation in the
country had deteriorated so drastically that
international action to protect the population was the
only viable option. That is why Italy supported the
Security Council’s intervention from the beginning of
the crisis and, in complete coherence with resolutions
1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), contributed to the
collective action under way, which has prevented even
greater violence being committed against the Libyan
people.
The meeting in Rome confirmed the need to
increase pressure on Al-Qadhafi’s regime through all
necessary and legitimate means. While we stress the
importance of the NATO-led Operation Unified
Protector — which is crucial to the achievement of the
goals of the Security Council resolutions and to the
effective protection of the Libyan population — the

26

political and economic component must also be firmly
supported to secure a complete cessation of all
violence and attacks on and abuse of civilians.
Part of the work of the Contact Group meeting
was dedicated to humanitarian assistance to Libya, to
which the international community is greatly
contributing. Italy has always been at the forefront of
aid provision. Less than two weeks after the beginning
of the insurgence, our first aid packages were delivered
to Benghazi. We then strengthened the assistance
capacity of Camp Choucha in Tunisia, provided
humanitarian assistance in Misrata, repatriated thirdcountry nationals, transported some of the wounded
from Benghazi to Italy, and responded to the regional
flash appeal for the Libyan crisis.
We reiterate our firm support for the United
Nations role in leading and coordinating international
efforts. It is thus our great hope that the United Nations
can urgently restore a presence in Tripoli in order to
coordinate the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
to establish, with the Government authorities, the ways
and means to allow humanitarian organizations full
access to the affected populations, in fulfilment of the
agreement of 17 April 2011 between the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Tripoli authorities. Should that not happen, I would
also like to reaffirm that Italy is ready to participate in
any future European Union action to assist and to
secure the delivery of aid, if requested by OCHA.
We are also deeply concerned by the troubling
developments in Syria. The lack of access to the areas
where the violence has been most intense and the
consequent inability to obtain reliable information
about the needs of the civilian population are cause for
even greater concern. We strongly urge the Syrian
Government to honour its responsibility to protect its
population, and we invite it to immediately stop the
repression under way and to begin a dialogue with
those who want reform, as President Al-Assad has
promised. We support the Secretary-General’s appeal
to allow a United Nations humanitarian team into the
towns worst hit by the protests and the violence.
In conclusion, I would like to express Italy’s deep
appreciation for the increased attention that the
Security Council has given to the issue of the
protection of civilians, which is more relevant now
than ever. The adoption and implementation of the
resolutions on Libya and Côte d’Ivoire are a clear

11-33032

S/PV.6531

testament to the Council’s commitment to operating
effectively and with determination to guarantee the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. The
international community has shown that it is ready to
act collectively and resolutely, through the United
Nations and its organs and in accordance with the
Charter, against perpetrators of violent and inhumane
attacks against civilians.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a pleasure to see you, Mr. President, presiding
over the work of the Council for the month of May.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is
an issue of indisputable significance. At this meeting,
we would have preferred to have had this year’s report
of the Secretary-General on the topic, which,
unfortunately, has still not been issued. The last report
(S/2010/579) has shortcomings that were pointed out at
the time by many countries, including the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. On this occasion, however, we
will have to restrict ourselves to making slightly more
general remarks.
Despite the effort made, there are still many
aspects to be clarified with regard to the protection of
civilians, such as, inter alia, who decides when there is
a need to protect; who decides that a State is not
protecting its population, and on what basis; who
determines the action to be taken, and under what
criteria; what are the limits for the duration; and how
to prevent the issue being used for the purposes of
intervention and interference.
The position of my delegation on the issue under
consideration is well known. As pointed out by
Comrade Fidel Castro, the historical position of the
Cuban revolution, which always opposed actions that
threatened the lives of civilians, is also known. The
obligation and responsibility of States to promote and
to protect all rights of their population are beyond
doubt.
Cuba denounces measures that violate the
sovereignty of States, the Charter of the United Nations
and international law being taken under the cloak of
humanitarian protection. We oppose the death of
innocent people, whatever the circumstance and place,
as we categorically condemn aggression under
whatever garb its hides.

11-33032

Despite all the efforts made by the United
Nations, including the sincere and selfless effort of
many members of this Security Council, a great
number of civilians continue to suffer throughout the
world. The steps taken to date have not produced the
desired results or allowed the addressing, as a whole,
of all the implications of attacks on civilians and their
consequences for international peace and security,
including their humanitarian consequences.
The fact is simply that some have tried to ignore
that respect for the sovereignty of States is the
cornerstone of international relations and that it can in
no way be disregarded or undermined. If the United
Nations has not been able to fully play its role in
assisting and protecting the millions of people in need
around the world, especially in underdeveloped
countries, it is because of the lack of political will in
the Organization, as demonstrated by those who have
imposed an unjust and inequitable international
economic order.
If the Organization has often not been able to act
as it should in many situations, it is because of the
selectivity and double standards to which it has been
subjected and because the resources for development
needed by most of its Members are increasingly
limited, despite the fact that underdevelopment
problems are among the root causes of many conflicts,
as stated in the Council in February (see S/PV.6479). It
is because of the distortions in the work of some of its
organs, in particular the Security Council, to the
detriment to the General Assembly.
We must recognize that no legal provisions exist
by which to justify the legal nature of an intervention
on the basis of humanitarian reasons or pretexts. The
Security Council would have to undergo profound
reforms, including in its membership and working
methods, to ensure that any civilian protection actions
taken would be non-abusive and non-selective.
The necessary consent of a State for any measure
proposed in relation to its civilian population is an
inviolable principle that must be fully respected.
Otherwise, as has often been the case, we would run
the risk of engaging in actual military interventions in
internal conflicts and in regrettable civil wars, with the
supposed consent of the United Nations. In that regard,
it is essential that the role of approved peacekeeping
missions in protecting civilians be duly clarified from
the beginning.

27

S/PV.6531

Lastly, it is imperative to permanently stamp out
as well the dual morality and double standards
exemplified by some Governments with regard to the
protection of civilians. A mission as noble and
commendable as that of protecting civilians cannot be
invoked as a pretext for achieving spurious political
and economic objectives, as has been the case with the
implementation of resolution 1973 (2011), which was
imposed on the Security Council on 17 March and
which provides a clear example of this. Nothing in the
resolution authorizes, under the pretext of humanitarian
actions or protecting civilians, the bombing of cities or
populated areas resulting in the death of more innocent
civilians, the destruction of schools, homes and
hospitals and further suffering of the civilian
population.
How can indiscriminate bombing, the use of
sophisticated weapons and aircraft and the death of
innocent people, including children, under the pretext
of protecting other equally innocent civilians, be
justified? The United Nations has made no statements
whatsoever regarding the protection of the civilian
victims of NATO’s aggression against a sovereign
country. The silence of the Organization in the face of
the murder of innocent people, including women and
children, perpetrated by the foreign troops attacking
that country, is outrageous.
How can we understand the inaction and
dysfunction of the Security Council in the face of the
death of innocent Palestinian civilians, who themselves
have even fallen victim to the excessive and
indiscriminate use of force?
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): As I
an taking the floor on behalf of the Human Security
Network, I will deliver my statement in English and
thank you, Sir, for your understanding.
(spoke in English)
It is my honour to speak on behalf of the Human
Security Network, namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica,
Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Slovenia,
Switzerland and Thailand, and South Africa as an
observer.
We would like to thank the French presidency of
the Security Council for having organized this
important debate. We would also like to thank the

28

Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights
and Head of the New York Office of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for their presentations today.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
priority of the Human Security Network. We highly
value the continued attention that the Security Council
is giving to that important issue. The holding of
informal consultations of the Security Council on
protection issues last February was a welcome step to
address the three pillars of the protection
architecture — namely, the protection of civilians,
children and armed conflict, and women and peace and
security — in a comprehensive and coherent manner.
Significant progress has been made in recent
years in the normative and institutional framework
with the adoption of important resolutions, most
recently resolution 1960 (2010), which established a
monitoring, analysis and reporting mechanism on
conflict-related sexual violence. However, emphasis
must now be placed on progress in enhancing
protection on the ground. The worrying recent increase
in the number of conflict situations, in particular in
countries in North Africa and the Middle East, leaves
no doubt that we need to strengthen our efforts so as to
protect civilians from the impact of armed conflict and
from becoming targets of attacks. We are deeply
concerned by the use of force against civilians and by
ongoing violations of international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law.
The
Security
Council
should
strongly,
systematically, consistently and promptly respond to
serious violations of international law concerning
civilian populations in all situations and without
distinction, as it has done with the adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011) in response to events in the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, and of resolution 1975
(2011), reinforcing the protection mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
The Human Security Network would like to
reiterate the importance of appropriate and determined
action by the Security Council to stop and prevent
further violations of international law. The recently
updated aide-memoire on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (see S/PRST/2010/25, annex) serves as
a useful tool in that regard.

11-33032

S/PV.6531

We also believe that such initiatives as the socalled horizon-scanning briefings of the Secretariat, if
held at regular intervals, can be a useful means to
enhance the Council’s capacity to prevent violations
and should be continued. The systematic monitoring of
situations of armed conflict, as well as the inclusion of
detailed information relating to the protection of
civilians in country-specific reports of the SecretaryGeneral, is also important. We welcome the fact that
the Secretariat is currently developing guidance in that
regard.
The Human Security Network advocates a
people-centred, holistic approach to security. That
includes a focus not only on the protection of civilians
once a conflict situation occurs, but also on prevention
in a broader sense. In our view, peace and security,
development and human rights are indivisible and
interdependent. Therefore, human security threats and
vulnerabilities, such as the lack of development,
poverty, inequality or human rights violations, have to
be addressed in a comprehensive and integrated way.
The active empowerment of the individual, especially
of those that are most vulnerable, is an effective
protection strategy.
All parties to an armed conflict must respect
obligations under international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law. Recent events have once again
highlighted how humanitarian assistance is crucial in
times of conflict. The Human Security Network
condemns all attacks on humanitarian workers. All
parties to conflict bear the responsibility of allowing
and facilitating access for the delivery of such
assistance.
In addition to enhancing compliance with
international law and strengthening national protection
capacities, we recognize the major role of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the majority of
which are mandated with protection-related tasks, in
the protection of civilians, including in the area of
prevention. Peacekeepers cannot stand by when
civilians are attacked. The international community, in
close coordination with troop-contributing countries,
must ensure that peacekeeping operations are provided
with the necessary resources and capabilities, as well
as with operational guidance, to implement their
protection tasks effectively. Force commanders have
the responsibility to develop comprehensive and
effective strategies for the protection of civilians, and
to ensure that they are implemented vigorously.

11-33032

The Human Security Network welcomes the
progress made over the past months by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in the development of a set
of important tools enabling peacekeeping operations to
carry out protection mandates in a coordinated,
coherent and proactive manner. The strategic
framework for protection of civilians strategies will
provide guidance to missions in this area and will help
to further clarify the roles and responsibilities of all
relevant actors. The resource and capability matrix will
assist both in planning missions with protection
mandates and in drafting protection strategies. Finally,
the envisaged protection of civilians training modules
will ensure that peacekeepers are adequately prepared
for implementing protection activities on the ground.
We also encourage the members of the Security
Council to continue to make regular use of the informal
Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians, which
provides, inter alia, valuable input to the revision of the
mandates of peacekeeping missions involving
protection tasks.
Respect for and implementation of international
humanitarian and human rights law are inextricably
linked with ensuring accountability and the fight
against impunity. The importance of ending impunity
for criminal violations of applicable international
humanitarian and human rights law should be seen as
part of a comprehensive approach to seeking
sustainable peace, justice, truth and national
reconciliation. We welcome in this respect resolution
1894 (2009), which draws attention to the full range of
justice and reconciliation mechanisms to be
considered, including national, international and mixed
criminal courts and tribunals, and truth and
reconciliation commissions, as well as national
reparation programmes for victims and institutional
reforms. In this regard, we support the important and
complementary role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and welcome the Security Council’s recent
consensual decision to refer the situation in the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the Prosecutor of the ICC.
In situations where there are serious allegations
of violations of international law and significant
civilian casualties, Governments are obliged to conduct
effective investigations and prosecutions. Where this is
not done, independent international accountability
mechanisms should be established. We welcome in this
regard the proposals for enhancing accountability
contained in the Secretary-General’s most recent report

29

S/PV.6531

on the protection of civilians (S/2010/579), such as the
possibility of mandating commissions of inquiry to
examine situations where concerns exist about serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law.
(spoke in French)
I would now like to share a few observations in
my national capacity.
Switzerland welcomes the assertive manner in
which the Council has worked to address situations of
concern in recent months. In particular, I would like to
underline the importance of timely and concerted
action by the Council, using the whole range of tools
that the international community can apply in the case
of widespread violence against civilians. This includes,
in particular, applying deterrent measures such as asset
freezes, travel bans and early ICC referrals.
The Council needs to ensure that its actions to
protect civilians are coherent and non-selective in
order to ensure its political sustainability in the long
term. Switzerland therefore urges the Council to devote
more attention to situations that are not formally on its
agenda, as recommended in paragraphs 102 and 103 of
the report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians of November 2010.
The momentum created by recent decisions of the
Council may be lost if situations that are just as
important as those in Libya and Côte d’Ivoire are not
addressed. Failure to do so may lead to the perception
of the whole concept of the protection of civilians as
purely utilitarian, further endangering civilians and
those charged with protecting them on the ground.
Among the various situations that would merit
the Council’s attention, Switzerland is very concerned
about threats to civilians in Syria and firmly condemns
the human rights violations that have been committed
there. We are concerned by the behaviour of the
security forces towards non-violent protesters and
civilians who are not participating in protests.
We must also ensure that the most visible
situations do not cause us to lose sight of other, longterm protection tasks. Humanitarian access remains
difficult in many instances, including in regions that
are not usually at the centre of the Council’s attention.
Switzerland welcomes the fact that the United
Nations in general and the Security Council in

30

particular are addressing another aspect of the
protection of civilians more systematically, namely, the
duty to investigate allegations of violations of
international humanitarian law or human rights and to
hold their alleged perpetrators accountable. The recent
referrals of situations to the ICC are striking examples
of this positive trend. In this regard, Switzerland would
also like to stress the importance of the report of the
Panel of Experts on Accountability in Sri Lanka
mandated by the Secretary-General.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let me join the
previous speakers in thanking France for convening
this open debate under its presidency. I note the
presentations made by the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator,
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights.
We followed carefully the issues highlighted at
the most recent Security Council debate on this subject,
held in November 2010 (see S/PV.6427). As a country
that faced a brutal terrorist threat for over two and a
half decades and whose civilians were a constant target
of this threat until the very end, we see an overarching
need to achieve more tangible change, especially in
enhancing protection on the ground for the
communities most affected by conflicts.
We also emphasize that this protection task
cannot be understood or addressed solely within
traditional frameworks, as today’s threats require us to
be conscious of a multiplicity of different factors,
ranging from changing political realities, socioeconomic factors, the basic rights of individuals, the
proliferation of small arms, asymmetric warfare and
the sophistication of terrorists to the complexities of
disarmament. We must pay special attention to
vulnerable categories, such as women and children,
who are increasingly exploited by terrorist groups. A
realistic and honest appraisal of protection issues will
help us to identify gaps in the existing protection
policy frameworks and guide our collective efforts at
effectively addressing them in a pragmatic manner.
During almost three decades of combating
terrorism in our country, we took utmost care to draw a
clear distinction between civilians and terrorists. Those
who are intent on dismissing this effort will continue to

11-33032

S/PV.6531

do so, but successive Governments ensured a
continuous supply of essential goods and services, such
as food, free health services and education, to civilians
in the north and the east of Sri Lanka over the 27 years
of the conflict, despite the control that the terrorists
had over them. While allegations of infractions of
international standards emerged after the end of the
conflict, those allegations were not heard until the end
became abundantly clear to the terrorist group. Once
the end of the terrorists became obvious, a well-oiled
propaganda machine began to churn out reams of
allegations to set the stage to continue the conflict by
other means.
During the conflict, Sri Lanka also engaged
closely with the international community and related
human rights and humanitarian mechanisms — United
Nations agencies, the International Committee of the
Red
Cross
and
local
and
international
non-governmental organizations — to facilitate
provision for the needs of civilians in terroristcontrolled areas, despite the constraints imposed by
logistical and security needs. This close cooperation
has extended to the aftermath of the conflict by
providing for the needs of the displaced population,
their resettlement and reintegration, and the
reconstruction of their homes.
Many of today’s conflicts take place within States
and involve non-State armed groups. Sri Lanka’s
experience relates in particular to the challenges we
faced in protecting civilians in the context of an
internal conflict — a challenge to the State itself,
involving a ruthless terrorist group, the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). In Sri Lanka, that
terrorist group made the Tamil civilian population a
part of its military strategy. The terrorists’ brutal
strategy was to create a situation inviting civilian
casualties by forcing civilians to be trained in weapons
and to take up arms, recruiting children for combat
duties, herding thousands of civilians to form human
shields, holding them hostage and placing heavy guns
in their midst, attracting retaliatory fire.
Some of the children were under 12 years of age.
UNICEF recorded over 5,700 cases of child
recruitment. The LTTE withheld food supplies sent by
the Government and diverted those supplies for use by
its armed cadres. The civilians being used as a human
shield by the terrorist group were our own people. This
strategy of the LTTE posed extraordinary operational
challenges to our security forces engaged in combating

11-33032

the group while ensuring the protection of civilians.
The Government, for its part, adopted a zero-civilian
casualty policy. Our troops endeavoured to distinguish
between combatants and civilians, and the protection
and liberation of civilians from the clutches of the
terrorist group were their highest priority. Over
280,000 civilians were eventually freed.
In this context, the challenges posed by terrorism
in many parts of the world today may necessitate a
re-examination of the rules of military engagement.
Many of the rules of war are largely based on the
presumption that the parties to a conflict are
conventional armies of responsible States engaging
other State parties. But terrorists disregard those laws
and principles as they wage asymmetric warfare. They
mingle with civilians and use them to achieve their
goals.
Whether it is one human being held as a human
shield or many, the fact remains that terrorists employ
inhumane strategies that existing international
humanitarian law may not have adequately taken into
consideration. Once again, we must seriously
investigate the practical realities learned in the
experiences of Member States instead of attempting the
theoretical
application
of
a
one-size-fits-all
humanitarian framework. One size does not fit all, and
the complex Sri Lankan experience would seem to
demonstrate that reality.
There is a need to recognize the fundamental role
of the State in civilian protection. In the first place, the
role of Governments in civilian protection should be
respected as it is their primary responsibility to protect
their own citizens. The United Nations and
humanitarian agencies must support and assist
Governments, and in doing so be sensitive to ground
realities, including by respecting the sovereignty of
States.
Unfortunately the politicization and selectivity
that characterize the debate have affected its
credibility. The willingness to accept wild and
unsubstantiated allegations made in the media — even
those disowned by senior United Nations officials — is
extremely unfortunate. Such an inconsistent approach
and an unambiguous tendency to target the small and
the weak for the rigorous application of principle also
affect post-conflict reconciliation in complex country
situations. Difficult reconciliation processes that are

31

S/PV.6531

successfully moving ahead are disrupted by insensitive
external interventions.
In keeping with the recognition that it is the first
and foremost responsibility of States to address
infractions of the law, and with a view to initiating a
long-term healing process, the Government of Sri
Lanka has established a Lessons Learnt and
Reconciliation Commission to address reconciliation
and
confidence-building
issues,
including
accountability.
My delegation hopes that the Council’s
discussion on the protection of civilians will facilitate
practical outcomes based on ground realities. It is for
this reason that my delegation has sought to share our
experience and to urge all of us to invest greater efforts
in preventing conflicts and their recurrence and to
respond practically and proportionately to situations
affecting civilian populations. It is also our view that
seeking to punish the past does not ensure a guilt-free
future.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on the
protection of civilians. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos, UnderSecretary-General Alain Le Roy, and Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Šimonović for their briefings.
First, allow me to emphasize that the primary
responsibility to protect civilians, in accordance with
humanitarian law and Security Council resolutions,
fundamentally lies with the Government and the army
of the country in which a conflict occurs. We are
concerned that we still face constraints of access in
many locations, as well as difficulties in the provision
of humanitarian assistance to the vulnerable. We call
for strict compliance by all parties with international
humanitarian law. It is necessary for all of us to
establish the rule of law — which includes
strengthening judicial systems — and to continue the
fight against impunity. We believe that, in order to
prevent civilians being victimized and to strengthen the
protection of civilians, it is necessary to effectively
enhance systems of monitoring and reporting.
In the cases of Libya and Côte d’Ivoire, Japan
commends the effective and timely role that the
Security Council has been playing in the protection of

32

civilians, and we expect the Council to continue to take
effective actions to that end. As for the case of Libya,
Japan has repeatedly called on the Libyan authorities to
immediately cease committing acts of violence against
the people of Libya, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Japan strongly condemns
the violence being perpetrated by the Libyan
authorities against their own people, which has
continued unabated despite the demands of the
international community that it cease. Those who
commit violence against the Libyan people, including
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, should be held accountable for
their actions, including through the International
Criminal Court.
We support the Member States that are taking
measures in accordance with resolution 1973 (2011) to
protect civilians and civilian-populated areas under
threat of attack in Libya. At the same time, Japan
believes that all diplomatic efforts should be made to
achieve an immediate ceasefire, and strongly supports
all efforts in that regard, especially those of
Mr. Al-Khatib, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral.
On Côte d’Ivoire, Japan supports the action
taken, in accordance with resolution 1975 (2011), by
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the
French forces that support it to protect civilians,
including to prevent the use of heavy weapons in the
deteriorating security situation since the end of
November. We invite President Ouattara to cooperate
with the international investigation of human rights
violations in his country, and also expect the
perpetrators to be punished so that there is no
possibility of impunity.
A peacekeeping mandate for the protection of
civilians must be clear and achievable. It is also
important that the mission be provided with all the
resources necessary for implementing its mandate. A
comprehensive approach, along with the Council’s
resolutions, will ensure the successful protection of
civilians through such measures as actions by the
Sanctions Committee; strengthening of the rule of law
through the Commission of Inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council; and close cooperation with
regional organizations, including the African Union
and the Economic Community Of West African States.
The ability of the Security Council to enforce
accountability for the protection of civilians, especially

11-33032

S/PV.6531

women and children, must be further strengthened. In
that regard, we expect that the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence requested under resolution 1960 (2010) will
be operational as soon as possible. We also expect the
Council to take action to hold accountable any parties
that attack schools.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The Council has
taken important decisions on the topic of protection of
civilians in armed conflict, in particular resolutions
1265 (1999) and 1894 (2009). As in other thematic
areas, however, it has struggled with the application of
the provisions and principles of its thematic decisions
when dealing with actual country situations. Recent
events and decisions of the Council have cast today’s
debate in a different light. We hope that this will help
the Council focus its future policies, including its
consideration of the input of the wider membership.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
first and foremost the responsibility of the parties to
the conflict. State and non-State actors alike must at all
times observe the rules governing armed conflict, in
particular the Geneva Conventions. The Security
Council must in turn use the broad range of means at
its disposal to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, from insisting on respect for that law
on the part of all parties to a conflict under all
circumstances, to strengthening the protection
mandates of peacekeeping missions and, last but not
least, to using accountability mechanisms.
Recent events, especially in Libya, have led to
discussions about how to define the moment when an
internal armed conflict begins. This question is
relevant to determining whether international
humanitarian law applies in such a situation, in
addition to applicable human rights laws. But it has no
bearing on whether action is needed. The
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force
against civilians is always unacceptable and always
unlawful. Depending on the exact circumstances, such
acts can amount to war crimes or crimes against
humanity, but they must never be met with silence on
the part of the intergovernmental bodies of the United
Nations. There is also a collective responsibility to
ensure the protection of civilians outside situations of

11-33032

armed conflict, and the Council acted accordingly in
adopting resolution 1973 (2011).
In addressing the need to protect civilians in
armed conflict or otherwise, the Council has to strike a
balance between its customary case-by-case approach
and the principles that should govern its action,
including those contained in its own resolutions.
Effectiveness must be a guiding principle of all action
that the Council engages in, but effectiveness is also,
among other things, a function of credibility. Such
credibility is promoted if the action is perceived to be
consistent and undertaken for the main purpose of
achieving the stated goal.
Against that background, we welcome the action
the Council has taken to protect the civilian
populations of Libya and Côte d’Ivoire. But we also
believe that other situations, particularly those in Syria,
Yemen and Bahrain, also require greater attention from
the international community. Likewise, there is a
renewed common responsibility in light of the report of
the Secretary-General’s Panel of Experts on
Accountability in Sri Lanka. The Panel concluded that
“the conduct of the war represented a grave assault on
the entire regime of international law designed to
protect individual dignity during both war and peace”.
Failure to protect a civilian population must not be
compounded by indifference to efforts to create
accountability.
For the second time in the history of the
International Criminal Court, the Council, in resolution
1970 (2011), decided to refer a situation to the Court
for investigation of the most serious crimes under
international law. We welcome the referral as an
expression of the Council’s commitment both to
contributing effectively to the fight against impunity
and to a strong working relationship between the
United Nations system and the Court. The referral is of
particular value because it was decided by consensus.
We hope that this consensus will also prevail when the
Council is called on to act to ensure the
implementation of follow-up action to resolution 1970
(2011). In the absence of universal ratification of the
Rome Statute of the Court, such Security Council
referrals remain the only means of ensuring quick and
decisive action to fight impunity in a given situation.
Creating ad hoc and separate accountability
mechanisms such as tribunals would not only be very
slow, but would also increase costs dramatically.

33

S/PV.6531

When it referred the situation in Libya to the
Court, the Council underlined that it wished to avoid
any financial responsibility for its decision, while at
the same time it created an additional burden for the
States parties to the Rome Statute. We note in this
regard that the Security Council is not competent to
make decisions on budgetary matters, and that the
General Assembly may at any time enter into an
arrangement with the Court for reimbursement of costs,
as foreseen in the Relationship Agreement with the
Court.
The action of the Council, or the lack thereof, on
the topic of the protection of civilians has been one of
the defining moments in its history. We hope that the
Council will live up to the current challenges, different
as they are, in order to agree on ways to ensure the
protection of civilians.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): First, I would like to thank you for having
convened this debate under your presidency,
Mr. President.
Since the last debate on this subject (S/PV.6427),
many events have underscored the depth and solidity of
the reasoning that has guided Nicaragua in the debates
on the protection of civilians, both in the Council and
in the General Assembly. What we are witnessing in
Libya — the exploitation for political purposes of a
noble subject by a small group of countries — has
drained any credibility from the allegedly altruistic
intentions behind the promotion of the protection of
civilians.
Once again we have witnessed the shameful
manipulation of the slogan “protection of civilians” for
dishonourable
political
purposes,
seeking
unequivocally and blatantly to impose regime change,
attacking the sovereignty of a State Member of the
United Nations and violating the Organization’s
Charter. Once again, the logic of interventionism and
hegemony has prevailed through a disastrous decision
with incalculable potential consequences for tens of
millions of individuals worldwide.
If the founding Charter of the United Nations
does not include any kind of reference to a supposed
right of humanitarian interference, that is not because
attempts were not made at the time of its drafting to do

34

so, but rather because it was obvious that this principle
was attempt to interfere for purely political purposes in
the internal affairs of States. That, inter alia, is why
respect for the sovereignty of States, for
non-interference and for non-intervention in the
internal affairs of States was placed above any other
consideration. Therefore, there is no legal justification
for poorly defined concepts such as the protection of
civilians to prevail over the sovereignty of States.
The Security Council must explain to us,
particularly in the light of resolution 1973 (2011), how
civilians are to be protected from shelling. We ought to
be told — because we have the right to know — how
many civilians have perished in the name of this
alleged protection of civilians. We need to be told who
is going to protect the civilians from their supposed
protectors. Someone needs to explain to us how, in
applying the protection of civilians, the assassination
of a head of State of a sovereign country is planned.
We must be told how the bombing death of innocent
children contributes to the protection of civilians.
Here, I would like to quote Bishop Giovanni
Martinelli, a witness of the atrocities committed by
NATO’s aircraft and the Apostolic Vicar in Tripoli:
“Bombings, however targeted they may be, cause
civilian casualties. Bombs are immoral. I ask
myself then, is it moral to assassinate a head of
State? What right to we have to do so?”
I would also like to recall what was said by
Commander Daniel Ortega, President of Nicaragua,
who stated a few days ago:
“NATO’s military intervention in Libya,
condemned by heads of State, including by Pope
Benedict XVI, by leaders, individuals and
movements worldwide, is causing an everincreasing number of civilian deaths. I reiterate
Nicaragua’s call for an immediate ceasefire. We
once again call for a return to dialogue and
negotiations, which should be the hallmark of
international relations and of relations between
the inhabitants of a country when any form of
dispute divides its citizens.”
In conclusion, I wish to underscore that the
inexcusable double standard of actions dishonours and
fatally undermines the credibility of the Council and
tarnishes the Organization as a whole. Where is the
Council’s resolve when it comes to the heroic and

11-33032

S/PV.6531

martyred Palestinian people? It is precisely this double
standard that fuels, inter alia, the expansionist and
occupation policies that allow Israel to continue to act
with full impunity against the heroic Palestinian people
and the Arab nation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): We welcome the holding of today’s open
meeting, which we consider a valuable opportunity to
review the achievements of the international
community so far in the area of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, particularly at this time
when many regions are facing new forms of violence
and turmoil following rapid upheaval among their
peoples and in their political systems.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates its strong
condemnation of the serious and tragic crimes
committed against peaceful civilians, especially
women, children and humanitarian and media workers,
in areas of armed conflict. It wishes to emphasize that
fair trials and proportional punishment for perpetrators
and a system of legal accountability with no impunity
all constitute a critical step in developing strategies and
efforts to protect people.
We therefore call for the adoption and
implementation of clear, comprehensive and achievable
multilateral international and regional strategies that
support the political, security, legal and humanitarian
programmes being carried out by the United Nations in
collaboration with other international and regional
organizations with a view to protecting civilians in
armed conflict and in crisis areas, in accordance with
resolution 1674 (2006).
We also reaffirm that implementation of
international and regional multilateral protective
measures and plans must be based on principles of
neutrality, justice and objectivity, particularly in the
provision and coordination of adequate relief,
humanitarian assistance and protection of humanitarian
corridors, in order to ensure that assistance reaches
affected people in a timely manner and alleviates their
suffering. At the same time, we stress the need to
separate these strategic plans and programmes from the
conflict resolution process, in accordance with the
rules of international law.

11-33032

The United Arab Emirates has played a
distinctive and transparent role in supporting efforts
aimed at protecting civilians in conflict areas. It was
among the first States to participate in international
humanitarian operations and has made valuable
contributions, including by providing various types of
humanitarian relief and medical assistance to affected
people, regardless of their affiliations or beliefs, in
many conflict areas in the world. The latest of these
tireless efforts is the United Arab Emirates’ intensive
and ongoing effort to alleviate the humanitarian crisis
in Libya within the framework of resolution 1973
(2011).
In this regard, while we support the United
Nations efforts to address the critical humanitarian
situation of the Libyan people — including protection
of civilians, accelerating the delivery of humanitarian
supplies and ensuring the safety of humanitarian
workers — the United Arab Emirates affirms its
support for the Libyan people’s legitimate aspirations
to determine their future through an inclusive political
process that will bring a lasting peace to their country.
We also affirm our commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Libya. We will continue to cooperate
with other international actors in their efforts to ensure
the protection of civilians in Libya and their access to
humanitarian assistance in accordance with Council
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).
In this context, we also call for all necessary
measures to be taken to protect Palestinian civilians
from the collective punishment and daily acts of
excessive violence committed by Israel, the occupying
Power, against them on their own territory. These
measures must include the exertion of the necessary
pressure on Israel to remove its inhumane and illegal
blockade on the Gaza Strip in order to ensure that
adequate humanitarian supplies, including basic
construction materials, are delivered to the people of
the Gaza Strip to enable them to rebuild and
rehabilitate their institutions destroyed by the Israeli
machine since 2006.
We call for strengthening the exchange of
information, monitoring and reporting on crimes
against humanity in armed conflict. We also favour the
strengthening of the system to ensure that those
responsible for such crimes do not enjoy impunity, so
as to ensure that such crimes are not repeated. We also

35

S/PV.6531

advocate for the promotion of effective specialized
judicial proceedings to address such crimes and for the
development of national and international capacities in
the areas of verification and prosecution.
In conclusion, as part of its commitment to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, the United
Arab Emirates will continue to actively participate in
and support various humanitarian relief programmes
and peacekeeping, reconstruction, rehabilitation and
mine clearance operations in a number of conflictaffected areas, with a view to alleviating the suffering
of their inhabitants.

36

We hope that the deliberations of the Security
Council on this topic today will contribute to fostering
and coordinating international, regional and national
efforts aimed at protecting civilians in armed conflict
and violent crises, and to the development of tools and
applications to that end.
The President (spoke in French): There are still a
number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with
the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

11-33032
