UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THiRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

28 MARCH

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/24253
of the agenda

......

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I..*..*..*........*.......

1

................................................

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations
Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15651) ..........

of

WPV.2425

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents

of the Security Council

(symbol S/ . . .) are normally

published in quarterly

Supplements of the Official Record of the Security Council. The date of the document indicates the

supplement

in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system adopted in
1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council. The new
system, which has been applied retroactively’to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became
fully operative on that date.

2425th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 28 March 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

(Democratic Yemen), Mr. &tipping Victoria (Dominican
Republic), Mr. AIbornoz (Ecuador), Mr. Chdvez-Mena (El
Salvador), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr.
van Well (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Taylor
(Grenada), Mr. Purushottam (India), Mr. Serajzadeh
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. La Rocca (Italy), Mr.
Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Maudave (Mauritius), Mr. MuAoz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Narkhuu (Mongolia),
Mr. Ozores Typaldos (Panama), Mr. Pastor de la Torre
(Peru), Mr. Arcilla (Philippines), Mr. de Pinies (Spain),
Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Rupia (United
Republic of Tanzania), Mrs. Coronel de Rodriguez (Venezuela) Mr. Hoang Bich Son (Viet Nam) and Mr. Silovid
(Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2425)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda.

2.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15651).

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Cyprus, Czechoslovakia and Hungary
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

The meeting was called to order at 4.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15651)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus), Mr. Suja (Czechoslovakia) and Mr. R&z (Hungary) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [242&h to 2424th
meetings], I invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Honduras to take a place at the Security Council table. I
invite the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, the German Democratic Republic, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Ecuador, Grenada, India,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia,
Panama,
Peru, the Philippines, Spain, the Syrian Arab Republic,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam
and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker this afternoon
is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of El Salvador, Mr.
Fidel ChBvez-Mena. I welcome him and invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
4. Mr. CHAVEZ-MENA
(El Salvador) (interpretation
from Spanish): I wish to thank the members of the Security Council for allowing me to address the Council during the discussion now under way.
5. Respectful as it has been and is of the principle of
non-intervention,
my country has not interfered and
does not interfere in the internal affairs of other States.
If that is our behaviour on the international level, it is
equally true at the regional level, on which we have
indissoluble ties of geography, history and culture, as
was proclaimed by the leaders of an independence that
we obtained on the same day, after struggling against

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colindres
(Honduras) took a place at the Council table. Mr. Abada
(Algeria), Mr. Muifiz (Argentina), Mr. Moseley (Barbados), Miss Dever (Belgium), Mr. Salazar Paredes
(Bolivia), Mr, Bueno (Brazil), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria),
Mr. Sam de Santamaria (Colombia), Mr. Zumbado
Jim&w (Costa Rica), Mr. Roa Kourl (Cuba), Mr. AI-AI&
1

14. El Salvador has never intervened in the internal
affairs of the other States of Central America, nor has it
ever interfered in the internal affairs of Nicaragua. Consequently we are in a moral position to demand similar
conduct on the part of the other countries of Central
America.

the same colonizer. That is why a great deal of what I am
about to say is extremely distressing to us.
6. Everyone is aware that at the present time tW0 ideological
trends are vying with each other to establish themselves in Central America. Those two trends are
expressed in diametrically opposed behaviour. If they
continue, those two attitudes cannot but hinder .the elimination or reduction of tension. They are as different as
water and oil, or the wolf and the lamb.

15. El Salvador has been the victim of-among
other
belligerent and hostile acts-the continued transfer of
weapons, the last link in the chain being our neighbour
Republic of Nicaragua, which acts under the aegis of a
misunderstood
international
solidarity and does not
practise, and respects even less, the principle of noninterference in the internal affairs of Central American
States. As we all know, that principle includes not only
one State’s individual relations with another but also its
relationships with various States and even international
organizations themselves.

7, The recent introduction of political interests
alien t0
Central America, derived from larger-scale confrontations, perpetuates the problems of the countries of our
region, making them play the game-apparently
unconsciously-of the merchants of war.
8. If we are to be successful in formulating ideas that
will lead to harmony based on trust and co-operation, on
common origins, on shared geography and destiny, then
all people of good will must zealously embark on a
search for peace, and others must co-operate with us in
our efforts. The presence of both elements is essential,
because if there is good will on the one hand and
attempts to frustrate our efforts on the other, then in the
end there will exist a situation in no way differing from
what I have just described: water and oil, the wolf and
the lamb.

16. Everyone is aware that the armed groups operating
in El Salvador have their central headquarters in Nicaragua. It is there that decisions are made and logistic sup
port is channelled-logistic
support without which it
would be impossible for them to continue in their struggle and without which they would have joined in the
democratic process.
17. Fortunately for the valiant and persevering people
of Central America, and the Salvadorans in particular,
neither the collusion of countries nor international trends
can bend their will of iron, since they only want peace,
but peace obtained through democratic channels, not
through the fragility of a Government that wishes to
impose itself without the support of the people, and
surreptitiously.

9. It is a universally acknowledged fact that there is a
situation of widespread conflict in Central America. That
situation is generating new tensions and fostering other
tensions whose origins date far back into the past. This
situation makes it extremely difficult, if not impossible,
for any political plans to be viable and stable, regardless
of their nature.

18, If the principle of non-intervention is the cardinal
norm of international law, it is strengthened by the relations of friendship and co-operation among States
already developed by the United Nations. We believe it
relevant to refer to General Assembly resolution 2131
(XX), entitled “Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of
Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the
Protection of Their Independence and Sovereignty”,
because we consider that text to be particularly relevant
to the present circumstances in Central America, In its
operative part it clearly states:

10. In this connection I reiterate that the existence of
different political programmes designed to overcome the
conditions caused by social, political and economic
underdevelopment produces tension and conflicts when
one trend tries to impose itself on the others in the futile
belief that they are exclusive approaches.
11. It is clear that the Central American situation is not
free from the major disorders of the international monetary system, high rates of unemployment, excessive protectionism and the whole long series of negative
symptoms the Central American subregion must face
while it is in the very midst of its own social and political
crisis.

“No State has the right to intervene, directly or
indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the internal or
external affairs of any other State, Consequently,
armed intervention and all other forms of interference
or attempted threats against the personality of the
State or against its political, economic and cultural
elements, are condemned.

12. The world has witnessed the fact that El Salvador, a
country that belongs to a region in conflict, as Central
America now is, has in its international relations acted
with the greatest respect for the principles of nonintervention and self-determination, In a word, we have
acted with the greatest of prudence.

no State shall organize, assist, foment, finance,
incite or tolerate subversive, terrorist or armed activities directed towards the violent overthrow of the
regime of another State, or interfere in civil strife in
another’ State.
“

I

13. That prudence has not been recompensed, given the
accumulation of evidence that the Nicaraguan Government has been one of the primary factors of instability in
Central America,
2

.

.

“The strict observance of these obligations is an
essential condition to ensure that nations live together
in peace with one another, since the practice of any
form of intervention not only violates the spirit and
letter of the Charter of the United Nations but also
leads to the creation of situations which threaten international peace and security.

for military training. There can be no double standard or
scale of values in this respect. The principle of noninterference is a unity, without exceptions or equivocations. If we do not all accept that commitment, not only
out of conviction but also because it is suitable, there will
be no peace in Central America.
22. We have stated that we do not wish to see Central
America become the object of a dispute in a conflict
between the super-Powers in their zeal to acquire new
zones of influence for their respective hegemonies, nor do
we wish to see that process become divisive in an attempt
to establish a political model that does not respond to the
aspirations and traditions of those peoples, who are eminently Catholic, especially when that model is based on
other cultural realities.

“Every State has an inalienable right to choose its
political, economic, social and cultural systems, without interference in any form by another State.
“All States shall respect the right of self-determination and independence of peoples and nations, to be
freely exercised without any foreign pressure, and with
absolute respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms,”

23. How can such an extraneous process fail to cause
deep social unrest, such as we are observing in Nicaragua? If that occurs inside a country, international tensions heighten when that indistinct model is exported
through words and deeds in propaganda and subversion
that foment class struggle and magnify the social and
economic imbalances that lie at the root of the political
problems in Central America but which also exist in
other parts of our world.

The clarity of those concepts requires no further comment, but we have quoted paragraphs of the resolution in
exrenso because they are very enlightening with regard to
the problem of Central America and the situation that is
now confronting the countries there.
19. No observer of the international
scene can be
unaware that the situation in Central America does not
bode well for stability, much less for reasonable improvement. Everything seems to indicate that Central America
is becoming a region of serious tensions from which
wider confrontations ,could easily arise. For, taking
advantage of prevailing instability and unjust economic
and social structures, foreign interests are cultivating and
directing the action of ideological groups in favour of
their own particular military political positions.

24. Neither a vioient and merciless revolution inspired
by nihilism, one that attempts to destroy the national
infrastructure and creates unemployment
and poverty,
nor the maintenance of an unjust sratus quo, can be a true
solution in Central America. We therefore firmly reject
any attempt to establish through violent means a political system that represents an abandonment of ideological
pluralism. This repudiation is consistent wjth the firm
wish of the overwhelming majority of the people of Central America, who abhor the imposition, through force,
of alien and dependent’models.
Precisely owing to that
rejection, the path of elections is fundamental to the political solution and opens wide a door for massive and
democratic participation by the peoples of Central America. Thus far, in the practice of political science no better
method has been invented to reflect the national will. All
of this must, of course, be accomplished with the necessary electoral guarantees.

20. In this context, it is logical to suppose that the
expansionist designs of a Power outside the region
should consider Central America and the Caribbean
basin as a zone of “vital expansion” and as a bridgehead
in America. Its hegemonistic and expansionist objectives
are favoured by two ideologically loyal parties, Cuba and
the Government of Nicaragua. This makes more acute,
in a notable way, the presence on Central American soil
of the different forms of struggle in the so-called EastWest confrontation; it tends to regionalize or internationalize the conflict and makes its solution depend,
unfortunately, on decisions taken by Governments or
groups alien to the life of our own countries.

25. We also wish to state that where the freedoms of
citizens are concerned, bragging about non-alignment
without ideological pluralism internally has no practical
meaning and becomes only another tool for totalitarian
and anti-democratic propaganda.

21. At the appropriate time El Salvador will assert the
right recognized by the Charter of the United Nations
itself with regard to regional competence-in this case, of
the inter-American system -which,
by political logic,
must take preference in conflicts among States in the
region. Our country has not deemed it prudent to resort
to this measure for the time being in order to maintain
some calm in a turbulent region and thus avoid an aggravation of the situation, through diplomacy and in the
perhaps vain hope that the leaders of Nicaragua will
understand that every country must resolve its own problems through the political system each people voluntarily
chooses. Wisdom resides in tolerance for the systems of
others-not in the clandestine export of arms, not in
logistic support and not in the provision of sanctuaries

26. We must not confuse the full exercise of territorial
sovereignty with attitudes that create conflicts by promoting distrust. I am referring to the acquisition of military arsenals that are disproportionate
to the needs of
national security or regional balance and its true economic capabilities, Is that unbridled arms race not a
provocation for neighbours, especially when the exportation of new social schemes to neighbouring States
becomes nationtil policy? Is this not an invitation to the
arms race? Is it not an element that contributes to
regional tension? Is it not a factor that destabilizes the
peace of the region in an already turbulent situation?
3

27, The answer is clearly affirmative. It is high time that
in this play-acting-in
what is of course, owing to the
death and desolation it is creating, a tragedy-that
the
masks were dropped and that those who today in international forums are posing as victims stood revealed as the
victimizers.

can countries, including Nicaragua, to meet to discuss
logically, in a civilized manner, the best possible way of
putting an end to tensions in our region.
35. Thus, on the basis of the principle of noninterference and the concept and nature of the Central
American nation, it is essential that the Central Americans alone, exclusively, resolve the problems of the
region. Therefore, no one-absolutely
no one-under
any pretext should interfere in the regional problems of
Central America, which are essentially and basically the
responsibility of Central Americans. In this connection,
we reject any formulas or proposals, regardless of their
intention, from outside the Central American region,
since we have the political maturity and awareness of the
historic responsibility required in order within a regional
dialogue, without any exception, I repeat, to seek the
peace and political, social and economic stability of the
region.

28. Our highest aspiration and most fervent desire as a
Central American people facing the difficult challenge of
mindless gun-fire and the insanity of attacks is for peace
in the region, We do not want to see an increase in tension; therefore, we must make every honest and sincere
effort possible to achieve political stability, economic
development and social peace in Central America.
29. This is not a new position. On the contrary, it is in
line with age-old tradition, a long line of conduct that has
always been marked by peace. At the meeting of Foreign
Ministers at San Jose, Costa Rica, on I5 March 1980, in
which the five Republics of Central America participated, we affirmed the highest Central American aspirations for peace, mutual respect, peaceful coexistence, the
right to self-determination
and, especially, the recognition of the absolute and unfettered observance of the
principles of non-interference in the internal affairs of
other States as vital requirements for the establishment
of peace and security in the region. That was reiterated at
the meeting of Central American Foreign Ministers at
Tegucigalpa on 15 August 1981.

36. That meeting of Central American countries should
be inspired by good faith, by an honest desire to resolve
the problems that cause tension and by a renunciation of
any aggressive or meddling attitude in the affairs of other
States. That gathering of the Governments of Central
America, which we have promoted together with the
Republics of Honduras and Costa Rica, should, in our
view, include the discussion and analysis of the following
points: first, limitations on the arms race; secondly, safeguards with a view to eliminating the traffic in weapons
from the Central American region; thirdly, the strengthening of trade and economic relations among the countries of the region; and, fourthly, the strengthening of the
region’s democratic, pluralist and participatory institutions.

30. Until peaceful coexistence prevails, until there is
respect for the principles of the self-determination of peoples and non-interference in the internal affairs of other
States, until petty foreign interests cease to guide the
conduct of any country in the region, development, justice and peace will remain unattainable ideals.

37. We hope that’ the international community
will
accept and welcome this peace initiative being expressed
here with the best of intentions.

31. Thus I do not hesitate in offering all my good will
to obtain that peace-a prerequisite if those other values
are to be attained.

38. My appeal is for the establishment of democracy,
the complete observance of human rights, social justice,
tolerance and fraternal feelings among all the peoples of
Central America. And it is for peace-for peace the victories of which are more difficult to achieve and, for that
very reason, more desirable than the victories of war.

32. To that end it is essential that all Central American
countries adopt consistent policies for the limitation of
arms and military troops; that we completely refrain
from arms trafficking; and that we do not accept provocation or harassment from outside, because we all have a
right to organize ourselves at the social, economic and
political levels in the way in which each of our peoples
freely decides through its own sovereign will.

39. Mr. NATORF (Poland): First of all I should like to
extend to you, Sir, the congratulations of my delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. Your competence and skill assure us of good
leadership in dealing with the Council’s business this
month. We have already witnessed that. It is also with
satisfaction that I take this opportunity to convey to your
predecessor, Mr. Oleg Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union,
our appreciation for the skill, objectivity and personal
charm with which he conducted the Council’s work last
month.

33. It is essential, therefore, that each and every one of
our Central American Governments, representing each
and every one of our peoples, undertake an urgent search
for a viable and adequate solution, And the first step is
that we sit down face to face, without exclusion and without conditions, to discuss, speak and analyse. In the
mean time, let the cannons and guns cease their fire and
let the limited resources available to us not be wasted on
a useless and shameful arms race.

40. The Council continues its consideration of the
serious increase of tensions in Central America caused by
open interference in the internal affairs of Nicaragua.
That interference is evidently threatening peace and stability in the region and, consequently, in the world at

34. El Salvador reaffirms its democratic and peaceful
calling, Without any rancour or desire for revenge as the
brothers we are, we publicly invite all the Central Ameri4

large. That is why the Council as a whole should not
remain indifferent to it.

not unfamiliar to us. There were some references made
by her to the alleged proliferation of various “strange
rights” in the present world. Indeed, what we very often
are witnessing is the United States Administration’s
efforts to usurp to itself a strange right to be the supreme
moral judge of every Government’s conduct, of every
system and of every country. The facts of the not-soremote past, Very well known to the entire world, do not
give the United States moral authority to lecture others
on morality.
Such pretensions, mixing unilateral,
dubious-in
our view-moral
absolutes and diplomacy,
contribute only to aggravating the international climate
and worsening of relations.

41. My delegation has listened with particular interest
and attention to the statements made before the Council
by Mr. Victor Hugo Tinoco, the Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua, including the one this
morning
[242&h meeting]. He described in detail the
situation in and around his country. There is no doubt
that the Nicaraguan Government’s request for an urgent
meeting of the Council was fully justified.
42, Both the content of Mr. Tinoco’s statements and
the facts widely publicized by the mass media prove that
the Government and people of Nicaragua are facing a
new aggressive escalation of actions aimed at the destabilization
of the life and economy of that country, This
sinister escalation is reflected in repeated subversive and
terrorist activities, hostile external propaganda, acts of
intimidation
by the United States Administration
and,
most recently, the massive infiltration of foreign trained
mercenaries from the territory of Honduras. Today The
New York Times reveals new facts about the real involvement of Honduras in a master plan aimed against Nicaragua. A real army of paramilitary
forces has been
recruited abroad from ex-Somoza guards and is now
being used in sabotage raids against agricultural, industrial and other important targets in Nicaragua. Simple
common sense is sufficient to confirm that those activities and the groups conducting them can exist only to the
extent that they are financed, trained and supported by
external forces interested in overthrowing the legal
Government
of Nicaragua.

46. When we listened to the statement of the representative of the United States, we had the feeling that it was
intended essentially to prove two things: first, that the
Nicaraguan system and Government was an extremely
weak one, full of internal illnesses and incapable of assuring the development of the nation-in
fact, that the country was almost falling to pieces; and secondly, that
Nicaragua posed a grave danger to the security of the
whole Central American region and was capable of destabilizing all the Central American nations. Simple logic
points to the fact that both assertions are inconsistent
with each other; what is more, they are selfcontradictory: the first excludes the second, and vice
versa. So at least one assertion was wrong. As far as we
are concerned, both of them are false.

44. A large-scale propaganda campaign against Nicaragua has been escalated and reflected in numerous highlevel pronouncements by a number of United States
officials. This proves that there is tension in relations
between the United States and Nicaragua which affects
the security of Central America, and it is not tiny Nicaragua which poses a threat to the security of the United
States.

47. My country, although located far from Central
America, cannot remain indifferent to threats to peace
and international security, wherever they occur. In the
Political Declaration of the States Parties to the Warsaw
Treaty of 5 January 1983, Poland joined the call to put a
halt to “the policy of constant threats and provocations
aimed against Cuba and Nicaragua and to all attempts at
external interference in their internal affairs” [see
S/1.5556, annex, sect. 1vJ. This reflects also our policy of
friendship and co-operation with the Government of the
peaceful Sandinist revolution in Nicaragua. We welcome
the call upon the Government of the United States to
“adopt a constructive position in favour of peace and
dialogue with Nicaragua, and in order to help achieve
political and negotiated solutions to the problems of the
region” [see S/15628, annex, para. 281, as contained in
the final communiqut
of the Extraordinary Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the NonAligned Countries held at Managua from 10 to 14 January 1983, This coincides fully with Mr. Tinoco’s appeal
to the United States on Wednesday [242&h meeting] to
cease its aggressive stance against Nicaragua and to
reconsider all peace initiatives.

45. I cannot but remark bitterly at this particular
moment. Instead of replying to the facts and proof of
aggression against Nicaragua, the representative of the
United States in both her statements [242&h and2423rd
meetings] indulged in highly propagandistic and rhetorical accusations against Nicaragua’s domestic policies.
We interpret this as clear-cut interference in the internal
affairs of that country, an action which, by the way, is

48. My delegation takes note with satisfaction of the
fact that the Nicaraguan Government endorses the peace
initiative presented by Mexico and Venezuela in which
the Presidents of those countries expressed their readiness to promote a dialogue between Nicaragua and Hdnduras that would facilitate understanding. We took note
also that the non-aligned countries appealed to Honduras to reciprocate this gesture.

43. The aggressive escalation of hostile acts against Nicaragua is taking place when its Government of National
Reconstruction has embarked upon the road of ridding
its country of the legacy of economic underdevelopment,
poverty, illiteracy, unemployment,
social injustice and
destruction. It is an irony that former friends and sponsors of Somoza’s tyranny are now supporting his exfollowers under banners of lofty slogans of democracy,
liberty and human rights. It seems to me that there
should be limits to everything, even hypocrisy.

5

54. The question before the Council is part of the crisis
disrupting many countries in the region of Central America and points to the long struggle of the peoples of the
region fully to assume their destiny in dignity, freedom
and independence, free of foreign interference.

49. The question before US should be considered with
all the attention its gravity calls for. The independence
and territorial integrity of Nicaragua should be effectively protected by the Organization. This Central American country, as well as other nations of *the region,
should be allowed to enjoy fully its sovereign right to
determine its system without any external interference, as
set out in respective United Nations documents. The
Council should not remain indifferent to the Nicaraguan
call for help in developing a Central American policy
conducive to peaceful, negotiated solutions. The threats
and acts of aggression against Nicaragua should be
denounced. Careful consideration should be given to
Nicaraguan and non-aligned peace initiatives, There are
many mechanisms for a peacefu1 settlement of disputes
to be freely chosen by the States concerned. Action by
the Council along these lines would contribute to its
effective discharge of its primary responsibility as enshrined in the Charter.

55. In this difficult path, Nicaragua constitutes an outstanding example of the ability of a people to reverse the
tragic course of its history, to regain its usurped freedom,
to affirm, in the face of the regal rights of an oligarchy,
its rights and to wage a true struggle, which we are all
seeking to wage, against poverty and inequality. Far
from being a danger to anyone, the Sandinist revolution
has been perceived in its true meaning: the ultimate rehabilitation of peoples through the triumph of freedom and
justice over oppression and repression.
56. It is this exemplary nature which has won for the
Sandinist revolution deep sympathy and broad support
throughout the world and which, within the United
Nations itself, has been most meaningfully expressed
when, scarcely a few months ago, a majority of Member
States designated Nicaragua to sit on the Security Council. Over and beyond the natural expression of their solidarity towards Nicaragua, many Member States wished
to show their full appreciation of the maturity of the
Sandinist revolution and the responsible nature of its
leaders.

50. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
5 1. Mr. ABADA (Algeria) (ini’erpretation from French):
Thank you, Mr. President, for having allowed me to take
part in this debate, I should like first of all to extend to
you, Sir, the congratulations of the Algerian delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are convinced that your experience and
broad knowledge of international affairs are an earnest
of the quality of your contribution to the work of the
Council. Our congratulations go also to your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, who, with his customary skill,
discharged that same responsibility during the month of
February.

57. For its part the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, upon the victory of the democratic forces, was
happy to welcome Nicaragua to its ranks, aware of the
eminent contribution that would make. And it was precisely at Managua that the Non-Aligned Movement convened an extraordinary meeting of its Co-ordinating
Bureau in January to take up the problems of Latin
America and to express the Movement’s solidarity with
the struggle of the peoples of that cqntinent. At that
meeting, as at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi scarcely two weeks ago, from 7 to 12 March, the
non-aligned countries clearly stated their concern at the
threats to Nicaragua. The Movement’s Co-ordinating
Bureau was requested-and
I quote from the final communique from Managua-to
“continue observing the
events in this subregion very closely, especially the acts of
aggression against Nicaragua, and take appropriate
action as called for by the situation” [see S/15628, annex,

52. A year ago, almost to the day, the Security Council,
at the request of Nicaragua, took up the serious situation
affecting the entire region of Central America, and more
specifically Nicaragua, whose sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and the very choice of its own politi,
Cal, economic and social system were being threatened. A
large number of countries, in particular those in the nonaligned group, expressed their serious concern over the
danger of such a situation for Nicaragua itself and for the
entire region. Like many other delegations, the Algerian
delegation forcefully stressed the desire to see the Council, which was quite rightly seized of the situation to
prevent the irreparable from happening, use its authority
and assume its responsibilities to preserve international
peace and security.

para. 411.

58. Aware of the repercussions of that situation on the
future of the peoples of the region and, first and foremost,’ out of the desire to establish genuine, lasting
peace-that is, to the real benefit of these peoples-the
Movement welcomed and encouraged the peace initiatives put forward by many countries, notabiy Colombia,
Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, as regards the problem
of concern to us today. Algeria shares the fraternal contern of those countries and supports their initiatives,
which, in the clear interests of all the peoples of the
region, promote a peaceful search for a solution of the
conflict.

53. That concern and that awareness of the dangers
expressed by a broad sector, and given added strength
within the Council itself by a significant majority, unfortunately
came
P *,
.I ^to naught. Today’s debate reflects that
failure ano In tact points to the worsening of the situation, because the persistence of this same conflict situation means that the peoples concerned continue to be
diverted from their overriding legitimate task of reconstruction and development and are pitted against each
other to the benefit of interests alien to them.
6

59. In this process, which will certainly help stave off
the dangers of confrontation, Algeria voices the hope
that the Security Council will exert its full authority and
thus deter all aggressive and destabilizing attempts of
which Nicaragua is a victim. It wishes also to assure that
friendly country of its full solidarity in the struggle for
the consolidation of its independence, the preservation of
its territorial integrity and the defence of its revolution.

friendly countries that would play the role of witnesses to
this declared good will to negotiate. That is why the delegation and Government of Nicaragua have always considered it fundamental to have witnesses in any process
of negotiation with the Central American parties and in
talks with the United States, precisely because after talks
or a meeting when only the two parties in dispute have
been present in a given place it is easy for everyone coming out of such conversations to say that he saw or heard
something different. It is essential to have the presence
there of impartial friends of all the parties and of countries that are economic partners in the region with all the
countries involved and that have political, diplomatic
and friendly relations with them.

60. Mr. TINOCO
(Nicaragua) (interpretation from
Spanish): With respect to statements in the debate on the
possibilities of arriving at specific ways to alleviate existing regional tension and bilateral problems and the reference to the arms buildup of Nicaragua reiterated at this
afternoon’s meeting, the delegation of my country would
like to point out that we have already made it clear that,
for the defence measures taken by a nation to be qualified as excessive, the nature and the dimensions of the
aggression or the threat it is facing must first be identified
and described.

66. Hence this morning [242&h meeting] we proposed
that, in order to overcome the escalation of problems
between Honduras and Nicaragua-above
all the possibility of a conflict in the area between forces of the two
countries-the
process of bilateral talks be accelerated.
We proposed specifically that the Presidents or heads of
State-the Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua, and President Roberto Suazo Cbrdova of Honduras-meet
in the
presence of the Presidents of Mexico and Venezuela, who
are good friends of both countries, so that they can attest
to the good will of both countries and their willingness to
reach agreements, as they would also be witnesses to the
agreements that are reached at each meeting so that at
following meetings it might not be said that such agreements were not reached.

6 1. The identification and description of the threat confronting the Sandihist revolution must be undertaken in
the light of the attitude and actions of the United States
Administration
towards Nicaragua and in the light of the
attitude of the countries of the region-specifically,
that
of the Governments of Honduras and El Salvador.
62. In this connection I shall give but one example. Just
a few weeks ago the Minister of Defence of El Salvador,
General Guillermo Garcia, in an open and public statement made in San Salvador, called on all the army heads
of Central America-and,
more specifically, of Honduras and Guatemala-to
form a military alliance to go on
the offence against Nicaragua, Subsequently, an attempt
was made to deny that statement of the Defence Minister
and strong man of El Salvador through an official communiquC issued by the El Salvador Ministry for Foreign
Affairs. Nevertheless, the next day that same man, Mr,
Guillermo Garcia, said that there had been no mistake
and that he had really been calling for an alliance, for the
formation of a military triangle-the
so-called triangle of
the North-between
the armies of Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala against the Nicaraguan revolution.

67. One could not accuse Venezuela or Mexico of being
partial towards Nicaragua or partial against or in favour
of Honduras. We believe that this is important, and if
there is good will on the part of the Governments of
Mexico and Venezuela to participate as witnesses to this
process of dialogue with Honduras, then the process will
move forward. If any country has any problems regarding participation, then there might be some other country
that wants to serve as a witness, but this is a fundamental
requirement of any serious process of dialogue and negotiation, above all in a region where there are such high
levels of tension and distrust among countries.

63. I wanted to give that example so that there could be
some understanding of the complexity of the situation in
Central America and how difficult it would be to define
the character and the extent of the threat against Nicamgua and, hence, the levels of defence to which the people
of Nicaragua is entitled.

68. Furthermore, we wish to point out that Nicaragua
is not underestimating
regional dialogue. Nicaragua
considers that it is important that there also be, parallel
fo the bilateral dialogue with Honduras, a regional dialogue which tackles the entire complex problem of the
Central American region, We believe that in the discussion of the regional problem it is obviously important
that, among countries with high levels of tension, differences and distrust, there be third-party countries of the
region to bear witness to the level of agreement reached
and to the positions stated. This is why we have reiterated that we are prepared to participate in initiatives such
as ‘chat of Contadora, where countries of the region in
proximity to Central America, such as Mexico, Venezuela, Panama and Colombia, have begun to work. We
reaffirm that as far as the regional discussion is concerned, which is being promoted in this forum, Nicara-

64, Moreover, speaking of the problem of negotiation
and trying to go in depth into the steps that have been
proposed, a representative who spoke before me already
said that there was need for trust in order to enter into a
negotiating process. It would be difficult to say that there
is a high level of trust among the Central American countries, basically among the four countries of northern Central America.
65. In view of this situation, we believe that it is logical
and elementary, if there is really a wish for progress in
the negotiating process, to count on the presence of
7

gua is prepared, next week if possible, to respond to any
appeal that might be made by the four countries that
initiated the Contadora measures.
69. In connection with the United States, we reiterate
that this is also a decisive factor in the regional situation
and in the threat to Nicaragua. That is why this morning
we proposed a direct, immediate dialogue with the
United States. It is true that we have not proposed an
,intermediary or a witness, as far as the United States is
concerned, but this is because in the last two and a half
years, when we have been proposing to the United States
Administration
that we should meet, on every occasion
there has been a refusal to engage in a dialogue. When we
proposed, one year ago, that Mexico should be a witness
to such talks between Nicaragua and the United States,
the United States purely and simply rejected the idea of
Mexico’s presence as a witness. Because of this Nicaragua has proposed the very least that could be proposed:
that we engage in direct dialogue, without witnesses, in
any place that might be acceptable to United States of&
cials. That is what we proposed this rporning.

in the quest for stable and lasting peace. Suffice it to
mention the initiative taken by the Presidents of Mexico
and Venezuela, taken up at the meeting on 8 and 9 January 1983 on Contadora Island by the Foreign Ministers
of Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela’ and
which the Dominican Republic expressed its wish to join
during the recent visit to Caracas by its Foreign Minister
Vega Imbert.
76. These efforts are hampered by the participation of
other interests that are more concerned with their own
hegemonic positions than with the establishment of effective and genuine peace.
77, The Central American countries are not arms producers. Their economies are weakened, not only by the
world economic crisis, but also by a long war of considerable proportions and repeated natural disasters such as
earthquakes and floods, and because of the terrible
scourge bf terrorism and sabotage that affects the vital
centres of their economies with the purpose of bringing
chaos and destruction to them, Within this disastrous
economic situation we see an alarming increase in the
levels of war materials, military and paramilitary
contingents and irregular forces in the region. We therefore
have to ask ourselves: Who has been supporting that
situation of confrontation for so long? If all statements in
favour of peace are sincere and if those who make them
are acting according to what they preach, how is it possible that such a situation of confrontation continues day
after day?

70. We believe that those three lines of dialogue and
negotiation are fundamental if we are really to progress
towards finding a solution to the Central American
crisis.
71. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Venezuela. I invite her to take a place at the
Council table and to make her statement.

78. We have to conclude tnat these statements are part
of a verbal exchange, a form of confrontation with’the
Security Council as its scenario and where mutual accusations replace a new but at the same time ancient form
of fighting,

72.

Mrs. CORONEL
de RODRIGUEZ
(Venezuela)
(interpretation
from Spanish): Sir, I should like to express,
on behalf of my delegation, our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We wish you every success. Through you I shouId also
like to convey to the representative of the Soviet Union
our most cordial congratulations on the excellent work
he accomplished as President of the Council last month.

79. Peace in Central America cannot be reached
through the Security Council, which already demonstrated its inefficiency during the Malvinas conflict last
year. The interests of the super-Powers inhibit the action
of the Council and place the Central American problem
in terms of East-West confrontation. When this situation
arises the Central American peoples cease to be protagonists in their own destiny and become pawns in a chess
game where the interests of peace are far removed.

73. Venezuela wished to participate in this meeting of
the Council requested by the representative of Nicaragua
because we consider that today it is increasingly urgent
for us to seek formulas of understanding to put an end to
the grave problems facing the peoples of Central America. We have listened with interest to the statements by
the representatives of Nicaragua and Honduras. Many
countries have expressed their views and their hopes that
peace may take root in that region of the Earth where for
almost five years now a constant battle has been waged.

80. We consider it essential for the solution of the conflict that direct talks should take place among the countries of the region, and we are prepared to offer our own
assistance and co-operation so that they can begin. We
know the difficulties that mutual distrust places in the
path of dialogue. This is why we stress Latin American
channels, free from outside intervention or that of the
super-Powers or middle-sized Powers. Our presence, as
witnesses or promoters of dialogue, is intended
to
encourage a meeting free of propaganda or raised voices,
If that meeting is to bear fruit, what we previously
referred to as a verbal exchange must be discarded. The
mutual accusations that have been put forward in the
Council are not a path towards the establishment of a
constructive dialogue.

74. Mr. Luis Herrera Campins, the President of my
country, in the speech he made in Nicaragua on 19 July
1982, on the occasion of the third anniversary of the
Sandinist revolution, which he attended as the only head
of State invited to that event, stated that there had been
no peace initiative or measure in which Venezuela would
not have participated.
75. Venezuela has been accompanied and is accompanied today by many countries that are genuinely interested
8

8 I. In the face of the statements made by the representatives of Nicaragua and Honduras, Venezuela feels compelled to invite them, together with the other Central.
American countries, to begin a prudent and frank dialogue that will enable the restoration of trust, the only
effective path towards the achievement of peace.

upon it. we have, with good cause, supported all the
processes of free election that have taken place in the
area, and we continue to support those that are planned.
86. I wish to conclude by repeating the words spoken
by the President of the Republic of Venezuela on the
occasion of the third anniversary of the Sandinist revolution, to which I referred at the beginning of my
statement:

82. We have always affirmed that Latin American
problems must be resolved by our own family of peoples,
without foreign interference. The internationalization
of
the conflicts does not in any way help the comprehensive
solution of the crisis in Central America. We do not
want-indeed,
we reject-the hypocritical positions of
those from other continents who request for our countries what they forcefully reject for their own countries.
Venezuela has never sought any type of “help” from
outside the continent which cannot solve the political
and military problems of an area vital to it, as is Central
America.

“For Venezuela, it is a profound aspiration that
lasting peace be achieved in Central America, that
threats cease, and that people be able to dedicate
themselves to education, to work, to the promotion of
cordial relations, without having to arm themselves in
order to guard against possible surprise attacks.”
87. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Bolivia, I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

83. Consistent in our rejection of war, terrorism and
violence and in support of free popular expression and
genuine democracy, which is not imposed by weapons
but rather is brought about by the genuine desire of the
citizens expressed through the vote, we have supported
all initiatives aimed at the institutional normalization’of
the area and at the search for sincere agreements among
the States concerned with the goals of reducing weaponry, eradicating terrorism and strengthening the climate
of peace.

88. Mr. SALAZAR PAREDES
(Bolivia) (interpretationfrom Spanish): This is the first time that the constitutional and democratic Government of Bolivia is speaking
before the Security Council, It is therefore an excellent
opportunity to record once again our profound democratic convictions and our firm support for the Charter
of the United Nations,of which we were among the original signatories.
89. Allow me first of all, Sir, on behalf of the Bolivian Government, to congratulate you on your presidency, which we are convinced will contribute to obtaining results commensurate with the purposes in the
Charter.

84. But all of this must be done within a Latin American framework, All of the initiatives, even though they
have not been fully successful, have had positive prospects for the reduction of tension. There have been initiatives of a bilateral and multilateral
nature. Today,
together with other friendly countries, we are promoting
the high-level meeting for peace and disarmament
in
Central America, with the presence of Central American
countries, in addition to the presence of five countries
acting as witnesses in good faith. One of those witnesses
of good faith will be Venezuela. That meeting should
take place as soon as possible. Such an initiative is in no
way an obstacle to any other procedure that the States
concerned may wish to promote within the, regional
framework. But we insist that this is not the place, by
promoting the internationalization
of the conflict and
increased interference by the major Powers in matters
involving our peoples to defend the cause of Latin America. It is in Latin American forums and with Latin Americans as protagonists that we should consider the
situation in Central America in its overall complexity.

90. We have followed with close attention the statements made in this forum by the representatives of Nicaragua and Honduras, both brother countries with which
we have ties of close friendship. My Government cannot
gloss over a matter as serious as the one which brings us
here together in the Council and has given me instructions to express its concerns in this connection. This is
not a concern which stems from the circumstances of the
present day, but rather the result of our commitment to
the norms of internationa1 law.
91, As early as 1 December of last year, on the occasion
of his visit to the Organization’s Headquarters, the President of my country, Mr, Herndn Siles Zuazo, in his
speech to the General Assembly, affirmed:
“The grave crisis affecting the brother countries of
Central America is a cause of deep concern for my
Government. Tension, threats and escalating violence
are all factors in the conflict which is developing and
becoming more complex in that region. The foundations of peace are being constantly and increasingly
weakened and, because of a lack of vision and understanding, the threat of war is arising. What is necessary is respect for the sovereignty of each and every
country of, the region and of their right freely to dis-

85. In Central American territory, in the city of Masaya
and in Nicaragua itself, the President of Venezuela made
a clear appeal to pluralism as the genuine way of achieving peace. The unfortunate violence which is today rending the nations of Central America can be eliminated
only through the exercise of genuine democracy. This
was stated by His Holiness Pope John Paul II in his historic visit to the area, In recent days, we also have
affirmed this and we will continue to say this and act
9

96. I have precise instructions from my Government to
state our most forceful rejection of any type of intervention from any source and our most energetic condemnation of the violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of a State.

pose of their natural resources and carry out changes in
their political, economic and social structures. It is now
more important than ever before that the principles of
non-interference and self-determination are respected, if
a conflagration in Central America, which could so easily
extend beyond those frontiers, is to be avoided. The situation calls for initiatives in good faith such as that of
Mexico and Venezuela, which have opened prospects for
a peaceful political solution. The peoples of that region
have already suffered too much under totalitarian
regimes to have to suffer now the horrible scourge of war.“2

97. We state that most forcefully because we ourselves
experienced a huge territorial aggression that deprived us
of sovereign and useful access to the Pacific Ocean.
Today, after more than 100 years we still suffer the consequences of that aggression against our territory.

92. Today we would seem to be at the threshold of that
terrible scourge to which the President of Bolivia
referred. Nicaragua has described what that country considers to be a serious increase in acts of aggression
against its sovereignty. Honduras, for its part, has
rejected the accusations and has referred to the internal
situation prevailing in Nicaragua. Similarly, other countries have echoed that reasoning concerning the internal
policy of Nicaragua which, according to them, might be
the cause of that dangerous situation in Central America.

98. We are confident that the Council can benefit in
some way from the statements we have heard here. In
any event my country, Bolivia, wishes cordially to appeal
to our brothers from Honduras and Nicaragua to make
every effort to find a solution to the situation that has
caused us to gather here and is of such concern to us.

93. Bolivia is a democratic and non-aligned country.
Therefore we wish clearly to state the need for respect for
the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
other States. In the Council we have heard, and not without concern, several lines of reasoning inconsistent with
the Council’s function, which is to guarantee rapid and
effective action for the maintenance of peace in times of
danger. The reasoning we have heard, however, runs
counter to the principles of the Charter, which does not
authorize any Members to intervene in matters that are
essentially within the internal jurisdiction of States.

100. Miss DEVER
(Belgium) (interpretation from
French): At the outset, Sir, we should like sincerely to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council.

99. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Belgium. I invite her to take a place at the
Council table and to make her statement.

101. My Government was hesitant to speak in this
debate because it believes that when a problem
is
brought before the Security Council it is primarily up to
the members of the Council and the parties directly concerned to speak. It is not a good idea to encourage the
tendency towards a proliferation of statements by nonmembers of the Council and to a prolongation of deliberations, However, bearing in mind the need to maintain a
balance of opinion in the discussion, we have requested
the Council to hear us and we thank it for having
acceded to that request.

94. In this context our substantive position is in line
with the documents adopted in New Delhi this month at
the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries [see S/15675 and Corr. 1
and 2, annex], of which we are Vice-Chairman,
in the
sense that the processes of change taking place in Central
America cannot be attributed to an East-West ideological conflict. That simplistic vision makes a secondary
issue of the anguish of social justice that exists in Central
America and throughout the third world, which in the
majority of cases is not ideological in nature, as the vying
Powers would claim. The desire to achieve a quality of
Iife more consistent with our aspirations can in no way
be taken as an excuse in any way to destabilize any
Government,
especially if the peace and security of an
entire region is jeopardized.

102. Belgium has been following with disquiet the turn
of events in Central America and the escalation of violence that has engulfed the inhabitants and impedes the
social and economic development essential to ensure
peace and justice in the States of the region.
103. My country is deeply committed to respect for the
basic principles
of the Charter regarding
noninterference, non-aggression, the sovereignty of States
and human rights, We welcomed with satisfaction the
fall of the Somoza Government and the chance it offered
to establish a democratic regime in Nicaragua and to
enable populations to enjoy their proper rights. We
regret that the hopes aroused have not thus far been
fulfilled.

95. In cases such as the one before us a military so]ution is no solution. Perhaps it would seem to be the
easiest way out for those who do not participate directly
in the scourge of war but actually cause it. In the long
run that type of operation is difficult to resolve when the
conflict widens and is prolonged. Therefore my Government has taken a very favourable view of the peace initiative presented by the Governments of Mexico and
Venezuela, the proposal of the Governments of Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, and the recent initiatives presented before this very Council.

104. Throughout this debate we have heard accusations
and counter-accusations, but we have also heard protestations of good will, offers for negotiations and references to proposals made by the countries of the region to
seek a solution. The path that should be followed is the
seeking not of a military solution but of a political solution that would restore peace and security to all the coun10

tries of the region and guarantee respect for human
rights. Thus we support the peace initiatives ma&, in
particular, by the contries of the region, and we oppose
any actions that can only poison a situation that is
already disquieting enough.
I05
We have recalled the basic principles of the Charter. We would urge all parties concerned to respect them
by putting an immediate end to violence and by embarking on’ negotiations through which we believe the
regional organization, the Organization of American
States, could certainly make a substantial contribution.
106. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
107. Mr, BUENO (Brazil): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you and the other members of the Council for
having promptly acceded to my delegation’s request to
participate in this debate.
108. Allow me, Sir, to extend to you our congratulations on your assumption of the presidency and our
appreciation of the efficient and distinguished manner in
which you have conducted the business of the Council
during the current month.

in the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Time and again Brazil has reaffirmed its
adherence to the basic principles of the Charter, which
call for respect for the national independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all States, nonintervention and non-interference in the internal affairs
of States, non-recourse to the threat or use of force and
peaceful settlement of disputes. Such principles are
equally the backbone of the inter-American system.
114. We still have time-and
this should be our main
task-to stop and to reverse the escalation of violence in
Central America. Only if we do so will it be possible to
concentrate efforts to help find solutions to the deep
rooted economic and social problems in the region.
115. I cannot stress it too strongly: the resolution of the
present conflict must follow the path of moderation, constructive dialogue and political understanding.
116. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Dominican Republic, I invite him to take a
glace at the Council table and to make his statement.
117. Mr. KNIPPING
VICTORIA
(Dominican Republic) (interprelationfrom
Spanish): Please allow me first of
all to say how pleased my delegation is, and how pleased
I myself am, to see you, Sir, as President of the Security
Council at this very delicate juncture. Your presence here
is in itself a guarantee that our discussions will be
inspired by objectivity, good judgement and, above all,
wisdom. We also wish to extend our congratulations to
your predecessor, the representative of the Soviet Union,
for the brilliant way in which he led the Council debates
during his term of office last month.

109. A large number of delegations, in particular those
from the Latin American region, have intervened in this
debate to state their deep preoccupation with the situation in that area. The Brazilian delegation also wishes to
express its grave concern regarding the growing tensions
in Central America. In so doing it has in mind the good
and fruitful relations Brazil has developed with all the
countries in that region which observe the principles of
sound international behaviour.

118. The delegation of the Dominican
Republic is
appearing before this organ of the United Nationswhich has among its functions and powers the primary
responsibility of maintaining
international
peace and
security- deeply concerned at the recent events in the
Central American region. The turn that situation is taking adds an element of danger that could lead to the
failure of all the enormous efforts being exerted by the
peace-loving countries of the Latin American region to
create an atmosphere conducive to bringing the parties to
the conflict closer together, an atmosphere of peace, of
the trust that is absolutely essential to bringing about a
negotiated political solution that can eliminate those conflicts and make it possible to study, objectively and in
depth, the social causes from which they derive.

110. My statement is inspired by a long-standing tradition of Brazilian foreign policy which pursues mutual
trust and respect among nations, the instruments of
which are constructive dialogue and the search for peaceful understanding.
111. The principle of the non-use of force should be
strictly observed in today’s areas of tension. It is the duty
of all States-not only of the more powerful ones-to
refrain from acts or attitudes that would contribute to
heightening international tensions. It is necessary to circumscribe these tensions to their specific causes and to
try to solve them on the basis of the national interests of
the countries involved, free from any outside interference.

119. The prerequisite is that peace be restored. Without
peace there can be no political, economic or social development, Peace must be the great consensus of nations and
must constitute the common good of mankind. Peace must
be the result of international social justice.

112. There can be no topical solutions to the problems
which have been undermining the stability and development of Central America. In facing those problems we
cannot minimize the historic, social, political and economic components of the present crisis in the region.
And we cannot isolate the difficulties of Central America
from the world economic crisis.

120. As representatives of a country which believes in
peace and social justice, we cannot be insensitive to the
tragic situation our Central American brothers are experiencing, Out of allegiance to Latin American solidarity,
we have repeatedly appealed to the parties to the dispute

113. In our view a lasting solution to these problems
can be achieved only if we rely on the wisdom contained
11

to reach a ground of understanding and to discuss
between themselves possible peaceful solutions to the
present crisis. It pains us to see so much bloodshed.

tribute to the urgent search for a negotiated solution. On
that basis and given the delicate and disturbing development of events, we reaffirm our support for an immediate meeting of all the parties invoived in the dispute,

121. In accordance with that principle of Latin American solidarity our Government has offered its territory as
the site for a meeting of all the countries of the Central
American region, a meeting which would also include the
presence and friendly participation of those Latin American countries that have been expressing their legitimate
concern at the serious events in that region. In other
words, that meeting would exclude no country of the
area, since it would be folly for the parties involved in the
dispute not to sit down at the negotiating table.

126. We believe that this last condition is essential for
the meeting to achieve objective and effective results and
so that it may not suffer the fate of other meetings which,
because they excluded certain parties, could not achieve
the desired goals.
127. All the means for the peaceful settlement of international disputes must be used. The use or threat of use
of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State must be avoided. There must be
respect for the principle of the self-determination of peoples. We should stress the principle of non-interference
in matters that fall essentially within the internal jurisdiction of States, the guiding principle for harmonious
international relations. Lastly, we wish to reaffirm that
for the delegation of the Dominican Republic any political settlement of the Central American conflict must be
inspired by and placed within the framework of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

122. The Dominican
Republic attaches such importance to a peaceful and negotiated settlement of the dispute that the first act of foreign policy of the Government of national concentration that guides the destiny of
my country, the Declaration of Santo Domingo-which
was signed by the heads of Government of Venezuela,
Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Belize and the Dominican
Republic on the occasion of Salvador Jorge Blanco’s taking the oath as President of my country-states that “the
rejection of a violent solution and the acceptance of
negotiation and dialogue are indispensable to the political settlement of the crisis, which should be the result of a
shared effort and common will, with the ultimate goal of
promoting
and implementing
democracy, economic
development and social justice”. That same Declaration
issues a cordial appeal to the countries concerned with
the strengthening of peace to exercise their gobd offices
towards attaining that noble goal.

128. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia, I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
129. Mr. SILOVIC (Yugoslavia): May I join other
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on, the assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I am confident that your proven diplomatic skill
and personal qualities will contribute to the successful
outcome of the deliberations on the item on the Council’s
agenda. I should also like to express my delegation’s
appreciation of the successful discharge of this very
important duty by your predecessor, Mr, Troyanovsky of
the USSR, who guided the Council’s work with competence last month.

123. Along those same lines we wish to point out that
the Government of the Dominican Republic was the first
to speak out in support of the peace initiative taken by
the Presidents of Mexico and Venezuela. With reference
to that initiative, our Minister in his statement at the
thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly said that
“the Dominican Government did not confine itself to
simple support but expressed its willingness to participate, in whatever useful way it could, without detriment
to the principle of non-intervention, in any effort to normalize relations” between Nicaragua and Honduras.3
Furthermore, our Minister stressed:

130. The Council is meeting again at the justified
request of Nicaragua to consider the latest escalation in
the infiltration of anti-revolutionary forces from Honduras into the territory of Nicaragua. We have been alerted
to the impending danger by various sources, including
the mass media. We particularly appreciate the information and analysis presented by the representative of Nicaragua to the Council at the 2420th meeting, as well as in
his later statements. They enable us to understand the
gravity of the situation, its causes and possible grave
consequences.

“For the Dominican Republic it is not Utopiau to
believe and to say that the Central American and
Caribbean region must become a zone of peace, of
balance, stability, pluralism and the total rejection of
military solutions.“4

131. We believe that what is in question is not a mere
dispute between two neighbouring countries or their temporary misunderstanding. It is obvious that causes of tension which have recently increased so dramatically
are
much deeper. They are to be found in the historical contradictions that affect the whole region of Central America and the Caribbean.

124. We believe that the time has come to begin that
fruitful dialogue, We must not allow the situation to
reach an extreme that will make it impossible for reason,
good judgement and civilized coexistence to prevail.
125. Our country, which enjoys a democratic system
recognized by the international
community and which
maintains excellent relations with all the countries of the
Central American region, reiterates its willingness to con-

132. One of the main features of the present time is the
aspiration of peoples to emancipation, political
and
12

economic liberation, the exercise of the right to decide
freely and independently without interference or imposition of foreign will their destiny and their socio-economic
system.

gua and called for the cessation of all hostile acts against
that country, They called also upon all countries to
refrain from acts and policies that might increase tension
in the area, and they reiterated that the principle of noninterference and non-intervention in Central America, as
well as in all other regions of the world, should be strictly
abided by. They stressed again their opposition to all
forms of foreign domination, pressure, threats and imposition of foreign will upon independent countries. They
demanded full respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity; independence and the right of all peoples freely
to decide their own destiny.

133. The longer and greater the social injustice and foreign direct or indirect domination, the more exacerbated
the conditions in which changes occur. The revolutionary
transformation
which has taken place in Nicaragua was
an authentic expression of the will of its people to
become free of the dictatorship which had brought about
injustice, social inequality and poverty and had to a great
extent depended on foreign support.

138. A number of constructive proposals and initiatives
have been submitted concerning the situation in Central
America, of which Nicaragua is part and parcel. Among
them is the Contadora initiative by Colombia, Mexico,
Panama and Venezuela from January this year,’ as well
as the earlier ones by Mexico and France and by the
Socialist International,
as well as a number of others.
The value of these proposals lies in the fact that they
proceed from an overall perception of the situation and
aim at a comprehensive political and peaceful solution
based on negotiations, excluding the use of force and
taking into account the existing situation, necessities of
social development and justified demands for national
and political emancipation.

134. Changes resulting from historical necessity and the
right to equality, dignity and development of humanity
towards a society wherein all segments of the population
would constructively participate in establishing a more
just system cannot be denied, and even less stubbornly
undermined
by pressures, threats or infiltration
of
groups of armed terrorists. It is .evident that such-groups
cannot survive without foreign political and economic
support, that is, without direct assistance, since they have
no stronghold in the country itself, These groups are
obviously being trained and launched from outside. Such
pressures and assaults against the sovereignty of any
country, as is the case with Nicaragua today, lead to an
increase of tension and political polarization in this and
in any other region.

139. Yugoslavia, together with other non-aligned countries, supports such an approach to the solution of the
multiple problems in the area. We believe that it is the
best way to. overcome the existing difficulties, to avoid
further aggravation of the situation, to curb foreign interference and to establish ,peace in this exhausted region
ridden with crises. Nicaragua has made and is making
efforts to find a peaceful solution. It has many times
expressed readiness to negotiate, has put forward proposals in that direction and has reacted positively to those
mentioned earlier and to some others. Yugoslavia supports this position of Nicaragua and calls upon all
involved and concerned parties to contribute to the
search for a negotiated settlement in the interest of peace
and security in the region as well as in the world at large.
We support the right of the people of Nicaragua and of
other Central American countries, as well as of all countries and peoples in the world, to undisturbed development, free from foreign pressure and interference.

135. The international situation is burdened by the policies of blocs which tend to divide the world into spheres
of influence and interests, thus leading to further intensification of rivalry under various pretexts and to the prolongation and increase of, tension.
136, Arrogation of the right to intervene in arbitrarily
proclaimed zones of vital, special or any other interest,
according to whatever criteria, nurtures the logic of such
behaviour and necessarily leads to its escalation, Such
policies carry constant danger of new interference and
shift the rivalry to ever new areas. This not only denies
the sovereignty of States and the right of peoples to independent choice of decision, but also threatens peace and
security in wider regions, not only in Central America
but also in other continents.
137. The non-aligned countries, aware of the danger
that can result from such a development in Central
America, held in January this year an extraordinary ministerial meeting of their Co-ordinating Bureau dedicated
exclusively to the problems of that region. The meeting
was also an expression of solidarity of non-aligned countries with Nicaragua’s determination
to confront all
threats and to maintain its own independent way. The
Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, recently’ held’at New Delhi, the
largest gathering of nonialigned countries so far, also
attached great importance to the situation in Central
America and in the Caribbean and assessed it as grave
and tense. The non-aligned countries condemned in particular the increase in threats and attacks against Nicara-

140. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Honduras has asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply,
and I now call on him.
141. Mr. ORTEZ COLINDRES
(Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): It is, indeed, not as a customary
expression of diplomacy that we should like to extend
our Government’s thanks for the patience and attention
with which these 15 countries of this deliberative body,
the supreme body of the United Nations, are conducting
these deliberations. The seriousness .with which you, Mr.
President, have guided this debate will be recorded some
day not just in the records, but also in the annals of
Central America’s quest for peace.
13

.

,,,

;, ’ .”
1

142. The hour is late, so I shall address myself to the
crux of the question. The Honduran Minister for Foreign
Affairs would have liked to fulfil this responsibility, but
as is logical and just, we know that there are rules and
norms that must be respected and we have learned how
to wait our turn and at the same time to try to be
positive.

we would have no objection to providing trucks so they
could go back to Nicaragua, to the place whence they
came. Why do they not wish to return? Are they on
vacation? Have they gone to Honduras to spend Christmas or Holy Week with relatives? It is easy to find the
answer: it is because there is no respect for the rights of
the ethnic minorities, who rightly fear being exterminated. That is easy to see, because many of the leaders of
Miskito groups are in El Salvador trying openly to establish counter-revolutionary
movements.

143. After having heard the interesting statements of a
large part of the international community, I could say
that we are approaching an analysis of the problem into
well-identified
parts: internal problems, international
problems and dialogue for peace.

148. I now come to the second internal aspect. I ask in
absolute honesty and sincerity: What have we Hondurans to do with the fact that the wife of the man who
opposed Somoza for 20 years-Pedro
Joaquin Chamorro, who died of a gunshot wound-who
was
rewarded with the Presidency of the Junta by the revolutionaries; Mr. Arturo Cruz, who, when I was President of
the Central American Bank, was my chief of operations
for eight years and an honest and brilliant man who had
three positions in Nicaragua: member of the Junta,
ambassador of the Sandinist Government of Nicaragua
in Washington and President of the Central Bank; and
Alfonso Robelo, three members of the Revolutionary
Junta, denounced the Junta and organized to struggle
against the Government today in power in Nicaragua?
What internal problems have we been causing the Nicaraguans so that those persons have gone over to the other
side in disillusionment?

144. With regard to the first aspect of the problem, if I
were not to provide some information
the situation
might not be clear, and we would not want this to
happen. We shall do our best and not dwell on details,
because otherwise the Council would become some sort
of peace tribunal or a mini-General Assembly, and it
seems to me that when the Council was created that was
not the intention,
145. As for the internal questions involved, Nicaragua
and some countries friendly to it have asserted that what
is happening in that fraternal country is not an internal
problem. The statistics on how many persons have died
in Central America over the last three years reveal that it
is no exaggeration to speak of 100,OOtl lives lost, and it is
our Nicaraguan brothers who have lost the most, I would
say some 40,000. As to the Salvadorans, I believe that we
do not exaggerate when we say that about 30,000 have
died. That makes 70,000. And among the deaths that
were not reported there must be another 30,000. That
round figure is no exaggeration.

149. Today [2424th meeting] my Minister mentionedand I do not wish now to go into petty details-the
official notices of Nicaraguan censorship which can be
provided to the newspapers; they are official and bear a
seal. When the Minister comes to speak of peace, that is
completely censored. Press censorship is such that only
one newspaper is left, that of Chamorro’s widow, and the
censors lose all sense of proportion, because of what they
have censored, which I shall bring to your attention: the
arrival day of my Minister; and the photograph showing
ex-President Carter with Brezhnev, who had died a day
earlier, giving him a hug. Those are problems they wish
to blame on us.

146. When General Somoza’s downfall took place and
the Sandinist revolution triumphed-I
was one of its
most ardent admirers, and I publicly defended it in my
country at the union and university levels and in those
forums in which the will of the people is reflected-there
arose in Nicaragua a phenomenon which had repercussions in my own country, namely, a mass migration of
25,000 Nicaraguans seeking refuge after 40,000 persons
had been killed in the internal conflict in Nicaragua.
Those 25,000 Nicaraguans are still in Honduras, and the
Nicaraguan exodus is increasing further with the internal
problem in Nicaragua. I have precise figures: every day
some 100 persons cross the border, some 600 to 700 persons every week, as the result of Nicaragua’s internal
problem. Our country has seen this figure swell to 45,000
refugees, Among the 25,000 Nicaraguans are 6,000 Miskitos indigenous to the border area of Nicaragua. Those
Miskitos-and
the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees can attest to this-do not want to return to
Nicaragua, They have been asked whether they want to
return to the homeland from which they fled, and they
answer that they do not.

150. The representatives of Nicaragua need have no
fear; I shall not tire them; I wish to maintain my sense of
respect for them. I have a file which is but an introduction to the acts of aggression committed against us by
Nicaragua. I shall read out 10 of them, or fewer, because
to go through the entire list would be to show a lack of
consideration for the members of the Council. As I said,
this is not a court or a peace tribunal, but a most
esteemed forum. But I must bring some of these facts
before the Council, for were I not to do so-members
know that in international law silence grants consentonly one side of the coin would be seen. I shall try to be
as brief as possible.
151. In January 1982 a Sandinist patrol pursuing some
smugglers crossed into Honduran territory and there
came upon a Honduran patrol and exchanged fire for
five minutes: violation of our national territory and

147, If they answered that they did and the United
Nations offered to protect their lives, thus freeing us
from any responsibility as to what might happen, then
14

on the southern front, which is far from Honduras-that
is, some 200 to 300 kilometres from the border, It is
inconceivable that these problems should be purely internal problems. It is clear that they have international
repercussions.

harassment of our national army. That occurred in the
Palo Verde sector, co-ordinates 0757 on the map of Concepci6n de Maria, department of Choluteca. This is just
one random example.
152. On 4 March elements of the Sandinist army
entered the Guapinol sector and kidnapped citizens Cornelio Rubio and Daniel Gonzales, taking away their
boats, Those two persons were kidnapped: violation. of
our territorial waters and kidnapping.

162. Let us clarify the confusion about the meeting at
the highest, presidential, level, between Mr. Roberto
Suazo Cordova and Mr. Daniel Ortega Saavedra. I have
in my possession notes that have just arrived. They are
voluminous and I shall not read them into the record. In
these notes, dated 16 September and 11 October 1982,
which will be transcribed to authenticate the truth of the
statements and words of a responsible Government,
President Suazo C&rdova agrees to talks, even bilateral
ones.

153. On 17 March, at 11 o’clock, Sandinist elements
attacked elements of the Honduran navy, wounding Corporal Mario Roberto Ramos: violation of our territorial
waters; aggression against a Honduran patrol. Coordinates 13” 05’45”; wounded: Mario Roberto Ramos.
154. On 17 March, in the afternoon, two Honduran
boats were captured in territorial waters facing the Miskito village of Irlaya. A Nicaraguan coast guardsman
shot at the Honduran boat Debbie K, taking away its
captain and 24 fisherman members of the crew.
155. On 17 March the fishing boat Baby Jones was
attacked by a Nicaraguan ship and towed to a Nicaraguan port with all its crew: violation of territorial waters.
Kidnapped: Longino Cruz, Ligio Ordoiiez, Horatio Sandino, RenC Flores, and others.
156. On I8 March, Sandinist elements penetrated as far
as the community of Raya, 30 miles within Honduran
waters, capturing 48 fishermen and the Derveequee, kidnapping them and taking them towards Nicaraguan
waters. Kidnapped: 48 fishermen from the community of
Raya, 30 miles within Honduran waters, in the Atlantic.
157. On 21 March, at 1400 hours, a communication
was received at the naval base of Puerto CortCs from the
naval station of Islas de1 Cisne to the effect that two
patrol boats of the Sandinist forces had entered Honduran waters, capturing four Honduran fishing boats and
taking them toward Puerto Cabezas in Nicaragua: violation of territorial waters.
158. I shall not go any further in this regard so as to
avoid having it all transcribed and causing further expenditures to the United Nations.
159. Accordingly, I hope that no one will be impressed
by Honduran or Nicaraguan attacks, for there are ,11cs
and dozens of notes which in the last eight monts-if
since I have been ambassador-I
have sent officially to
the Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council. We are causing internal problems.
160. Shots are being heard today where they were
heard last week-in a town which, for those who know
Central America, is called Matagalpa. Matagalpa is not
on the border with Honduras; it is at least 150 kilometres
from the border with Honduras.
161. I shall refrain from mentioning all the attacks carried out today and which are reported from Costa Rica,
15

163. What has happened? Where is the change? I have
explained to the Council why the President was unable to
attend on the date set because of the kidnapping of 100
citizens and because of the enormous rally expressing
civic support for him. I was in Honduras at the time, and
we talked with his staff and his advisers. One’s teachers
teach one something. I had some good teachers, in practice, who told me: “Never leave your President exposed;
never expose the fundamental part or the stability of a
region by preparing a meeting of Presidents badly.”
When what is at stake is the peace or destiny of a
country-or
of Central America, as is the case now-a
meeting organized hurriedly and in a rush can cause
great disillusionment, even if good will is present. Consequently, in these notes, my President tells the Presidents
of Mexico and Venezuela-witnesses whom I too regard
as honourable and whom I accept as honourable, as Nicaragua accepts them, ‘and I accept them now, as we
accepted them the last time-that
this meeting must be
successful and must not be a mere show that will complicate the world’s image and create false expectations for
our peoples. For Presidents lose prestige when they meet
at the highest levels and spend time exchanging solely
and exclusively liquors, cocktails, Coca-Colas and photographs; Central America is not for that sort of thing.
That is very dangerous. We are a young Government; we
have taken 20 years to elect a president and we cannot
tarnish him through an international failure, with negotiations lacking seriousness and sound preparation. Therefore in these notes he tells the Presidents: “We wish to
accept this bilateral dialogue.” Yes, we have no fear of
bilateral dialogue. Why should we? If this is nothing
more than a bilateral and regional problem, there are
two sides to the coin and we want to talk about both of
them.
164. For that dialogue to culminate in a responsible
agreement to which we subscribe, one which is prudent,
logical and sincere, we propose a meeting of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Central American countries.
That is how the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907
and the Atlantic Treaty were prepared, The heads of
State did not just sign the Treaty of .Versaiiles without
their ministers and advisers informing their respective
Presidents of the seriousness and gravity of the points
and drawing up a formal, serious agenda enabling the

success of such a meeting.
today.

The principle

us advice. However, as I do not wish to begin-nor does
my Government-to
sniff out and to judge who in Latin
America is democratic and who is not, as this is a very
dangerous subject, we accept now that it shall be
recorded that we want and encourage this dialogue and
that if we do not mention the Latin American countries
that should take part in it this is because we do not wish
to muddy the waters in passing and we do not want any
regional or continental interest to say to us: “Ah! That
country is not democratic; it is a dictatorship.” Then the
dialogue collapses through a judgement that is extremely
difficult to handle.

is still valid

165. My Government does not slight Presidents. That
would be irresponsible on our part. I was at the 1973
Guyana meeting when the Residents of Mexico and
Venezuela-during
the big oil crisis when a barrel, of
crude oil went up in price from $2.50 to $12.50, leaving
Mexico and Venezuela with a profit margin of $lOgranted Central America, at the most difficult stage of
the crisis, &year terms and 8 per cent interest financing
to be used for infrastructure replacement and energy consumption in a situation that we were not prepared to
bear. It would thus be illogical, impractical, amoral and
lacking in gratitude on our part, and we are not like that.
Therefore we are not trying to avoid the presence of these
two high-level witnesses.

169. But we reiterate that our position is to accept the
dialogue. I am happy, Mr. Deputy Minister, that your
words are changing a little in substance. You are an intelligent man and a man who has fought in all disputes.
You have defended your country with devotion, You
were a guerrilla who passed through my territory, I am
sure. And if it was not you, because I cannot prove it, I
can speak about another hero, Commander Zero. Those
men who crossed like you, who forged the victory, were
not supported by the Honduran Government;
they
passed through blind spots on the border. We were not
able to control them, did not want to control them. They
crossed and overthrew a r6gime without the complicity
of the Government of Honduras. I think that this is a
virtue,

166. The problem, indeed, is greater. This is so true
that a few minutes ago the representative of Venezuelaone of the countries suggested for the talks-read
its
proposal and I listened most attentively. She said that
another meeting was held between that date and the
present-the Contadora Island meeting. That meeting
was not bilateral; it was not just Mexico and Venezuela,
but Panama and Colombia also attended. We viewed this
with great sympathy, and when those four Presidents,
four Ministers and four Governments even took the initiative within the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries so
that the Latin American countries would not be tied to
blocs, encouraging the Latin American countries to forge
their own destiny and, with a view to the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries at New Delhi, that we unite with the independent world, Nicaragua was opposed. The countries that
are trying to censure us here objected to our being
included as observers, but thank God we are allowed to
speak in this forum. We should have liked to have participated as non-aligned. Yet there were countries that
spoke against Honduras defending itself in the nonaligned bloc. Why? Because we are puppets of the United
States; they can judge from a distance. We do not
reproach those countries that are badly informed, but
logically we want the participants in the dialogue to be
those who are closely involved.

170. We as Hondurans must protest this, because when
we hear the statements of our allies in peace in the region,
such as Panama and Mexico, we note citations as though
there exist some articles about what lending of territories
or fomenting instability constitutes. I can only hope,
since no countries were mentioned, that no one in the
region wants to accuse us of actions of that nature.
171. We believe in Mexico and Panama and we do not
want to confound our thought. Comments have been
made to the effect that, directly or indirectly, Honduras
is implicated in officially wanting to destabilize Nicaragua. I repeat: we have faith in Panama; I repeat: we have
faith in Mexico; I repeat: we have faith in Colombia; I
repeat: we have faith in the Dominican Republic. I have
mentioned them by name; there is no taint or bad
thought involved.

167. This proposal, made by Venezuela itself a few minutes ago, was made on the instructions of its Government. This is no longer the affair of two countries, as
there were four in Contadora and now we are talking
about five. But let us play cleanly. It interests us and we
welcome it with satisfaction.

172. We do not want to say in whom we,most believe
until a position is taken, so as not to create confusion on
what could constitute the bases for a forum of five,.where
five countries of Central America would be seated, without, of course, exclusion of any Central American country with Latin American observers. I underline the words
“Latin American” because possibly my emphasis of this
might appear to some as complying with orders from the
American Government. But even if some think that we
are North American puppets-which,
we are not-1
emphasize ‘that the position of Honduras is that in this
dialogue the observers should be Latin Americans, not
because we feel there is suspicion attaching t9 the United
States. Just as we have respected the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and have, seen the intelligent stance

168. Out of international prudence and in order to help
the Council to achieve consensus we shall not mention
the names of those five, who could even be more. Yes, we
want these countries that will be observers-these witnesses of high quality that we accept, from now on-to
be democratic countries. We want this because it is impossible for us-countries
trying to set an example to our
peoples-to
be observed by dictatorial Governmenp
that do not possess the moral prestige to come and give
16

they have taken, we have seen the talent of Mrs. Kirkpatrick. We know the great responsibilities that they
bear; while we are engaged in gun battles, they.are discussing invisible missiles. It is logical: that is the nature of
the world. But we do respect the Security Council and we
are not expressing falsehoods here.

the laws and the institutions of their countries as a result
of free elections, I do not want to make judgements
about which Government is democratic and which is not,
177. Secondly, Mr. Deputy Minister, we want to be
clear that when we are speaking of “no restrictions”and we would like to know your feeling on the subject
when you deem it appropriate-we
shall then discuss
general disarmament, international supervision of armaments and of border zones-not
just patrolling of
borders-supervision
and control of ports, airports, sensitive points, dangerous and sensitive areas where there
are weapons, where there are strategic points: those
things that every country has, no matter how small it is.
And we declare and emphasize that, for the record.

173. Consequently, I should like it to be clear that Honduras views sympathetically, without any exclusion, a
meeting of the five ministers. If it is so desired, it can be a
meeting of presidents, with no pre-conditions, the five
presidents of Central America. And if they want
observers from democratic Latin American countries, we
accept that, too. The only thing we ask, out of a sense of
responsibility to our Ministers for Foreign Affairs, to this
forum and to ourselves as public servants, is that the
meeting be prepared properly, because there are already
100,000 dead. These are no longer merely rumours. And
lf these appeals at the highest level come to naught, the
world forums remain; when this body-the
Security
Council-meets,
it is because the crisis is being considered so serious as to create a threat to international peace
and peace in a region.

178. That is why my Minister came today, because
these are very serious commitments. I am an ambassador
who respects the laws of my country. My Minister, Mr.
Paz Barnica, has already said this, or wanted to say it,
this morning, but as a result of procedural problems he
was not able to make this statement. However, I am
authorized to make it on his behalf and on behalf of the
President of the Republic.

174. We believe that instead of coming to a body such
as this to ask that we be separated, that each of us be put
back in his corner, as unfortunately has happened with
the countries of the Middle East and as happened in the
case of the thirty-eighth parallel, we should act in a different manner, That is not what we want. We are prepared
to have it put on record that we are in favour of all these
intentions of the democratic peripheral countries and
that we are grateful to them for their desire to aid us in
this labour of peace.

179, We are prepared to accept disarmament; we are
prepared to accept international supervision and control,
provided that the reply of the Deputy Minister is affirmative. Obviously we cannot be so nai’ve in international
practice and theory as to allow our territory alone to be
supervised and controlled. That is why we take the multinational approach.
180. The disarmament we are talking about is substantial disarmament. What do we mean by, substantial? All
these things must be made perfectly clear. Somebody has
to establish the amounts and the limits that indicate
when a country has an offensive army and offensive
weapons. Technical experts would analyse this. I am not
going to decide the matter, but this substantial disarmament should establish the reality or the bases for living in
security, in peace, in harmony, respecting the rights of
others and the principle of non-intervention, being trusting and sleeping safely.

175. Let us endeavour to be constructive, because that
was my promise. Instead of exchanging accusations and
counter-accusations, why do we not clarify key points so
that the Council can take note of the points of
agreement?
176, I have not been clear, Mr. Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua, on one point. And I
should appreciate, whenever you deem it appropriate,
your telling us if you are prepared to accept a regional
dialogue, with no restrictions, of the five Central American countries-with
five additional countries or, if you
wish to add more, whichever you may mention, because
those that have been mentioned deserve our highest
consideration-to
discuss bilateral and multilateral problems. Because we are not going to escape from this circle
simply by saying that this is a bilateral problem and not
an internal problem. No, The problem is complex: it is
bilateral, regional, internal and international.
Consequently, we are going to speak without any restrictions.
As of now-let us emphasize this-we are prepared to
accept that dialogue, Five and five, as the representative
of Venezuela just said, and observers in addition. Honduras’ condition: .that they be democratic in nature. We do
not mention them, but we would like, for the reasons
noted and in order to give seriousness and credibility to
the meeting on the continent and in’ the world, that
rigimes be sought which respect legality, which respect

181. I have enormous admiration for a fraternal country, Costa Rica, It is already in the fifth or sixth democratic round. I have told the Costa Ricans that I admire
their democracy. We wish we could all be like the Costa
Ricans. Who would want Costa Rica to arm itself! But
techniques have changed. Our ambassador in London
sent me a letter reminding me of the fall 30 years ago of
Jacob0 Arbenz GuzmPn, in 1954, when, at age 20, I was
attorney for the strikers. In those days students went out
to make something of themselves. We no longer have
students; we have graduates, we have Ph.D.s.
182. In the University of Honduras we found-and this
has been publicized -torture chambers, masks, printingpresses, subversive material, bombs. And our soldiers did
not invade the university, though all Hondurans knew
that the seeds of dissent were there, and that there were
enormous numbers of kidnappings.
17

York Times, to whom we shall refer and to whom

we
shall reply regarding the photograph that appeared in
that newspaper today, must realize the problem of its
borders. We had a border which, thank God, was settled
legally by arbitration with Guatemala. It is an enormous
border, more than 700 kilometres.

183. On 24 December the daughter of the President of
Honduras was kidnapped. Our army fired not a single
shot, Never has it fired on any guerrilla movement for a
kidnapping. Even with guerrillas we have respected the
law. No Honduran citizens have seized our aircraft; they
have been Salvadorans, or Nicaraguan
citizensSalvadorans and Nicaraguans who have seized our
cabinet and the daughter of our President. I was in Tegucigalpa when the medicine needed by the country
spoiled: refrigerators did not work because a technical
guerrilla unit had bombed our power plants. Because of
a guerrilla movement our entire capital was blacked out
for 15 days at a time when we were making enormous
efforts to build hydraulic power plants and to find a way
out of the poverty in which our people live.

189. In Guatemala there is a guerrilla movement.
we
have in Honduras Guatemalans who have crossed the
border, just as Nicaraguans and Salvadorans have. we
have borders with El Salvador. They are territorial
and
fluvial: the Rio Motagua, in the case of Guatemala;
the
Rio Lenta, in the case of El Salvador. When Commander
Ortega Saavedra was here last, he said-and we can loOk
at the record to see if I am mistaken-that
there had beea
a violation of the fluvial border at the Rio Motagua. me
Rio Motagua forms the border between Guatemala
and
Honduras, not between Honduras and Nicaragua.

184. I would ask another question-not
to open discussion of a problem of give and take, but because these are
essential parts of possible negotiations-whether
your
country, Mr. Deputy Minister, is, as is mine right now,
prepared to remove its foreign military technical experts,
Let everybody leave: the North Americans, the Cubans,
the extra-continentals. Let us play clean. We are ready to
agree to this. Therefore in due course I should like to
hear the views of your Government on these points so
that the peace efforts each of us is making may be on
record.

190. We have one 700-kilometre border, part of which
was fixed by the Gamez-Bonilla Treaty and by an arbitration decision handed down by 14 members of the
International Court of Justice, 13 in favour of Honduras
and 1 in favour of Nicaragua, which clearly and categorically laid down our borders with Nicaragua.
191. But when I mention that dossier, I must add that
we also have thousands of kilometres of borders, because
we can look at it another way: there is the Atlantic Ocean
and the Pacific Ocean; we are an interoceanic belt, a vital
point. Were the Americas a woman, Central America
would be her waistline. It is there that the trouble is, in
the waist of America, for no chain can be stronger than
its weakest link.

185. Nicaragua has referred to our President, the chief
of foreign relations of our country. It said that when that
gentleman was elected in popular elections positive
expectations regarding Nicaragua and its people and its
system were created. I personally happened to receive
Commander Ortega Saavedra at the airport when he
arrived for the presidential inauguration. It is true that
there were expectations. I remember seeing him loaded
with weapons when he arrived at the airport. He was
afraid that we in Honduras would do something to him.
When the aircraft had come to a halt he said he would
not disembark unless it was with his people. Our Government said no: if he had no faith that our Government
would live up to its word, that was a matter for regret,
but the Honduran Government would provide security.
He agreed. There was no incident; there was a civic
celebration.

192. If only to correct the impression that we are referring solely to border patrols, in addition to the vessels
and people who are in Nicaragua that were captured
from us as a result of so many incidents, we must add
another border, the air border, which is being violated
That astronomical
border, which can be projected
upward ad infinitum, as. high as planes can fly, has been
violated too. The international
news services, as we
know, have informed us that the land borders have been
violated; we have truckloads of captured weapons,
freight cars full of weapons. The guerrilla movement now
exists also in El SaIvador. I do not understand why we. do
not echar la vacu-a common expression meaning
to
group together against an adversary. This is not to aaY
that Nicaragua must be an adversary, but it is a problem
that they have and that we have and, with God’s help, we
may reach agreement and these problems may disappear,
That border is being violated: press releases mention
Salvadoran units in the department of Moradn;
official
statements of the Government state that aircraft
and
smali planes from Nicaragua are overflying our territory
and landing to reinforce the Salvadoran guerrillas. I have
no intention of interfering with the Salvadoran guerrillas
or with anything else. I am just stating what is going on:
that when airspace is violated it is a border violation.
And that is why I speak of thousands of miles of border*

186. Mr. Deputy Minister, when Somoza fell we all
believed in the great expectations of the Sandinist movement, but I regret to tell you that you have radicalized
them. Totalitarianism
has seized you, We have no political prisoners.
187. In one of your replies you told me that I had made
a numerical error because the probIem at the border was
a simple one. I had said there were thousands of kilome-

tres; you said it was only 700. It is as though you have
used a 50-millimetre
photographic
lens rather than a
zoom. In return I shall use a zoom lens. Let it focus both
ways. And these are not digressions; these are figures.
188. My country has thousands of kilometres. Those
who study international law, and any person who looks
at Central America, even the’reporter from The New
18

193. Why is our Foreign Minister not here to reply?
That deserves some explanation. He would wish to have
replied, perhaps in a less emotional manner than I. But
we respect international commitments. We accept this
one, but we also have a regional and continental commitment. Both Nicaragua and Honduras are members of the
Organization of American States, and article 23 of its
charter clearly states that States members of the OAS
should exhaust the resources of that regional forum
before turning-and
that charter states this specificallyto the Security Council. The Foreign Minister will make
his statement tomorrow morning in Washington at 11.30
a.m.

what one reporter says that another reporter told him,
and so on. However, since the accusation was made in
this forum we have telephoned the President of the
Republic. And he said: “Tell the Council that we are
immediately sending a commission of inquiry, and if we
find any camp at all we shall not only destroy it but
capture and punish all those in it, whether they be Hondurans, Nicaraguan% foreigners; they will be subject to
Honduran law, and the Government guarantees that. We
do not support such camps.”
196. Can the President’s word not be believed? Let us
then, I say again, go into what we have agreed tonamely, international supervision of the problem, so that
independent parties can have their say and see that their
decisions are implemented.

194. So let us land from this flight of the Columbia in
order to come to something positive at the end. The
refugee problem is enormous. I do not know how the
refugees cross the border when the news that we receive
is that you have mined the border. There is a state of
emergency in Mocoron; I do not know how they manage
to get across, but they do.

If!%e meefing rose at 7.10 p.m.

195. So, to sum up: we continue to affirm that the problem has profound domestic implications in the case of
Nicaragua. Regarding the one remaining accusation, I
did not wish to take the past six minutes to speak about
the first page of The New York limes. In a forum such as
this, we cannot arrive at our opinions on the basis of

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

NOTES

’ See A/38/68.
a See Osficial Records of the General Assembly,
Thirty-seventh
ston, PIenary Meetings,
vol. III, 84th meeting, para. 31.
3Ibid,
vol. I, 33rd meeting, para. 53.
4Ibid., para. 58.

00400

60205~July

Ses-

IQQO--2,050

OBTAIN UN’ITJ2D NATIONS
PUBLICATIONS
Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.

HOW

TO

United

COMMENT
SE PROCURER
LES PUBLICATIONS
DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences d.+ositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous il : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

KAK l-lOJlYYtfI’b

OPrAHH3AIQ%i
O1G%E~MHEHHbIX
HAL@@
Haunt4 MOXHO WLiTbB
KHHXHblX
Mtll23fiHaX
H areHTcrnax no ncex paiIoioaax Mupa. HmoxHTe
cnpanrui 06 H~X~HHRX II mueM KHWHOM
Mawme
mu
nmmre
no aqpecy: Opramisamut
06aenHtiesmbrx HauuB, Cexumt no
npormxce tc3~aHnti,
HbndopK
um )KeHesa.
bbUlHH5I

OpEUiH3atUIH

H3&WklR

06beRHHeHRbIX

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES
DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de Ias Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

oo400

69205-July 1990-2,050
