asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6872

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6872nd meeting
Tuesday, 27 November 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Araud
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2012/818)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-60778 (E)

*1260778*

S/PV.6872

were represented at the leadership level in that session
already signaled the potential for elevated engagement.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2012/818)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Serbia to participate in this meeting. On behalf of
the Council, I welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivan Mrkić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting. Mr. Zarif is
joining today’s meeting via video teleconference from
Pristina.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Enver Hoxhaj to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/818, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: The report before the Council
(S/2012/818) details key events and activities in Kosovo
during the period 16 July to 15 October 2012. While the
period in question was mainly calm, very significant
developments have taken place since the end of the
reporting cycle, and it is on them that I shall focus
today.
On 21 August, the last time the Security Council
met to discuss Kosovo (S/PV.6822), I spoke of the
urgent need for a renewed political process, not only to
safeguard the substantial international investments in
Kosovo, but also to encourage the parties to move more
swiftly in order to resolve issues hampering progress
on both sides. The fact that Belgrade and Pristina
2

Subsequently, as new sessions of the dialogue
mediated by the European Union (EU) got under way
soon after the end of the reporting period, a far more
fundamental milestone was reached on 19 October. That
day, thanks in great measure to the personal leadership
of EU High Representative Catherine Ashton, a new
and more fundamental phase of the dialogue process
was initiated in Brussels. Prime Ministers Dačić and
Thaçi assumed direct leadership within this process,
and met for the first time as leaders of their respective
delegations.
This fast meeting was swiftly followed by a second
meeting on 7 November. During their second meeting,
the two leaders demonstrated their seriousness, and
were able to agree on concrete steps to move forward
in the dialogue in a more profound and far-reaching
manner. At the end of October, High Representative
Ashton and United States Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton paid joint visits to Pristina and Belgrade,
crucially demonstrating firm commitment and support
to the dialogue process at a high level.
I am personally gratified by these developments,
and wish to congratulate both sides — in particular
these two leaders — on demonstrating the political will
and courage to embark on the difficult yet indispensable
process of working together to recast relations between
Belgrade and Pristina. In so doing, they each showed
that they are looking to the future rather than to the
past.
Given the complexity of the issues that have
continued to inhibit progress on both sides, it would
be unreasonable to expect solutions to emerge easily
or quickly. Nonetheless, this initiative to tackle the
issues more forthrightly in a higher-level dialogue is a
development which I hope all members of this Council
will not simply commend, but also provide concrete
support to. The international community should be
well prepared to provide appropriate resources and
political backing to encourage and endorse sustainable
agreements achieved through a genuine dialogue
between the two parties.
As with any process striving to overcome the
legacies of past conflict, leaders on each side will
inevitably be confronted with obstacles on many fronts.
Each side must be able and empowered to overcome
challenges and resistance, including from those among

12-60778

S/PV.6872

their respective constituencies who, for one or another
reason, do not see political progress serving their own
interests. Some may seek to influence the situation on
the ground outside the context of peaceful negotiation.
Others may seek to undermine the political position of
those negotiating.
Indeed, in the few weeks since these higher-level
talks were launched, we have witnessed instances of
increased tension in sensitive areas on the ground in
Kosovo. Also, in just the past week and the past two days,
public reactions to decisions of courts involving highprofile war crimes defendants have shown the fragility
and reactiveness of public sentiments on matters of
reconciliation and justice. In order not to allow such
developments to generate yet further obstacles, a united
approach among the international presences engaged
on the ground also remains essential.
I am pleased to be able to report in this respect that
today there is great unity of purpose and commitment
among the mandated international presences on the
ground. The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is fulfilling its mandate
as part of a genuine team that encompasses the Kosovo
Force, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and the European Union
Special Representative for Kosovo, who is leading the
important political engagements within Kosovo. Most
recently, close coordination of efforts on the ground
has already helped to inhibit recent flare-ups from
acquiring less manageable proportions.
Many issues are yet to be addressed through
dialogue, and both sides face daunting challenges
outside of the process, including difficult economic
circumstances, challenges to the further development
of rule of law institutions, and complicated internal
political environments. The situation in the north
of Kosovo remains fragile. The mission continues to
put priority on working with our partners to maintain
stability, and to try to slowly increase confidence among
populations living north and south of the Ibar River. It
is vital that all who are able to influence the atmosphere
continue to work together towards these ends and to
promote an atmosphere conducive to progress during
the political dialogue.
During the reporting period, I once again appealed
to Kosovo Serbs in the north and to the Pristina
leaders to encourage them to open further lines of
communication. In talks with leaders in Belgrade and
12-60778

Pristina, I also stressed the importance of providing
these communities with full information in order to
reassure them that their legitimate interests were taken
fully into account during the efforts to achieve political
progress.
As detailed in the report, during the recent period
EULEX continued to implement the reconfiguration of
its structure, and provided new targeted expertise to
the police and judicial institutions in Kosovo. A recent
report of the European Court of Auditors, alongside
recent reports of the Kosovo Ombudsperson and the
OSCE, provided a sobering reminder of the current
essential challenges in this area. UNMIK has continued
to monitor the situation affecting minority communities
in Kosovo and, wherever possible, is providing good
offices for the resolution of disputes and reduction of
tensions on the ground.
I continue to be concerned about recurring incidents
of vandalism, theft and occasional violence against
minority returnee communities and their property. At
the same time, I am heartened by the renewed efforts of
the Kosovo police and other public institutions to engage
the communities affected and to tackle these problems.
Increased participation in municipal community safety
councils and local public safety committees during
the reporting period was an encouraging sign of these
efforts.
Among the many issues that continue to demand
sustained and coordinated effort on the ground, it
is worth mentioning in particular that, during this
period, the Mission dedicated facilitation efforts to
progress on the issue of missing persons. UNMIK
and the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus
facilitated a joint visit to Cyprus by representatives of
the Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serbian families of
missing persons and further pressed all parties, local
and international, to step up their work to help promote
earlier resolution of this issue.
Albeit in its early phase, the elevation to a higher
political level of the EU-mediated dialogue marks a
new and vital step in the political process. Each side
should be commended for assuming the leadership and
political risks entailed in taking it. They should be able
to depend upon political support, including from the
members of the Council, to underpin the process and
the agreements that may be reached during its future
course.

3

S/PV.6872

I would like to sincerely thank the members of the
Security Council for their continued support of the
work of UNMIK, and for their continued commitment
to and interest in promoting peace and security in
Kosovo. I ask for the Council’s active support for
the new phase of EU-mediated dialogue. I also ask
for its active encouragement to both Belgrade and
Pristina to fully seize the opportunity that has now
been presented, including through taking additional
confidence-building measures within their own remits.
Doing so holds promise for real hope, not only to begin
to overcome long-standing problems but also to achieve
fundamental progress towards meeting the aspirations
of the people for a more secure and more prosperous
future.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mrkić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Mr. Mrkić (Serbia): First of all, let me thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council under resolution 1244 (1999). I also
take this opportunity to express my appreciation to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif for his engagement and for the positions expressed
in his statement.
I have carefully read the Secretary-General’s
report on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for the
period 16 July to 15 October (S/2012/818), which is,
for the most part, factographic. We had expected it to
contain some substantial assessments concerning the
development of the situation in the region, primarily
bearing in mind the Secretary-General’s visit to the
region in July.
The Republic of Serbia is committed to contributing
to building peace, security and stability in the region, as
well as to developing a platform for a common European
future. During the reporting period, we once again
confirmed our readiness to contribute to overcoming
outstanding issues and problems. Our continuing efforts
are aimed at a peaceful resolution of the problems in the
region, including the issue of Kosovo and Metohija, as
mandated by resolution 1244 (1999).
We continue to oppose unilateral actions by any
party, In that respect, I wish also to underline once
again the unacceptability of the unilaterally declared
independence of Kosovo and Metohija. Let me say

4

it once again: we shall not recognize the so-called
Republic of Kosovo thus proclaimed.
I would like to express my country’s sincere
gratitude to the majority Member States that continue
to respect Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We urge them to maintain their principled stance, as
that is the most important contribution they can make
to the ultimate success of the dialogue.
Adhering to the principles of international law, as
well as the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, we support the continuous
building and promotion of mutual confidence, while
respecting the legitimate interests of both Albanians
and Serbs living in Kosovo and Metohija.
The Serbian side continues to promote and pursue
the policy of finding peaceful solutions in a constructive
dialogue with Pristina. The Republic of Serbia sees the
dialogue as the only way of overcoming the current crisis
and arriving at sustainable solutions for the problems
facing the population in Kosovo and Metohija on a daily
basis. The new Government of the Republic of Serbia
recently entered into the follow-up to the dialogue
with the wish of making concrete progress between
Belgrade and Pristina. During the last meeting between
Mr. Dačić, the Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Thaçi,
held in Brussels on 7 November, a wide range of issues
was discussed. We insisted that the executive control
powers at the crossing points in northern Kosovo be
vested in the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). We also recalled that an agreement
had been reached to start implementing integrated
control by 10 December, within the framework of pilot
projects at the administrative crossing points. Also,
agreement was reached that the Kosovo Police Service
should set up a special unit for the protection of Serbian
cultural heritage that will be made up predominantly of
Kosovo Serbs. We are determined to fully implement
the arrangements reached thus far and are open to
discussions on all issues, except the dismantling of
Serbia’s institutions in Kosovo and Metohija.
Serbia wishes to move forward towards its
European future and is fully committed to the process,
which should result in lasting peace between Serbs and
Albanians.
We believe that UNMIK should have an important
role to complement the dialogue, so that an effective
exchange of information and reporting to the Security
Council can be ensured. The Security Council

12-60778

S/PV.6872

remains indispensable in securing the legitimacy of a
comprehensive settlement.
The role of the United Nations in the stabilization
of the situation in the region is irreplaceable. The
mandate of UNMIK must therefore remain unchanged,
and it should continue to enjoy our full support. We
would like to see more efficient cooperation among
UNMIK, the Kosovo Force and EULEX. Both UNMIK
and EULEX should be active on the ground and act
in accordance with their mandates, in a status-neutral
way, under the auspices of the United Nations.
I would like to stress that the role of EULEX,
especially at this moment, must not be changed. Its
executive role remains crucial, especially as far as the
implementation of agreements reached in the dialogue
is concerned. The Republic of Serbia will insist on
the implementation of agreed solutions on integrated
border management through the presence and executive
role of EULEX at the administrative boundary line.
It is important that UNMIK continue to perform
its mandate related to the external representation of
Kosovo, unless otherwise agreed within the framework
of some regional gatherings and initiatives. In addition,
the United Nations should ensure that the missions in
Kosovo and Metohija operate solely in a status-neutral
framework, as envisaged in resolution 1244 (1999). The
United Nations should further continue its key role as
coordinator of all international organizations that act
under its auspices.
Of special significance for the Republic of Serbia
is the continued financing of the United Nations
Administration in Mitrovica. It is unacceptable to
us to additionally limit the responsibilities of the
Administration as a result of the lack of financing
and the takeover of UNMIK’s responsibilities by the
creation and functioning of a parallel body based in
Pristina. We would like to point out that UNMIK is the
only legitimate international presence in which people
in north Kosovo still have full confidence.
Despite the long-standing international presence,
there is no significant improvement on the ground. The
lives and property of Serbs and other non-Albanians
continue to be threatened; there are no basic security
conditions or freedom of movement and employment;
safe return to their homes in Kosovo and Metohija has
not been ensured for Serbian refugees and displaced
persons; no major infrastructure facilities have been
rebuilt; and violence against the Serbian population and

12-60778

their cultural and religious sites by Albanian separatists
continues. The human rights situation in Kosovo and
Metohija, especially as it pertains to Serbs and other
non-Albanians, continues to be deplorable.
Concern for security and safety, as well as limited
freedom of movement, are definitely the most important
factors having an adverse effect upon the quality
of life of Kosovo and Metohija Serbs. The relative
diminishing of inter-ethnic violence is not a result of
improved inter-ethnic relations, but the consequence
of the growing isolation of the Serbian population as a
result of their retreat into enclaves or isolated villages.
According to the information available to us, in the
period from July to October, more than 70 attacks that
could be described as ethnically motivated were carried
out. The result is that there are ever fewer Serbs living
in the territory of Kosovo and Metohija. In the period
under review, additional concern, lack of security and
disquiet were also caused by further arrests of members
of the Serbian community without any explanation as
to the legal grounds for issuing controversial warrants
against them. In that way, added pressure is being put on
the Serbian community living in Kosovo and Metohija.
I take this opportunity to emphasize once again
that the systematic destruction and demolition of
houses deserted by Serbs and other non-Albanians has
continued. I would also like to point out that the activities
of local authorities are aimed at the expropriation or
forced dispossession and demolition of houses in the
historical parts of towns like Peć and Đakovica.
At a time when the international community is
making efforts to provide lasting housing solutions
for refugees and displaced persons in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia, the return of internally
displaced persons to Kosovo and Metohija is a slow
process characterized by a low level of sustainability.
According to the latest figures for 2012, a mere 285
Serbs returned to Kosovo and Metohija, which testifies
to the continuing downward trend in returns.
The way in which the Kosovo Privatization Agency
is privatizing enterprises in Kosovo and Metohija
is alarming, especially since January. Of particular
concern is the privatization of public and social
enterprises in Serbian communities. The consequences
of selling such enterprises to Albanian nationals are
an additional factor forcing the exit of the Serbian
population.

5

S/PV.6872

I take this opportunity to draw the Council’s
attention to the ever more frequent problem of the
limitation of the freedom of movement of private
persons due to technical changes in the established
procedure of organized police escorts, usually in
cooperation with EULEX police. A particular problem
is the constant prevention of visits and freedom of
movement of officials of the Republic of Serbia, despite
the fact that they duly inform EULEX of their visits
to Kosovo and Metohija in accordance with established
procedure. Even humanitarian aid has been denied
entry to Kosovo and Metohija.
In Kosovo and Metohija, Serbia is constantly faced
with attacks on its cultural and historical heritage.
Attempts to replace and rename the Serbian cultural
identity in Kosovo and Metohija as Albanian, Byzantine,
Illyrian and so forth are continuously taking place in
spite of the relevant recommendations and decisions of
UNESCO.
I would like to emphasize once again the importance
of full and effective investigation of allegations of
killing for the purpose of organ trafficking contained
in the report of Mr. Dick Marty, Rapporteur of the
Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly. The
Republic of Serbia is ready to continue its cooperation
with the EULEX investigation team in order to help
establish the truth, trace the missing and achieve
justice for the victims. The truth must be established in
a professional and serious manner, particularly bearing
in mind the information regarding the destruction by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) of evidence gathered by UNMIK. Serbia
will continue to call for a United Nations role in the
investigation.
After many years of conflict and tensions in the
Balkans, the region has entered a new era of cooperation,
confidence-building and dialogue. The Republic of
Serbia has played a significant role in that process and
is committed to resolving all problems peacefully. I
wish to reaffirm our strong commitment to continuing
the process of reconciliation, which is a key element for
the consolidation of peace and stability in the region.
In that regard, I take this opportunity to point out
the negative consequences for the reconciliation process
of the latest judgement by the ICTY Appeals Chamber
concerning the two Croatian generals. That judgement
has stunned not only the whole of Serbia but also many
legal experts around the world. We maintain that such
an injustice must never happen again.
6

Achieving lasting peace in the region requires
a comprehensive solution to be found for Kosovo
and Metohija. Reconciliation between Serbs and
Albanians requires tough decisions on both sides. The
following words of the former Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskjöld may serve as inspiration to us: “The
pursuit of peace and progress cannot end in a few years
in either victory or defeat. The pursuit of peace and
progress, with its trials and its errors, its successes and
its setbacks, can never be relaxed and never abandoned”.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Hoxhaj.
Mr. Hoxhaj: It is my pleasure to address the Council
today regarding the latest significant developments in
the Republic of Kosovo during the past three months.
Let me, at the outset, thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his continued efforts for peace, stability
and democracy in my country and in the region.
During the past few months, we have witnessed
incredible progress in Kosovo. The year 2012 has been
a historic one for our country and our citizens. Due to
limited time at this meeting, I will focus my comments
on key developments, including the end of international
supervised independence, the establishment of
contractual relations with the European Union (EU),
and the new phase of bilateral relations between the
Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of Serbia.
On 10 September, the International Steering
Group decided to end the supervised independence of
Kosovo and to end the mandate of the International
Civilian Office. That consensual decision by all
25 member States, including 20 European Union
member States as well as Turkey, Croatia, Norway,
Switzerland and the United States, closed the chapter
of Kosovo’s supervision forever and we entered a new
phase as a fully sovereign nation. That decision came
after the Parliament of Kosovo approved constitutional
amendments on the 7 September that removed
references to the Status Settlement produced by the twoyear United Nations-led negotiation process from 2005
to 2007, mediated by the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy Martti Ahtisaari. That was a major milestone
for the Constitution of Kosovo as the fundamental
legal framework in the country. As highlighted in the
formal conclusion of the International Steering Group,
the decision by members of the Parliament of Kosovo
from all ethnic communities demonstrated that we were
a functioning multiethnic independent State — a core
value of our society.

12-60778

S/PV.6872

This new phase of Kosovo’s statehood emerged as
a result of the close partnership over the past four years
among our institutions and our international partners.
Throughout that period, we were able to provide
stability, build key State institutions and enhance
fundamental development as a modern and multiethnic
country.
Kosovo is a country made up of the diverse
communities who live there and have lived there
for generations. Today, we are proud that Kosovo
is maintaining its multiethnic character, as it has
throughout history, by protecting, promoting and
upholding the principles of multiethnicity and
secularism. The spirit that has governed the Ahtisaari
Plan will continue ahead.
We have ended an international mission with a
political mandate as a result of exercising the full
extent of our sovereignty. At the same time, we remain
committed to working closely with international
technical missions to further enhance the progress of
our country. The end of Kosovo’s supervision proves
that our country is a success story. In less than five years,
with the closing of the international mission, Kosovo is
confirmed to be a unique achievement in the history
of State-building. The end of supervised independence
makes us aware of our increased responsibilities to
demonstrate our commitment and to address the needs
of our society. The most important supervisors of
independence remain the people of Kosovo. It is their
suffering, their patience and their support that has led
us to where we are today.
Kosovo is very committed to the rule of law as
a basic precondition for democratic governance and
economic development. We have made significant
progress in the past months in the fight against
corruption and organized crime. That was as a result
of good cooperation between Kosovo’s institutions and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX).
As a sovereign State, Kosovo has invited EULEX
to support its justice system. In fact, the Parliament
of Kosovo ratified an agreement that extended the
mandate of EULEX for another two years, until 2014.
The agreement was reached through an exchange of
letters between the President of Kosovo, Ms. Atifete
Jahjaga, and EU High Representative Catherine Ashton.
That act is important for two reasons: first, it created
the domestic legal bases for the EULEX presence in
Kosovo and, secondly, it established a formal mutual
agreement between the European Union and Kosovo.
12-60778

In terms of economic development, Kosovo has
maintained its macro financial stability in close
coordination with the International Monetary Fund.
In October, the Government decided to increase the
funding for pensions from 33 per cent to 40 per cent.
That development is occurring while many countries
are coping with financial challenges and are making
significant cuts in public sector salaries and pensions.
In the meantime, the World Bank’s Doing Business
2013 has ranked Kosovo 28 places higher than in 2012,
marking the most successful progress of any country
of the Western Balkans. That progress is a result of
long-term reforms by the Government of the Republic
of Kosovo to improve the business environment. The
progress has been acknowledged by the World Bank
Director for South East Europe, who emphasized
“the fact that Kosovo managed to exit eurozone
crises with much better public finances and with a
higher rate of increase than neighbouring countries
is evidence of the strong management by the
Government of Kosovo”.
On 16 November, the membership of the Republic
of Kosovo in the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (EBRD) was accepted by the Board
of Governors. That will allow Kosovo to obtain new
sources of development funding and will contribute
to the promotion of socioeconomic development,
particularly in important sectors such as energy.
Membership in the EBRD will help Kosovo address
the challenges of economic growth. Kosovo will be an
equal shareholder with the 65 other members of that
important financial institution.
Furthermore, over the reporting period, the
number of international recognitions of the Republic
of Kosovo, in geographical terms, continued to rise
and proved to be an unstoppable development. During
that period, the Republic of Kosovo was recognized by
Papua New Guinea, Burundi, Timor-Leste and Fiji. I
take this opportunity to thank those countries for their
decisions. We continue to establish full diplomatic
relations with Member countries of the United Nations.
To date, Kosovo has signed more than 100 international
agreements, both bilateral and multilateral.
This past October, the European Commission,
through a feasibility study, confirmed that Kosovo was
ready to start official negotiations on a stabilization
and association agreement. That will constitute the
first step towards membership in the European Union

7

S/PV.6872

(EU) and will bind the European Union and Kosovo
together. I would like to highlight two important
aspects of the feasibility study. First, it confirms that
the EU will establish contractual relations with Kosovo
and, secondly, it confirms that Kosovo has established
its international position.
The study emphasizes that Kosovo should
pay particular attention to the rule of law, public
administration, the protection of minorities and trade.
The European Commission also stated that the EU
and Kosovo could have a formal political dialogue
in order to discuss regional and international issues.
That demonstrates that Kosovo is a factor of peace and
stability, both regionally and internationally. It also
underscores the deep concern that Serbia continues to
fund and maintain its illegal structures, such as security
and police structures, which are a direct threat to peace
and security in the three northern municipalities of
Kosovo.
Let me reiterate that our Government and citizens
are very committed to peace, stability and security
within Kosovo and in the region. However, I need to
again draw to the Council’s attention to the fact that the
situation in the three northern municipalities of Kosovo
remains tense and challenging, as confirmed by the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/818). In full
violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and international
norms, Serbia is leading, controlling and financing
illegal police and paramilitary units in that part of
Kosovo. That situation has to stop. Again, I call upon
Serbia to dismantle those illegal structures. They
represent a grave threat to stability, not only to Kosovo
but to the region. They are intended to hamper the
governance of our State, to destabilize Kosovo and to
create ethnic division in our communities.
A recent example of that problem is the ethnically
motivated incident at Kroi i Vitakut in the northern part
of Mitrovica, where the illegal Serbian structures are
opposing the return of Kosovo Albanians to their homes.
We condemn that provocation and are determined to
reconstruct the destroyed and burned houses. If that
situation continues, it will have a negative impact on
Kosovo’s stability and development. Therefore, we
remain committed to resolving the situation in the
three northern municipalities. There is a need for an
integrated system of life in that part of Kosovo, in
accordance with the Martti Ahtisaari Plan.
Allow me to inform the Council about the official
commencement of a dialogue on the normalization
8

of relations between the Republic of Kosovo and the
Republic of Serbia. That process is facilitated by the
European Union and supported by the United States.
In that context, the beginning of dialogue was followed
by high-level visits to Pristina by the British Foreign
Secretary, Mr. Hague, the United States Secretary of
State, Mrs. Clinton, and the European Union High
Representative, Baroness Ashton.
Kosovo and Serbia have a long, difficult past. The
people of Kosovo have bitter memories due to decades
of oppression, apartheid, the war and then ethnic
cleansing. However, it is in our common interest to close
that dark chapter of history. As two independent nations
we are responsible for our future, and as neighbours we
are destined to share our fate.
The dialogue aims to solve problems between the
two independent and sovereign States in the interest
of normalizing relations, improving the lives of people
and advancing the European agenda for both States and
the region as a whole. The process has been endorsed by
the Parliament of Kosovo, which adopted a resolution
on the normalization of relations with Serbia. As stated
further by that resolution, the dialogue and its outcome
must be in compliance with Kosovo’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity, international personality and
Constitution.
For us, the dialogue is a democratic value,
recognizing that neither threats nor violence can solve
problems. That process is also a criterion resulting from
the European agenda for both countries. In that context,
let me quote the EU enlargement strategy 2012-2013,
which says:
”[a] visible and sustainable improvement in
relations between Serbia and Kosovo is needed so
that both can continue on their respective paths
towards the EU, while avoiding that either can
block the other in these efforts.
...
“This process should gradually result in the
full normalization of relations between Serbia
and Kosovo with the prospect of both able to fully
exercise their rights and fulfil their responsibilities
within the EU.”
Let me recall the promising outcome of that
process. On 19 October and 7 November, there were
two important meetings between the Prime Minister
of the Republic of Kosovo, Mr. Hashim Thaçi, and

12-60778

S/PV.6872

the Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić. Both
meetings were chaired by the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Baroness Ashton.
Both countries have decided to start the
implementation of all agreements reached in Brussels
in the technical dialogue. The first and the most
important issue discussed in both meetings was the
implementation of the agreement on integrated border
management. We welcome the fact that the Serbian
Prime Minister has signed the respective protocol
on integrated border management, and we remain
confident that the implementation process from the
Serbian side will not be followed by further delays. That
agreement will establish a joint presence of Kosovar
and Serbian authorities at border crossings. For the first
time, that European model of border management will
significantly foster inter-State cooperation, starting
with four crossing points in full symmetry with each
other.
The second important topic is the establishment
of respective liaison offices in Belgrade and Pristina.
Those institutions will provide consular services to
their citizens and promote investment and economic
cooperation. At the same time, they establish an
intergovernmental communication channel, which has
always been lacking. The opening of such offices will
serve as a bridge to build mutual trust and enhance
bilateral cooperation.
The third issue is related to the need for transparent
funding by Serbia to the Serb community in Kosovo.
Due to the fact that Serbia has not been transparent in
its funding, we demand that Serbia change its approach.
That process is closely related to the full dismantling
of illegal and parallel structures in the northern
municipalities of Kosovo.
The fourth issue concerns measures to protect
Serb religious and cultural heritage in Kosovo. In that
respect, we are fully aware of the great joint success
seen in the past five years. The Kosovo Force has
already transferred the protection of most sites to
the Kosovo Police, and we expect the same for other
monuments. The Prime Minister of the Republic of
Kosovo has proposed a special unit within the Kosovo
Police, which would handle only the protection of
religious and cultural heritage.
In both meetings, other issues were also discussed,
such as the fate of missing persons, Kosovo’s

12-60778

membership of various international organizations
and the proposal to establish a joint technical working
group to prepare a feasibility study for the PristinaNiš motorway, which would be a significant bilateral
project between both countries.
Let me conclude by saying that any success in
Kosovo and in Serbia will not be found in handshakes
and headlines. It will be found in the committed
implementation of all agreements that can lead to
tangible results on the ground. We expect Serbia to
refrain from any kind of rhetoric or action regarding
the international campaign against the recognition of
Kosovo or its membership of different international
organizations. Any violation of that basic expectation
would harm mutual trust and would be against the spirit
of dialogue.
Kosovo is dedicated to building a future in peace
and harmony with our neighbour, and we will remain
a partner in that historic process. Therefore, we firmly
believe that future normalization of relations with
Serbia is our destiny and that it contributes to our mutual
and regional best interests. We strongly believe that the
normalization of relations at the political level should
serve as a foundation for the future reconciliation of
our two societies.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Council.
Mr. Berger (Germany): Let me begin by
welcoming Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, and Mr. Ivan Mrkić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, to the Council. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing and
comprehensive report (S/2012/818), which gives reason
for cautious optimism.
First and foremost, we welcome the fact that the
European Union-led dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo has finally resumed at the highest political
level. That is an essential step forward and we fully
support the efforts of High Representative Baroness
Ashton as facilitator.
As pointed out by Ms. Ashton and Secretary Clinton
during their recent visit to Belgrade and Pristina, the
common goal needs to be the normalization of relations
between both countries. Such normalization, with goodneighbourly relations as a result, is paramount if both
Serbia and Kosovo are to advance towards ultimately

9

S/PV.6872

becoming European Union members with full rights
and obligations.

therefore condemn the reported cases of intimidation
and threats against the staff.

We commend the willingness of the leaders on both
sides to invest their political capital in that process.
That capital will soon need to translate into concrete
and tangible results on the ground, starting with the
operation of the first border posts in the framework
of the integrated border management by December, as
agreed by the two Prime Ministers at their most recent
meeting on 7 November.

Ultimately, both sides need to understand that
further progress lies in their national interest. It will
free resources that are now tied up in dealing with the
ongoing conflict and allow both countries to advance
on their path towards European Union (EU) integration.

My country also welcomes the steps taken by
both sides to finally implement the agreement on the
representation of Kosovo in regional organizations. We
welcome the participation of the Serbian and Kosovar
delegations in numerous regional conferences over
the past few weeks. That dynamic needs to continue,
with Kosovo’s effective representation in the Regional
Cooperation Council being the next important step.
We also support Kosovo’s further integration into
the international community. We therefore welcome
the recent Board decision of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development to admit Kosovo as
a member. However, the implementation of agreements
concluded months ago will not be sufficient. A crucial
issue that would and should be addressed urgently
as part of the dialogue is the continued existence of
parallel Serbian State structures in northern Kosovo.
Regarding the areas of security, the judiciary and
municipal administration, there is persistent violation
of resolution 1244 (1999), which constitutes a constant
threat to stability. A positive step would be the
establishment of a multi-ethnic police unit by Pristina
with a clear mandate to improve the protection of
Serbian Orthodox religious sites. Both sides should also
seriously consider the proposed liaison arrangements in
their respective capitals. That could obviously facilitate
future discussions and provide important practical
support to citizens of the other country.
Any solution to those controversial issues will
need to be understood and accepted by the people in
Serbia and Kosovo. We therefore encourage political
leaders in both countries to reach out to their respective
constituencies in order to prepare them for the difficult
decisions and painful compromises ahead. That is
particularly relevant with regard to northern Kosovo.
The newly established Mitrovica North administrative
office can play a positive role in Pristina’s outreach
towards the Serb communities in that regard. We

10

My second point is on the security situation in
Kosovo, which has remained calm, despite occasional
security incidents in the north. We fully support the
approach of Mr. Zarif to urge the perpetrators of such
acts to refrain from violence and to engage in a peaceful
dialogue with all relevant stakeholders.
We also join him in strongly condemning
recurring attacks by Kosovo Serbian actors against
the international presence on the ground, including the
reported attack on 7 September against the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and
the Kosovo police.
The EU remains committed to further supporting
Kosovo’s law enforcement authorities. The extension
of the EULEX mandate until June 2014 will allow the
mission to continue its capacity-building efforts in the
rule of law sector and to support the Kosovo authorities
in the prosecution of war crimes, organized crime and
corruption.
In that context, we specifically welcome progress
made by the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force
by, inter alia, ensuring Montenegro’s support and
cooperation in the ongoing investigations. We call on
all partners to respect the Task Force’s restraint in
commenting publicly on its findings while investigations
are still ongoing. We concur with the SecretaryGeneral’s analysis that publishing confidential
testimony would jeopardize further investigations and
ultimately put the lives of witnesses at risk.
We also condemn all statements questioning the
impartiality of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. Such statements only serve to
undermine the mandate and authority of that institution.
The judgments and decisions of an independent
judiciary cannot be rated on their ability to please all
parties involved.
To conclude, let me reiterate our strong support for
the commitment of both parties to seriously engage in
the EU-led dialogue. Progress in the dialogue process
will serve as a catalyst for Serbia’s and Kosovo’s

12-60778

S/PV.6872

European aspirations — aspirations that Germany
unequivocally supports.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): My delegation thanks
Mr. Farid Zarif for his briefing. We have taken note of
the Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2012/818). We thank His Excellency Mr. Ivan Mrkić
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.
Pakistan believes that UNMIK continues to play a
vital role in ensuring stability in Kosovo. All constituents
of the international presence in Kosovo must maintain
neutrality while executing their respective mandates.
We are encouraged by the positive tone of the report
of the Secretary-General concerning developments
during the latest reporting period. We particularly
appreciate the commitment demonstrated by the parties
to engage with one another and resolve their differences
through peaceful means.
In that regard, the signing by Serbia of the technical
protocol on the implementation of the agreement on
the joint management of crossings and the resolution
of the impasse caused by differing interpretations
concerning Kosovo’s participation in regional meetings
are important developments.
We also note with satisfaction the progress made
in the implementation of the other agreements, as
highlighted in the report. Full implementation of all
agreements reached in the European Union-facilitated
dialogue will help to build mutual trust and confidence
and pave the way to addressing other outstanding issues.
We look forward to the resumption of the dialogue at
the earliest.
The overall security situation in Kosovo has
remained stable during the past three months. However,
tensions continue to prevail in the north, where some
serious incidents have occurred. Such occurrences have
the potential to undermine the security and stability of
the territory, as well as having a negative effect on the
political process. The challenges and tensions in the
relations between Pristina and northern Kosovo can
best be addressed through dialogue.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
recurrence of the targeting of minorities. Such incidents
breed a sense of insecurity among potential returnees.
The incidents should be properly investigated, and the
perpetrators must be brought to justice.

12-60778

The creation of conditions for the peaceful
integration of minority communities and sustainable
returns is essential for building the foundation for
long-term reconciliation among communities. Acts of
vandalism against cultural and religious heritage sites
are unacceptable and need to be addressed effectively.
We call upon all parties to pursue the path of dialogue
and engagement for the sake of lasting peace in Kosovo
and the region.
The recent developments noted by the SecretaryGeneral underscore that the parties are able to overcome
obstacles and are willing to move forward. It is therefore
essential to maintain the positive momentum.
Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and his team for their
contribution to the security and stability of Kosovo.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): My delegation would like to thank Mr. Zarif
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2012/818). We welcome the participation of
Mr. Ivan Mrkić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
in today’s meeting and agree with his assessment. We
have closely followed the statement of Mr. Hoxhaj and
note his carefully selected comments and references to
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
In discussing the legality or illegality of the events
in Kosovo we need to bear in mind the illegality of
a unilateral declaration of independence. Russia’s
position of non-recognition of the unilateral declaration
of independence by Kosovo remains unchanged.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force and
legally binding in terms of any international basis for a
Kosovo settlement.
In that context, we note the decision of the
participants of the so-called International Steering
Group that was set up to bypass the Security Council
in order to implement decisions that have not been
approved by the Council. What we are referring to here
is the Ahtisaari plan on the completion of the period of
controlled independence of Kosovo, which is merely a
political curiosity. No one entity is in a position to take
a decision in place of the Security Council.
The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) should remain the main
international presence in Kosovo and should carry
out its work fully in the province. In that regard, we

11

S/PV.6872

are concerned by the cut in funding to the Mission’s
administration in Mitrovica.
We view the launching of dialogue at the highest
political level between Belgrade and Pristina, and the
negotiation process as a whole, as a viable instrument
for stabilizing the situation and for the political and
diplomatic settlement of controversial issues, including
the protection of Serbian cultural and religious heritage
sites in the province. Dialogue is the only instrument
capable of solving the thorny problems in the province,
including in northern Mitrovica.
We are concerned that the situation in Kosovo
remains highly tense. There has been no decrease in
inter-ethnic incidents, some of which were mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General.
Another source of concern is Pristina’s attempts
to establish control over Serb-populated districts of
Kosovo. The fact that Pristina opened a municipal
administration in northern Mitrovica has provoked
new incidents. That also pertains to the practice of the
Kosovo police of detaining cars with number plates
issued in Serbia, a practice that has been supported by
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX). It also pertains to the ban on the use of
Serbian driver’s licences. There are serious problems
with respect to the freedom of movement of Serbians
in the territory of Kosovo. It is unacceptable for those
actions by Kosovo Albanians to be allowed by the
international presences, which should clearly be guided
by their mandates. Their activities should be statusneutral.
The difficult situation in the province is illustrated
by the problem of the return of refugees; there has been
no progress towards finding a solution in that respect.
According to the report of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe mission in Kosovo, only
22,200 out of 235,000 Serbian refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) have tried to return to their
former homes, and only 4,000 of those have remained.
There has been an increased drain of Serbs from the
province to other regions of Serbia. Another egregious
phenomenon is the pillaging of homes earmarked for
IDPs, the seizure of property and damage to religious
and cultural heritage sites.
There is a widespread practice of unjustly accusing
returnees of having been involved in crimes during the
period of conflict in the 1990s. A difficult inter-ethnic
situation has arisen recently in Brdjani, in the

12

northern part of Kosovo Mitrovica. On 19 November,
it degenerated into an exchange of fire, started by the
Kosovars in response to protests by the Serbs against
the non-consensual building of homes for Albanians.
It seems to us that the Kosovar Albanians are striving
to change the ethnic makeup of the population and
to squeeze the Serbs out of the northern part of the
town. The consequences of this are unpredictable. We
underscore that the adoption of any decision regarding
the north of Kosovo should take into account the views
of the local Serbian population. We urge Mr. Zarif to
give a fundamental assessment of the situation and to
take an active stance in line with his mandate.
The international presences in Pristina should step
up their efforts to develop inter-ethnic dialogue and to
build trust, without which prospects for a multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo are unrealistic. Oil has also been
poured onto the fire by the ruling of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia on the Croatian
generals. The promotion of radical elements clearly
will not promote inter-ethnic reconciliation across the
whole of the former Yugoslavia, including Kosovo.
We look forward to the results of EULEX’s
investigation of the cases identified by Dick Marty, of
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe,
concerning organ trafficking. We would like to draw
the Security Council’s attention to the fact that criminal
proceedings have been reopened in a case regarding
the participation in the murder and torture of civilians
of one of the leaders of the Kosovo Liberation Army,
Mr. Limaj.
The Kosovo Force (KFOR) is acting on the basis of
the Security Council’s mandate, and it bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of security in the
province. Any change to its function and format must
be approved by the Council. We hope that NATO will
recognize the potential implications of the transfer
of responsibilities from KFOR to Pristina lawenforcement structures for the safety of the Orthodox
monasteries in the south of the province, and we hope
also that it will take preventive measures in order
to avert further inter-faith and inter-ethnic clashes.
We have often mentioned the pitiful condition of
the province’s Orthodox churches, which have been
vandalized and whose clergy have been attacked. This
problem requires closer attention.
The stabilization of the situation in Kosovo is a long
way off. This has also been confirmed by the report
of the European Union (EU) auditors, who have noted
12-60778

S/PV.6872

the unsatisfactory results of EU assistance to Pristina
in the rule-of-law area. The document underscores the
fact that the results are limited and insufficient given
the objectives of the EU, the efforts made and the
financial resources used. According to the auditors, the
situation regarding the rule of law in Kosovo remains
unsatisfactory. In order to improve it, the EU must
ensure that EULEX delivers better and that it be much
more demanding of the Pristina authorities, which are
currently taking a passive stance.
In conclusion, I should like to urge the international
presences in Kosovo, whose unity was mentioned
earlier by Mr. Zarif, to take coherent action aimed at
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing as well as the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Kosovo for their
statements.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/818)
points out, and as Mr. Zarif has just noted, we can be
pleased with several developments that have taken
place since last we met. I will mention three of them.
First, the end of the supervised independence of
Kosovo on 10 September has opened a new chapter in
history. This represents an opportunity that should be
seized so as to consolidate the reality of a sovereign,
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo that is respectful
of human rights and living in peace with its neighbours.
To that end, Pristina must convince the Kosovo Serbs
that Serbs and Albanians have a common future and
shared interests both in the north and in the south. They
must give concrete assurances with respect to security
and decentralization to Serbs in the north of Kosovo,
exploring all the possibilities offered by the Ahtisaari
plan.
We view the establishment by the Kosovar
authorities of the Mitrovica North administrative
office as a step in the right direction, but we have to
go even further in terms of political vision and public
investment. Belgrade, for its part, must also contribute
to the settlement of the issue, including by finding a
solution to the question of illegal parallel structures
in the north by eliminating security structures and
integrating socioeconomic ones into the legal Kosovar
framework.
We support the integration of Kosovo into the
international community and its recognition by a
12-60778

growing number of States. The fact that the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development has decided
to welcome Kosovo as a member will promote its
economic and social development as well as regional
stability.
Secondly, the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo
held under the auspices of the European Union (EU) has
resumed at a political level, that of heads of Government.
That is an important gesture that confirms the will
of both sides to normalize their relations within the
framework of European rapprochement. We support,
of course, the efforts made by Mrs. Ashton towards a
comprehensive settlement of the issue that would allow
both countries to fully devote their energies and their
efforts to their European prospects.
We are encouraged by the progress made with
respect to integrated border management. We hope that
the agreements already reached will be implemented
in good faith and that this new dynamic will make it
possible to achieve progress in new areas for the greater
benefit of the citizens of both countries.
Thirdly, the security situation remains calm despite
a few incidents. We are closely following the situation
in the north of Mitrovica. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) office
must demonstrate the required neutrality.
As the report of the Secretary-General underlines,
it is crucial to strengthen the human rights of minorities
in Kosovo, protect its religious and cultural heritage,
and ensure the return of the 18,000 internally displaced
persons and refugees in conditions conducive to
security and reintegration. Respect for human rights is
crucial for the stability of Kosovo.
We would recall also that the personnel of the Kosovo
Force and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) are responsible for ensuring freedom
of movement in Kosovo, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). Any obstacle to their own freedom of
movement is unacceptable.
The prospect of European integration should make
it possible for Serbia and Kosovo to put conflict behind
them once and for all. The future of both countries is
the European Union.
We hope that when the time comes we can reach
the stage of membership negotiations with Serbia, once
the conditions set out by the European Union have
been fulfilled. France supports the negotiation of a

13

S/PV.6872

stabilization and association agreement with Kosovo
once the preconditions laid down by the European
Commission have been met. In that respect, we
encourage the Government of Kosovo to undertake the
necessary reforms in the areas of the rule of law, public
administration and the business environment.
We support the increased commitment of the
European Union to Kosovo. It is crucial that the
authorities of that country cooperate with the EULEX
mission, especially in investigating allegations of organ
trafficking. We are pleased that the EULEX report
annexed to that of the Secretary-General provides the
Security Council with information on the progress
achieved, and we welcome Mr. Williamson’s interaction
with the highest authorities of Serbia. It is also important
for the Government of Kosovo to work closely with the
European Union Special Representative and with the
head of the European Union Office.
I should like to conclude by thanking the Special
Representative and United Nations agencies in Kosovo
for their efforts. We invite UNMIK to continue to
cooperate with the other international organizations
that are present there and to adapt its efforts to the
evolving situation.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing on the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/818) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would
like to take this opportunity to wish a warm welcome to
Mr. Ivan Mrkić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and to Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
During the reporting period covered by the
Secretary-General’s report, the security situation
remained calm and stable overall, despite certain
persistent and sporadic incidents, which particularly
affected the Serb minorities in the north of Kosovo
and could undermine the momentum of recent months.
However, positive signs are on the rise following the
formation of a new Serb Government, and there is
reason for hope, as seen in the willingness of the
two parties’ leaders to step up their commitment to
resolving their differences. Indeed, the discussions
between the two parties, under the auspices of the
European Union, have reached a new phase in terms of
technical issues. However, substantial issues have not
seen much progress. Thus, negotiations on the question
of regional cooperation, civil registration, land registry
14

and joint border crossing management have seen
progress, but such issues as the freedom of movement
and the certification of degrees have not.
The progress achieved must not overshadow
incidents affecting minorities, be they acts of
vandalism, religious intolerance or the destruction of
religious sites. These incidents are not likely to bring
the communities together, much less reconcile them.
They serve only to promote the agenda of those opposed
to peace and stability in the region.
On another question entirely, that of investigations
into war crimes, forced disappearances, murders
and money laundering, we would encourage the
investigations led by the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo. We would also encourage UNMIK
to continue to carry out its mandate.
The region has suffered too long from the ravages of
war and fratricidal conﬂ icts. It is now up to Serbia and
Kosovo to work fervently to resolve their differences.
In this respect, we welcome the commitment and efforts
made by UNMIK and the Kosovo Force, who continue
to play a very important role with the parties with a
view to making progress on the questions that divide
them, and above all to finding a comprehensive and
inclusive political solution, in line with the provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/818) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), and Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his very
detailed briefing on the Mission and recent events in
that country. Allow me to also welcome the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, and
of Serbia, Mr. Ivan Mrkić. We listened very carefully to
their statements.
We note that, during the period covered by the
report, the security situation in Kosovo remained
relatively calm, and useful efforts were made by local
leaders in the region to moderate their rhetoric and
improve trust between the communities. However, we
are concerned by a few incidents that took place in the
north of Kosovo.
I would also like to highlight the progress achieved
in the implementation of the agreements reached
through dialogue and the adoption of measures for
implementing regional cooperation agreements and

12-60778

S/PV.6872

joint management of border crossings. All of this leads
us to call on the parties to continue to work on the
basis of the achievements that have been reached and
with renewed energy on those issues that still present
difficulties. We hope that the dialogue promoted by the
European Union between Belgrade and Pristina will be
resumed with renewed confidence, aiming at peace and
prosperity.
We note that the issue of the return of communities
to their places of origin still raises certain types of
challenges, including in the socioeconomic sphere and
with respect to coexistence. In that respect, Colombia
recognizes the work carried out by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
its partners to work with displaced persons towards
rapprochement, and the valuable contribution of other
stakeholders who have contributed to this urgent task.
We commend the initiative of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Kosovo and UN-Women in offering their support to the
Kosovo Agency for Gender Equality in the Office of the
Prime Minister in the development of a Kosovo action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We are concerned that attacks against international
organizations in Kosovo continue. My delegation
rejects and condemns such acts and calls emphatically
for respect for the work of these organizations and an
end to these attacks. Furthermore, given the charges
of organ trafficking, Colombia will closely follow the
results of the investigation, and offer its support to the
work carried out by Mr. Williamson, the lead prosecutor
of the Special Investigative Task Force. We hope that
it will reach a swift conclusion and ensure that those
responsible for these acts are brought to justice.
Security, stability and respect for human rights are
key to building lasting results. We therefore believe
that UNMIK must continue to promote cooperation in
this area between the parties involved and regional and
international agencies.

comprehensive briefing, and the Foreign Ministers of
Serbia and Kosovo for their statements.
During the period under review, we have registered
positive developments in the Belgrade/Pristina
dialogue, facilitated by the European Union. These
include the positive steps taken by both parties to
reduce tensions and normalize the relationship between
them, such as the interpretation of agreements between
them on integrated border management and regional
cooperation.
In this regard, a particular mention should be made
of the role of the European Union. The reconfiguration
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the extension of the Mission’s
mandate until June 2014 are a clear acknowledgement
of its contribution and efforts in the Kosovo context. At
the same time, the relative calm in Kosovo, particularly
in the north, is noteworthy and requires the further
encouragement and support of the international
community.
This must not, however, draw our attention away
from the serious obstacles to freedom of movement that
still persist. Incidents associated with the limitation of
free movement and the overall activity of UNMIK and
EULEX in the north of the country continue to be of
particular concern, and Portugal calls upon the parties
to cooperate constructively to facilitate movement in
the north.
On a different note, albeit one that is as important
to the future of Kosovo as any of the previous ones, I
would like to underline two issues that are central to
coexistence and reconciliation between Kosovo Serbs
and Albanians. The first pertains to religious and
cultural heritage. Portugal deeply regrets and condemns
the recurrent attempts to damage religious, historical
and cultural heritage in Kosovo. Echoing the words of
the Secretary-General,
“promotion of this valuable cultural and spiritual
heritage on the basis of ethnic and religious tolerance
remains central to achieving peace and a prosperous
future for Kosovo” (S/2012/818, para. 42).

To conclude, I would like to express Colombia’s
satisfaction with the holding of the meeting between
the Heads of Government of Kosovo and Serbia in
Brussels under the auspices of the European Union. We
hope that this will mark the beginning of a new period
of deeper and more extensive dialogue and cooperation
between Belgrade and Pristina.

It is incumbent on Kosovo’s authorities to protect such
heritage, and we are encouraged by the celebration
without incident of Orthodox religious festivities in
Kosovo.

Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his

The second point is about the right of return. The
relevance of the work being undertaken by various

12-60778

15

S/PV.6872

entities, most notably the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, regarding the return
of refugees and displaced persons to their homes in
Kosovo should be highlighted. Much has been done,
and what has been achieved must be applauded and
duly supported. Nevertheless, an immense task is still
ahead of us. The perception of a peaceful and secure
environment for returnees in Kosovo will be decisive
to the normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia, as well as a gauge of the progress achieved by
the Kosovo authorities, not only in the area of security
or economic development, but also in terms of the rule
of law and human rights.
That leads me to my final point, which is the recent
activity of EULEX, and particularly that of the Special
Investigative Task Force. Portugal commends the
efforts already undertaken by EULEX, and welcomes in
particular the most recent efforts of the lead prosecutor
and head of the Special Investigative Task Force.
Portugal takes note of the reported level of willingness
to cooperate on the participation of all quarters
contacted so far by the lead prosecutor, including the
willingness to cooperate shown by the Government of
Montenegro, as well as that of other countries of the
region, which, we are sure, would contribute to an
adequate investigation on the horrifying allegations
contained in the Marty report and to any concrete and
credible action that it may require in terms of countering
impunity and promoting justice and peace.
These are noble and fundamental goals that my
country considers essential to pursue, not only in
Kosovo but also in the wider Balkan region as a whole.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/818) on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome the participation in
today’s meeting of the Serbian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Ivan Mrkić, and thank him and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj for their statements.
The position of Azerbaijan with regard to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia
and
non-recognition
of
Kosovo’s
unilateral
declaration of independence remains unchanged.
Resolution 1244 (1999) continues to be the binding
international legal basis for a comprehensive settlement
through a political process and negotiations. As the
16

Secretary-General stated during his visit to the region,
it is critical to seek peaceful solutions to politically
sensitive issues and to exercise moderation in order
to avoid a possible increase in tension. In that regard,
we emphasize the utmost importance of UNMIK’s
presence and activities in Kosovo. We believe that the
Mission’s mandate and budgetary capacities should
remain unchanged and possibly enhanced. Furthermore,
UNMIK should maintain and further develop its key
role in coordinating all international efforts under its
status-neutral framework, as envisaged in resolution
1244 (1999).
As the report of the Secretary-General notes, the
Special Representative has closely interacted with key
actors at the community and political levels, including
in Belgrade and Pristina, to promote constructive
engagement. We encourage the Special Representative
and UNMIK to continue such interaction and dialogue.
According to the report, the overall security situation
remained generally calm during the reporting period.
However, security incidents, ethnically motivated
attacks and violence, and acts of vandalism and religious
intolerance have continued, affecting first and foremost
the rights and freedoms of minority communities in
Kosovo. Obviously, the atmosphere of impunity for
such violations can hardly contribute to enhancing
public confidence or to building the foundation for a
long-term reconciliation.
The situation regarding the return of internally
displaced persons to Kosovo again showed few signs
of improvement during the reporting period. At the
same time, the existing socioeconomic problems and
recurring security incidents in several returnee areas
only strengthened perceptions of insecurity among
potential returnees and thus stalled the progress in
sustainable returns. We take note of some efforts made
by local authorities to improve relations between the
majority population and the minority communities
and to address socioeconomic hardships. Continued
international engagement is needed to complement
those efforts.
The protection of religious and cultural heritage
must remain a priority for UNMIK. Although some
progress was observed in that area during the reporting
period, frequent acts of vandalism and instances of
religious intolerance have continued to undermine
the process of reconciliation among the communities.
We once again recall the obligations to comply with
the commitments made by the respective sides in that

12-60778

S/PV.6872

regard. Undoubtedly, the preservation of the region’s
rich cultural diversity and the further promotion of its
cultural and spiritual heritage on the basis of ethnic and
religious tolerance remain key to achieving peace and a
prosperous future in the region.
We take note of the information regarding the
investigation of the facts contained in the report of
Council of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty
related to a wide range of criminal offences, including
organized crime, the inhumane treatment of people
and organ trafficking. We strongly believe that the
establishment of truth will strengthen the principles of
justice and the rule of law and contribute to a lasting
political settlement.
We also note that, during the reporting period,
UNMIK continued to support and encourage progress
on the issue of missing persons, which remains one of
the essential aspects of reconciliation. We encourage
the sides and international partners to continue their
efforts to that end.
In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif,
for its efforts and important role in maintaining peace
and stability in Kosovo and the entire region.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif,
for presenting the quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/818) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would
also like to welcome Mr. Ivan Mrkić and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj and to thank them for their respective statements.
We welcomed the favourable conditions in which
the presidential and legislative elections took place in
Serbia in May, with the participation of Kosovo Serbs.
However, we regret that the elections interrupted the
dialogue coordinated by the European Union between the
Kosovo and Serbian authorities and the implementation
of the seven agreements that were previously concluded
between the two countries. Today, we welcome the fact
that the two parties have shown their willingness to
resume peaceful dialogue in the context of joint efforts
to settle their differences once and for all.
We note with satisfaction that that new dynamic has
led to the implementation of some technical agreements,
in particular the endorsement by the Serbian authorities
on 25 September of the protocol to the agreement on
integrated management for crossing points, and the
12-60778

publication that month of an instruction that allowed
for ambiguities in interpretations of the use of the
footnote reference to be overcome. That has enabled the
Serbian and Kosovo representatives to participate in
same regional forums. We urge the two protagonists to
continue along those lines in order to fully implement
the seven technical agreements and to strive to reach
a consensual agreement on the final status of Kosovo.
Furthermore, we note the decision taken on
10 September by the Kosovo authorities and the
International Steering Group to bring an end to
the supervised independence of Kosovo by the
International Civilian Office. Nonetheless, we note
that, while progress has been made by Kosovo since
its declaration of independence, in particular regarding
the overall stability and security of the country, efforts
still need to be made, particularly in northern Kosovo,
which remains an area of tension due to the fact that
the status of the country has not yet been unanimously
agreed upon within the population.
It is worrying to note that the local Serbian
community still refuses to recognize the authority of
the central Government, resulting in persistent, tangible
tensions. The blockade for several days in July of the
crossing at gate 1 at Jarinje in Leposavić municipality
to protest the continued presence of Kosovo police and
customs officers there, as well as a number of armed
incidents occurring in the north of the country, such as
the firing of automatic weapons at Kosovo police and
vehicles belonging to the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), clearly demonstrate the
fragility of the situation in that part of the country.
The persistence of such incidents, like the
inter-ethnic violence and the refusal to live together
peacefully, are simply the result of the lack of consensus
between the Serbian and Kosovo authorities on Kosovo’s
final status. That is why we believe it crucial for the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, work tirelessly towards a rapprochement
between Serbia and Kosovo. In that regard, we commend
the European Union’s continued efforts to maintain the
momentum of a peaceful dialogue between the two
countries.
We urge all the parties concerned to pursue and
promote the negotiations that are the only route to a
peaceful and lasting settlement of their differences, and
to avoid any act that might exacerbate tensions between
the various communities and dim the prospects for
their reconciliation. We also again encourage the
17

S/PV.6872

Kosovo authorities to take all measures necessary to
protect cultural and religious heritage sites from theft
and vandalism.
Finally, my country reiterates its congratulations to
UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, EULEX, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and all the
partner organizations that continue to work not only to
help Kosovar institutions run smoothly and to restore
security and the rule of law, but above all to bring the
various communities of Kosovo together and beyond
that to arrive at a definitive settlement of its status.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I would also like
to welcome to the Council Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and Mr. Ivan Mrkić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report (S/2012/818), and
indeed for his own close engagement with this issue,
reflected in his visit to Kosovo in July.
Kosovo continues to make progress, both internally
and on the international stage. Internally, in September
the International Steering Group declared the end of
Kosovo’s supervised independence. This is a measure
of substantial internal progress, although, obviously,
efforts to consolidate a multi-ethnic and democratic
society must continue. Internationally, since our last
meeting in August (S/PV.6822), four more United
Nations Member States have recognized Kosovo. We
encourage those countries that have not yet recognized
Kosovo to do so.
The United Kingdom welcomed the conclusions
of the European Commission’s feasibility study on the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Kosovo.
The conclusions underline that Kosovo is no longer
a special case; it is moving down the same European
Union (EU) accession path as the other countries of the
western Balkans. It follows that it will be expected to
deliver the same requirements, in terms of the reforms
necessary to meet the EU accession criteria. We wish
the Kosovo Government well in that regard; the United
Kingdom remains a firm supporter of Kosovo’s EU
accession path.
Good-neighbourly relations are a crucial aspect of
the EU accession process. We therefore welcome the
recent reinvigoration of the EU-facilitated dialogue,
reflected in high-level meetings that postdate the
18

issuing of the Secretary-General’s report. I readily
join Special Representative Zarif and other Council
members in welcoming this vital step. We look forward
to seeing tangible progress towards resolving issues at
the political level in order to reinforce the encouraging
progress already made in taking forward technical
agreements such as those on regional cooperation and
cadastre records. We are particularly encouraged to note
the progress made on integrated border management.
Going forward, it will be important to engage the local
community in northern Kosovo to ensure success.
The situation in northern Kosovo continues to be
a potentially destabilizing factor. We urge Belgrade
to take the necessary steps to remove illegal parallel
security structures in northern Kosovo. While the
dialogue remains a key vehicle for addressing the
overarching political issues, it remains important for
the authorities in Pristina to engage their citizens in
the north. They must demonstrate in both word and
deed their resolve to protect the community in northern
Kosovo, and to work towards its social and economic
well-being.
We are concerned about the recent unrest in the
ethnically mixed area of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani. The
United Kingdom reiterates its support for the right
of return of all Kosovo’s communities, providing it
is exercised in a transparent and consultative fashion
and with the correct documentation. We call for calm
and encourage all those involved to enter into dialogue
in order to find a secure and sustainable solution that
allows all citizens the right to return to their place of
origin.
The United Kingdom continues to be grateful for
the professional way in which both the Kosovo Force
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) are carrying out their mandates. We
particularly welcome EULEX’s efforts to increase its
presence in Zubin Potok. We condemn the 7 September
incident against EULEX and Kosovo police personnel
that led to injuries to a Kosovo police officer. The
perpetrators must be brought to justice.
With regard to the protection of minorities and
cultural heritage, we welcome the efforts of the
Kosovo police to enhance community policing and
the engagement of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in that process. It is important
that the planned recruitment drive for Kosovo police
give special attention to recruiting officers from the
Kosovo Serb and other minority communities. We also
12-60778

S/PV.6872

note the outreach by municipal officers to returnees.
It is important for Kosovo to continue taking visible
measures to prevent inter-ethnic incidents and to
investigate fully when such incidents do occur. We
welcome the recognition in the report of the importance
of socioeconomic factors in establishing sustainable
returns, and the United Kingdom remains committed
to the returns process through political engagement and
bilateral projects.
The United Kingdom continues to support the
important work being done by the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force to look into the allegations
relating to organ trafficking made in the Marty report.
We are confident in its capacity and determination
to take this important investigation forward. Let me
also take this opportunity to reiterate the simple but
important point that the United Kingdom respects the
verdicts of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.
I would also like to welcome the important work,
referred to in the Secretary-General’s report, that has
been taken forward by the United Nations Kosovo
team and the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, together with the EU and civil
society, addressing the theme of the status of survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence. This is a hugely
important issue, particularly in post-conflict societies
such as Kosovo. The British Foreign Secretary, William
Hague, has recently launched an initiative on preventing
sexual violence that aims to strengthen international
efforts and coordination to prevent and respond to
sexual violence. We will give strong support to efforts
to address the challenge posed by this tragic legacy of
past conflict in Kosovo.
The United Kingdom remains committed to the
irreversible progress of both Kosovo and Serbia towards
EU membership. We hope that the positive conclusions
of the feasibility study will be welcomed by the EU
General Affairs Council in December, with a view
to negotiations on the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with Kosovo being opened in 2013, once the
conditions have been met. We hope that both Belgrade
and Pristina will continue to engage constructively in
the dialogue, and we look forward to further tangible
results.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I am grateful for the statements made by Special
Representative Zarif and the Minister for Foreign

12-60778

Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivan Mrkić. I also listened
carefully to the statement by Mr. Hoxhaj.
The situation in Kosovo remains calm, but it is a
calm shadowed by sensitivity and fragility. In particular,
we are concerned about the fact that ethnic relations in
the north remain tense. The parties involved must adopt
a prudent approach, stick to dialogue to resolve their
differences, and avoid taking actions that might further
complicate or escalate the situation. China has always
called for full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia. The question of Kosovo must be dealt
with within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999).
It is up to the parties concerned to find an acceptable
solution through dialogue and negotiations.
China welcomes the high-level direct talks between
Belgrade and Pristina, and hopes that both parties will
bear in mind the overarching interest of lasting peace
in the region and the well-being of their peoples as they
continue making progress in the process of dialogue in
order to preserve peace and stability in the Balkans and
in Europe as a whole.
China welcomes the mediation efforts of the
Secretary-General aimed at resolving the question
of Kosovo. We commend the work carried out by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and support its ongoing efforts to
implement the Council’s mandate. We hope that the
international presence through UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force will strengthen coordination and play an active
and constructive role in facilitating solutions to the
outstanding questions.
China is deeply concerned by the illegal smuggling
of human organs in Kosovo. Any violation of the
standards of international law and international
humanitarian law is unacceptable, and the perpetrators
must be held accountable. The Council should play
the role that is expected of it and ensure the full and
complete investigation of the cases in question.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa thanks
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today on the report of
the activities of the United Nations Interim Mission
in Kosovo (S/2012/818). We welcome Serbian Foreign
Minister Mr. Ivan Mrkić to the Council and thank him
for his statement. We also welcome Mr. Enver Hoxhaj
and thank his for his statement.

19

S/PV.6872

We are pleased that the situation in Kosovo remains
relatively stable. However, the security incidents that
have occurred are an indication that tensions remain,
and unless the legitimate concerns or all parties are
resolved through a negotiated, peaceful settlement,
they will continue to be a threat to the stability of the
region.
South Africa takes note of the decision announced
by the International Steering Group concerning the
end of the supervised independence of Kosovo and the
subsequent action by the Kosovo authorities in that
regard. We maintain that resolution 1244 (1999) should
remain in force and forms the basis for the resolution of
the situation in Kosovo. It is therefore incumbent on the
international presence in Kosovo, including the Kosovo
Force and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, to maintain a status-neutral position in the
execution of their mandates, in line with the previous
decisions of the Security Council,
The two sides should refrain from any unilateral
action that could undermine the achievements attained
in the dialogue process. We therefore call on the parties
to exercise flexibility and enhance their engagement
in order to resolve outstanding matters and for
reconciliation to prevail.
My delegation continues to support the dialogue
process between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated by the
European Union, as mandated by the General Assembly.
We have noted the many positive developments during
the reporting period, in particular the resumption of the
European Union-led talks in Brussels on 19 October
following their suspension in February. Those
discussions are essential for building trust and mutual
confidence between the parties and will, we hope,
facilitate agreement on outstanding issues. We look
forward to the continuation of that dialogue.
Regular and direct contact is an important
confidence-building measure to improve trust and allow
the parties to address the outstanding and contentious
issues.
We welcome the signing by the Serbian authorities
on 25 September of the technical protocol on the
implementation of the agreement on the joint
management of crossings. South Africa encourages
all sides to strengthen the dialogue process in order
to reach agreement on outstanding contentious issues,
including the difficulties being encountered in the
implementation of agreements already reached.

20

We are, however, concerned that the security
situation in northern Kosovo remains fragile. The
outbreaks of violence and increased tensions between
ethnic groups have a negative impact on efforts to
build an environment conducive to building peace and
national reconciliation. Both sides should work together
and exercise restraint to prevent violent confrontations
from occurring. Furthermore, we concur with the
Secretary-General that
“the peaceful integration of minority communities,
creation of conditions for sustainable returns and
laying the foundation for long-term reconciliation
among communities must remain priorities”
(S/2012/818, para. 53).
We are concerned that the number of returnees
remains much lower compared to previous years, It is
imperative that the parties work together to create safe
conditions on the ground to encourage the minorities
to return to their homes. It is equally important that
the rights of the minorities and their properties are
protected by law.
My delegation has noted with appreciation
the parties’ determination to cooperate on the
reconstruction of some Serbian Orthodox Church sites
that were damaged. Such cooperation is a positive step.
However, we reiterate that security at religious sites
should be strengthened to protect them from the risk of
vandalism. Public reconciliatory pronouncements from
leaders on both sides are welcome and remain positive
contributions towards reconciliation.
Regarding the issue of missing persons, South Africa
welcomes the progress achieved so far in identifying
some of the remains, although the number of those still
missing remains high. The parties’ commitment and
cooperation on this issue are commended. We remain
confident that, with the support of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and assistance from the International Committee of the
Red Cross, much progress can be made.
Regarding the allegations of organ trafficking, we
wish to reiterate our position that a credible, thorough,
impartial and independent inquiry into these allegations
should be conducted. We hope for tangible results from
the process that is already under way.
In conclusion, South Africa would like to express
our appreciation and support for the role of UNMIK
under the capable leadership of Mr. Farid Zarif in
implementing resolution 1244 (1999).
12-60778

S/PV.6872

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), contained in document
S/2012/818. We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for having
introduced the report, and Mr. Ivan Mrkić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for
their statements.
We support the dialogue between the parties aimed
at achieving a definitive solution to the question of
Kosovo. We welcome the two recent high-level meetings
between the parties, facilitated by the European Union.
We are pleased by the constructive and pragmatic
attitude of Serbia. In that regard, we note a number of
positive developments in the activities being undertaken
to implement the agreements achieved through that
dialogue. We underscore the importance of the dialogue
regarding crossing points.
This leads me to the situation in northern Kosovo,
which remains a source of concern to my delegation.
We call on the parties to act with restraint in order to
reduce the risk of political setbacks or a resurgence of
instability. In that regard, we were surprised by the
change with regard to the local administrative office
in Mitrovica. In his previous report, the SecretaryGeneral expressed concern at the deviation by the
Pristina authorities of Kosovo budget funds intended
for UNMIK administration to a local administrative
office. The current reports conveys this as a fact, even
though that administrative office does not enjoy the
support and trust of the public.
I would like to highlight the importance of
confidence-building measures between the parties. We
also support the efforts of the Special Representative to
maintain close relations with key political actors at the
community level, including in Belgrade and Pristina, to
promote constructive contact.
Nonetheless, one area in which sufficient progress
has not been made is the situation of minority
communities in all areas of Kosovo. In that regard, we
should like to receive more specific recommendations
on how the Security Council can support UNMIK
in carrying out its mandates. This is also crucial to
improving the rate of voluntary returns to Kosovo.
Similarly, I would like to refer to the work of
the Special Investigative Task Force charged with
analysing allegations of human rights violations and

12-60778

organ trafficking in Kosovo. We are closely following
the progress in that regard. We note the report on the
activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (S/2012/818, annex I). We continue to
believe that it would be best to find an arrangement
that involved the United Nations in investigating those
allegations.
In conclusion, despite the extensive presence of
UNMIK on the ground, the report of the SecretaryGeneral reveals that it continues to play an irreplaceable
function as a guarantor of stability and neutrality
in Kosovo and in the region. We must see to the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), which is the
basis of the legal framework that must be applied to
Kosovo and respect for international law. We reiterate
our support to UNMIK for the neutrality with which it
carries out its duties as the key liaison for coordination
with international organizations. Furthermore, a strong
presence is still necessary as a result of the situation on
the ground, especially in the north of Kosovo.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I would like to welcome
both Minister for Foreign Affairs Hoxhaj and Minister
for Foreign Affairs Mrkić to the Council, and thank
them for sharing their perspectives with us. I would
also like to express again my appreciation to our longstanding partners in Kosovo, the European Union (EU),
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX),
the Kosovo Force (KFOR)/NATO, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
organizations that support the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would
like to make three main points.
First, the United States commends Kosovo and
Serbia for their efforts to move towards normalizing their
relations and to continue on a path towards full EuroAtlantic integration. The 19 October and 7 November
meetings of Prime Ministers Thaçi and Dačić with EU
High Representative Ashton demonstrate a willingness
to engage constructively. We also affirm that it is
only through dialogue that both countries can realize
their common goal of a European future and improve
their citizens’ lives. We are pleased that the Serbian
Government has stated that it will honour the dialogue
agreement on regional cooperation — a step that can
only benefit both countries in the region as a whole.
We extend our congratulations as well to Kosovo
on its most recent recognitions from Fiji, Timor-Leste,
21

S/PV.6872

Burundi and Papua New Guinea and for deepening its
regional economic integration through its impending
membership in the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (EBRD). EBRD membership will
support economic development and cooperation,
growth and social stability, to the benefit of the people
of Kosovo and throughout the Balkan region. We hope
that these developments will continue as we approach
the new year, and call for increased cooperation to
address the many issues that remain. We also welcome
steps being taken by both sides towards implementing
the agreement on integrated border management and
we look forward to the establishment of the first four
interim facilities by the end of this year.
Secondly, the United States remains concerned
about attacks on international personnel, restrictions on
freedom of movement, particularly that of EULEX and
the high level of tensions between ethnic communities.
Just last week, tensions rose in northern Kosovo when
Serb parallel officials, supported by Belgrade, sought
to halt the reconstruction of homes for displaced
ethnic Albanians and to protest implementation of the
integrated border management agreement. With regard
to the former, I note that employees of the UNMIK
office in North Mitrovica reportedly also tried to
impede construction efforts. We call on all officials of
Kosovo and Serbia, as well as UNMIK, to work to calm
tensions and avoid inflammatory language and actions.
We encourage close coordination between EULEX
and KFOR to deter and respond to such actions aimed
at undermining the rule of law and preventing legal
construction and returns to the north. We are deeply
troubled by the 7 September attack on a EULEX
armoured vehicle and the reports of attacks on staff of
the newly-established Mitrovica North administrative
office, including the attempted firebombing of the
house of its deputy director on 19 November. Those
efforts aim to intimidate the staff, many of whom are
ethnic Serbs working to better their communities.
We commend the Kosovo police force’s increased
efforts to protect cultural and religious heritage, as well
as its action against organized crime and trafficking
rings. We also encourage Kosovo and Serbia to redouble
their efforts to cooperate with the International
Committee of the Red Cross and local organizations to
locate the remains of over 1,700 persons who are still
missing. Further, we continue to support the Special
Investigative Task Force in its work to investigate and,
if necessary, prosecute allegations of organ trafficking

22

and other wrongdoing. We note the judgement of the
Appeals Chamber of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in the case of two Croatian
generals. We fully support the ICTY and accept its
rulings.
Finally, the United States congratulates Kosovo
on reaching the end of supervised independence
on 10 September, pursuant to a decision of the
International Steering Group that the Government
of Kosovo had substantially met all of its obligations
under the comprehensive settlement plan. We thank the
International Civilian Representative and his Office
for working diligently with the Kosovo Government to
reach this milestone. To achieve full EU integration,
Kosovo must continue its efforts, with the support of the
international community, to strengthen its multi-ethnic
democracy and the rule of law.
The United States continues to support both
Serbia and Kosovo in their pursuit of integration into
European institutions. To that end, we reiterate our call
for further constructive dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, under EU facilitation. As Secretary Clinton
said during her October visit to Pristina with EU High
Representative Ashton,
“We will stand with you as you make key reforms
to improve governance that brings you closer to
full Euro-Atlantic integration. We will stand with
you as you work with Serbia to resolve practical
problems and overcome obstacles, and we will
be there for you as you take the necessary steps
towards the future you so richly deserve.”
The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity.
Let me at the outset thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to thank
Mr. Ivan Mrkić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.
There were several positive developments during
the reporting period. Technical discussions on the
implementation of agreements reached so far in the
dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU)
resulted in Serbia’s endorsement of the technical
protocol on the implementation of the agreement on
the joint management of crossings. Serbia also engaged
with the EU to help clarify the ambiguity concerning

12-60778

S/PV.6872

Kosovo’s participation in regional forums. We welcome
these developments and hope that the sides will soon
resume substantive engagement within the framework
of the EU-facilitated dialogue to resolve the contentious
issues.
Despite the relative calm that prevailed during the
reporting period, there has not been substantial change
in the situation with regard to minority communities.
Recurring security incidents affecting them need to be
urgently addressed in order to promote intercommunity
harmony and facilitate their return. UNMIK, together
with the other international presences, should continue
to encourage the Kosovo authorities to address the
problems adversely affecting the minority communities
and their cultural and religious sites. In that connection,
UNMIK’s continued support of UNESCO remains
critical.
The issue of missing persons is an important
humanitarian issue. We hope that with UNMIK’s
direct support and encouragement to the International
Committee of the Red Cross, it will be possible to make
further progress on that issue.
We note UNMIK’s continued monitoring of the
ongoing Medicus human organ trafficking trial before
the District Court of Pristina. The trial should take place
in a free, fair and transparent manner. The international
presences in Kosovo led by UNMIK should render full
assistance to the process.

12-60778

In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation for the fact that UNMIK has continued
to implement its mandate in an impartial and statusneutral manner and has facilitated cooperation between
Pristina and Belgrade, the communities in Kosovo, the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We
commend and support Special Representative Zarif and
UNMIK for their contribution towards improving the
situation in northern Kosovo, and for the services that
the Mission is rendering in areas that better the daily
lives of all Kosovars. The Mission should continue to
implement its mandate in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999) and other relevant decisions. Other
agencies in Kosovo — the OSCE, KFOR, EULEX and
so on — should continue to cooperate and coordinate
with UNMIK in accordance with their respective
mandates.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

23
