A/77/422

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 November 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 84

The rule of law at the national and international levels
Report of the Sixth Committee
Rapporteur: Ms. Sarah Zahirah Ruhama (Malaysia)

I. Introduction
1.
The item entitled “The rule of law at the national and international levels” was
included in the provisional agenda of the seventy -seventh session of the General
Assembly pursuant to Assembly resolution 76/117 of 9 December 2021.
2.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its
agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee.
3.
The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 32nd and 34th
meetings, on 6, 7 and 10 October and on 3 and 7 November 2022. The views of the
representatives who spoke during the Committee’s consideration of the item are
reflected in the relevant summary records.1
4.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the
Secretary-General on strengthening and coordinating United Nations rule of law
activities (A/77/213).

II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.6/77/L.10
5.
At the 32nd meeting, on 3 November, the representative of Mexico, on behal f
of the Bureau, introduced a draft resolution entitled “The rule of law at the national
and international levels” (A/C.6/77/L.10 ).
6.
At its 34th meeting, on 7 November, the Committee adopted draft resoluti o n
A/C.6/77/L.10 without a vote (see para. 8).
7.
After the adoption of the draft resolution, the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic made a statement in explanation of position.

__________________
1

22-25567 (E)

A/C.6/77/SR.6, A/C.6/77/SR.7 , A/C.6/77/SR.8, A/C.6/77/SR. 9, A/C.6/77/SR.32 and
A/C.6/77/SR.34.

161122

*2225567*

A/77/422

III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee
8.
The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolution:

The rule of law at the national and international levels
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 76/117 of 9 December 2021,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, which are indispensable foundations of a mo re
peaceful, prosperous and just world, and reiterating its determination to foster strict
respect for them and to establish a just and lasting peace all over the world,
Reaffirming that human rights, the rule of law and democracy are interlinked
and mutually reinforcing and that they belong to the universal and indivisible core
values and principles of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the need for universal adherence to and implementation of the
rule of law at both the national and international levels and its solemn commitment to
an international order based on the rule of law and international law, which, together
with the principles of justice, is essential for peaceful coexistence and cooperati o n
among States,
Bearing in mind that the activities of the United Nations carried out in support
of efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate the rule of law are undertak en
in accordance with the Charter, and stressing the need to strengthen support to
Member States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their respecti v e
international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and capacity -buildin g ,
Convinced that the advancement of the rule of law at the national and
international levels is essential for the realization of su stained economic growt h ,
sustainable development, the eradication of poverty and hunger and the protection of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and acknowledging that collectiv e
security depends on effective cooperation, in accordance with the Cha rter and
international law, against transnational threats,
Reaffirming the duty of all States to refrain in their international relations fro m
the threat or use of force in any manner inconsistent with the purposes and principl es
of the United Nations and to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in
such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered, in
accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter, and calling upon States that have not yet
done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in
accordance with its Statute,
Recalling that the Declaration on Principles of International Law concernin g
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations1 was adopted in 1970,
Convinced that the promotion of and respect for the rule of law at the national
and international levels, as well as justice and good governance, should guide the
activities of the United Nations and its Member States,

__________________
1

2/5

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
22-25567

A/77/422

Recalling paragraph 134 (e) of the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 2
Noting the tenth anniversary of the declaration of the high -level meeting of the
General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and international levels, as
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012, withou t
a vote,
1.
Recalls the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law
at the national and international levels, held during the h igh-level segment of its sixty seventh session, and the declaration adopted at that meeting, 3 takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 41 of the declaration, 4 and
requests the Sixth Committee to continue its consideration of ways and means of
further developing the linkages between the rule of law and the three pillars of the
United Nations;
2.
Acknowledges the efforts to strengthen the rule of law through voluntary
pledges, encourages all States to consider makin g pledges, individually or jointly,
based on their national priorities, and also encourages those States that have mad e
pledges to continue to exchange information, knowledge and best practices in this
regard;
3.
Takes note of the annual report of the Secretary-General on strengtheni n g
and coordinating United Nations rule of law activities; 5
4.
Encourages the Secretary-General and the United Nations system to
accord high priority to rule of law activities;
5.
Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in encouraging the progressi v e
development of international law and its codification, and further reaffirms that States
shall abide by all of their obligations under international law;
6.
Also reaffirms the imperative of upholding and promoting the rule of law
at the international level in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and in this regard recalls the importance of the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among Stat es in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
7.
Further reaffirms its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 6 and recalls that
the goals and targets are integrated and indivisible and balance the three dimensio n s
of sustainable development;
8.
Recognizes the role of multilateral and bilateral treaties and treaty
processes in advancing the rule of law, and encourages States to further consider the
promotion of treaties in areas where international cooperation could benefit fro m
treaties;
9.
Welcomes the dialogue initiated by the Rule of Law Coordination and
Resource Group and the Rule of Law Unit in the Executive Office of the Secret ary General with Member States on the topic “Promoting the rule of law at the
international level”, and calls for the continu ation of this dialogue with a view to
fostering the rule of law at the international level;
10. Recognizes the importance of the United Nations Programme of Assistan ce
in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law
__________________
Resolution 60/1.
Resolution 67/1.
4
A/68/213/Add.1.
5
A/77/213.
6
Resolution 70/1.
2
3

22-25567

3/5

A/77/422

to the furtherance of United Nations rule of law programmes and activities,
emphasizes that further technical assistance and capacity -building initiatives, focused
on increasing and improving the participation of Member States in the multilateral
treaty process, should be examined, and invites States to support these activities;
11. Stresses the importance of adherence to the rule of law at the national level
and the need to strengthen support to Member States, upon their request, in the
domestic implementation of their respective international obligations throug h
enhanced technical assistance and capacity-building in order to develop, reinforce and
maintain domestic institutions active in the promotion of rule of law at the national
and international levels, subject to national ownership, strategies and priorities;
12. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure greater
coordination and coherence among the United Nations entities and with donors and
recipients, and reiterates its call for greater evaluation of the effectiveness of such
activities, including possible measures to improve the effectiveness of those capacit y building activities;
13. Calls, in this context, for dialogue to be enhanced among all stakeholders,
with a view to placing national perspectives at the centre of rule of law assistance in
order to strengthen national ownership, while recognizing that rule of law activities
must be anchored in a national context and that States have different national
experiences in the development of their systems of the rule of law, taking into accoun t
their legal, political, socioeconomic, cultural, religious and other local specificit i es,
while also recognizing that there are common features founded on international norms
and standards;
14. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the United Nations system to
systematically address, as appropriate, aspects of the rule of law in relevant activities,
including the participation of women in rule of law-related activities, recognizing the
importance of the rule of law to virtually all areas of United Nations engagement;
15. Expresses full support for the overall coordination and coherence role of
the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group within the United Nations system,
within existing mandates, supported by the Rule of Law Unit and under the leadersh i p
of the Deputy Secretary-Gen eral;
16. Requests the Secretary-Gen eral to submit, in a timely manner, his next
annual report on United Nations rule of law activities, in accordance with paragraph 5
of its resolution 63/128 of 11 December 2008, addressing, in a balanced manner, the
national and international dimensions of the rule of law;
17. Recognizes the importance of restoring confidence in the ru le of law as a
key element of transitional justice;
18. Recalls the commitment of Member States to take all necessary steps to
provide fair, transparent, effective, non-discriminato ry and accountable services that
promote access to justice for all, including legal aid, encourages further dialogue and
the sharing of national practices and expertise in strengthening the rule of law throug h
access to justice, including with regard to the provision of birth registration for all,
appropriate registration and documentation of refugees, migrants, asylum seekers and
stateless persons, and legal aid, where appropriate, in both criminal and civil
proceedings, and in this regard recognizes the role of knowledge and technolog y,
including in judicial systems, and stresses the need to intensify the assistan ce
extended to Governments upon their request;
19. Stresses the importance of promoting the sharing of national practices and
of inclusive dialogue, welcomes the proposals made by the Secretary -Gene ral ,
inviting Member States to voluntarily exchange national best practices on the rule of
4/5

22-25567

A/77/422

law in informal meetings and on an electronic depository of best practices on the
United Nations rule of law website, and invites Member States to do so;
20. Invites the International Court of Justice, the United Nations Commissi o n
on International Trade Law and the International Law Commission to continue to
comment, in their respective reports to the General Assembly, on their current roles
in promoting the rule of law;
21. Invites the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group and the Rule of
Law Unit to continue their dialogue with all Member States by interacting with them
in a regular, transparent and inclusive manner, in particular in informal briefings;
22. Stresses the need for the Rule of Law Unit to carry out its tasks in an
effective and sustainable manner and the need to provide it with reasonable mean s
required to that effect;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy -eighth sessio n
the item entitled “The rule of law at the national and international levels”, and invites
Member States to focus their comments during the upcoming Sixth Committee debate
on the subtopic “Using technology to advance access to justice for all”.

22-25567

5/5
