S/PRST/2006/41

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 October 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5546th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 October 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Letter dated 4 July
2006 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2006/481)”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern over the statement of
3 October 2006 by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (DPRK) in which it stated that the DPRK would conduct a
nuclear test in the future.
“The Security Council reaffirms that the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery constitute a threat to international
peace and security. The Security Council deplores the DPRK’s announcement
of withdrawal from the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (the
Treaty) and its stated pursuit of nuclear weapons in spite of its Treaty and
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards obligations. The Security
Council deems that should the DPRK carry out its threat of a nuclear weapon
test, it would jeopardize peace, stability and security in the region and beyond.
“The Security Council underlines that such a test would bring universal
condemnation by the international community and would not help the DPRK
to address the stated concerns particularly with regard to strengthening its
security. The Security Council urges the DPRK not to undertake such a test
and to refrain from any action that might aggravate tension, to work on the
resolution of non-proliferation concerns and to facilitate a peaceful and
comprehensive solution through political and diplomatic efforts. The Security
Council reiterates the need for the DPRK to comply fully with all the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1695 (2006).
“The Security Council supports the Six-Party Talks and calls for their
early resumption with a view to achieving the verifiable denuclearization of
the Korean Peninsula in a peaceful manner and to maintaining peace and
stability on the Korean Peninsula and in north-east Asia.
“The Security Council urges the DPRK to return immediately to the SixParty Talks without precondition, and to work towards the expeditious
implementation of the 19 September 2005 Joint Statement, and in particular to
abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programmes.

06-55705 (E) 061006

*0655705*

S/PRST/2006/41

“The Security Council will be monitoring this situation closely. The
Security Council stresses that a nuclear test, if carried out by the DPRK, would
represent a clear threat to international peace and security and that should the
DPRK ignore calls of the international community, the Security Council will
act consistent with its responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations.”

2

06-55705
