S/2017/486

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 June 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from 2 March
to 16 May 2017
I. Introduction
1.
The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past three months, pursuant to
the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended in
subsequent resolutions, most recently resolution 2330 (2016).

II. Situation in the area of operation and activities of the Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was maintained, albeit in a volatile environment attributable to the
ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. This is notwithstanding a number of
violations of the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces
(Disengagement of Forces Agreement) of 1974, which are set out below. The Syrian
Arab Armed Forces and non-State armed opposition groups engaged in exchanges
of heavy weapon fire in the area of separation and the area of limitation on the
Bravo side. Different armed groups, including the listed terrorist group Jabhat Fath
al-Sham (formerly the Nusrah Front) 1 and the Khalid ibn al-Walid Army, 2 which
pledged allegiance to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), continued to
exchange fire in the UNDOF area of operation. Inside the area of separation, the
presence of the Syrian armed forces and military equipment, as well as any other
armed personnel and military equipment other than that of UNDOF, is in violation
of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. As underscored again by the Security
Council in its resolution 2330 (2016), there should be no military activity of any
kind in the area of separation.
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it observes. All incidents o f
__________________
1

In July 2016, the Nusrah Front announced that it had changed its name to Jabhat Fath al Sham
and declared that it had cut ties with Al-Qaida.
2
The merger between the Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade and Harakat al Muthana was initially
announced on 12 April 2016. On 24 May 2016, open sources reported that both groups were now
operating under the umbrella name of “Khalid ibn al-Walid Army”. The grouping is assessed as
being ISIL-affiliated.

17-09140 (E)

090617

*1709140*

S/2017/486

firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire line, as well as the
crossing of the ceasefire line by individuals, are violations of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement. In his regular interaction with both sides, the Head of Mission
and Force Commander of UNDOF continued to call upon both parties to exercise
restraint and prevent any miscalculations that might lead to an escalation of the
situation. This was particularly the case when responding to incidents of spillover
and retaliatory fire.
4.
Military activity across the ceasefire line increased during the reporting
period. On 13 May, UNDOF observed three armed Israel Defense Forces personnel
in a vehicle in the area of separation in the vicinity of the Mount Hermon complex,
which constituted a violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. Two of
the Israel Defense Forces personnel left the vehicle for approximately 10 minutes,
after which all personnel and the vehicle returned to the Alpha side (Israeli occupied Golan).
5.
There was one incident of spillover fire across the ceasefire line during the
reporting period. On 21 April, United Nations personnel observed a high explosive
impact approximately two kilometres north of United Nations position 22. An
investigation team was allowed access to the site the following day, 22 April, by
which time only basic evidence could be gathered. The evidence indicated that the
impact was likely to have been caused by a round of 105 mm or 120 mm calibre
from the Bravo side. UNDOF also observed that a M557 point detonating fuse was
used.
6.
According to Syrian officials, the Israel Defense Forces responded to the
spillover fire with air strikes across the ceasefire line in the Khan Arnabeh region.
UNDOF was unable to confirm the Israel Defense Forces air activity or firing across
the ceasefire line. Syrian officials claimed that the Israeli retaliatory action halted an
ongoing Syrian Arab Armed Forces military operation in the area of separation.
7.
During the reporting period, open and government sources reported several
additional alleged incidents of Israeli air strikes or air activity in the Syrian Arab
Republic. UNDOF did not observe and is not able to verify the point of origin or
point of impact of any of the reported air activity described be low. On 17 March,
open sources reported that Israel Defense Forces aircraft entered Syrian airspace
and proceeded to strike targets in the general area of Tadmur (Palmyra); it was also
reported that in response, anti-aircraft missiles were fired, with some media outlets
suggested that an Israel Defense Forces aircraft was shot down. The Israel Defense
Forces subsequently confirmed the operation but denied that one of their aircraft
had been hit. It was also confirmed that the firing of anti -aircraft missiles had
triggered an anti-rocket alert system in Israel. On 19 March, it was reported that an
air strike killed an individual in Khan Arnabeh in the area of limitation on the Bravo
side. Open sources reported that the strike was carried out by an Israel Defe nse
Forces unmanned aerial vehicle. On 21 March, it was reported by open sources and
confirmed by the Israel Defense Forces that an Israel Defense Forces unmanned
aerial vehicle had been shot down in the Qunaytirah area. On 23 April, open sources
reported an Israel Defense Forces strike at a Syrian National Defence Forces
training camp approximately two kilometres from Camp Faouar that killed three
individuals and wounded two others, reportedly in retaliation for spillover fire, that
had occurred on 21 April. On 27 April, open sources reported that Damascus Airport
had been the target of air strikes by the Israel Defense Forces. In all cases, it was
reported by the media that the targets were Hizbullah or associated parties.
8.
The berm, or earthwork, in the area of separation remained a concern for
UNDOF throughout the reporting period. The berm is over 2 kilometres long and
appears to be facilitating movement in the corridor between Hamidiyah al -Jadidah
2/10

17-09140

S/2017/486

and Jubbata al-Khashab. The berm crosses the ceasefire line in at least one location
and is used by armed groups, thus making the area of separation a target for the
Syrian Arab Armed Forces. This continues to have the potential to draw fire,
particularly indirect fire, closer to the ceasefire line and the te chnical fence. During
the reporting period, UNDOF observed an increasing trend of incidents of
operational activity being conducted by armed groups in close proximity to the
technical fence and the ceasefire line. On 21 and 26 April, a self -propelled howitzer,
along with six armed elements and support vehicles, fired five high explosive
rounds into areas controlled by the Syrian Arab Armed Forces. The firing position
was located in the vicinity of former United Nations position 60A, in close
proximity to the technical fence. Syrian authorities noted that there had been
civilian casualties in Khan Arnabeh and that the Syrian Arab Armed Forces were
constrained in their ability to respond because of the risk that any spillover fire
would draw the usual response from the Israel Defense Forces.
9.
UNDOF assesses that military operational activity by armed groups, including
the practice of firing in close proximity to the ceasefire line and the technical fence,
is a deliberate attempt to avoid retaliatory fire from the Syrian Arab Armed Forces.
This activity serves to attract fire towards the ceasefire line, placing civilians and
United Nations personnel on the Alpha side at increased risk.
10. Crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians, primarily shepherds, from t he
Bravo side to the Alpha side continued to be observed daily. Instances of interaction
between Israel Defense Forces soldiers and individuals from the Bravo side
continued during the reporting period. Such interactions were observed on 15 March
in the vicinity of the Alpha gate and Camp Ziouani, and on 20 April in the vicinity
of United Nations observation post 54.
11. Relative to the previous reporting period, there has been a significant increase
in interaction between Israel Defense Forces soldiers and individuals from the
Bravo side, including from the Bayt Jinn pocket on Mount Hermon. UNDOF
observed 16 interactions between the Israel Defense Forces and unknown
individuals during the reporting period, occurring on four occasions in February,
three in March, eight in April and on one occasion in May. The interactions
followed a similar pattern and occurred in the same general vicinity on Mount
Hermon, close to an Israel Defense Forces position. Unknown individuals, armed
and unarmed, accompanied by mules, approached the Israel Defense Forces position
and were met by and interacted with Israel Defense Forces personnel. In some
instances, personnel and supplies were observed to have been transferred in both
directions. On all occasions, the unknown individuals and mules returned to the
Bravo side. The movement of unarmed unidentified persons with unloaded mules
was observed by UNDOF personnel on 28 March and 8 May.
12. From its observation, UNDOF cannot confirm or verify the nature of the
interaction described in the paragraphs above. The Israel Defense Forces have stated
that the interactions were of a humanitarian and medical nature.
13. As previously reported by UNDOF, there is a concern that such interaction
heightens the risk of clashes between the armed groups and the Syrian Arab Armed
Forces, including on Mount Hermon, and this poses the risk to United Nations
personnel of indirect fire. On 5 May, Observer Group Golan personnel heard
warning shots, then small arms rounds were fired in their direction by two
unidentified individuals in the vicinity of the Mount Hermon complex. UNDOF
assessed that the shots were intended as a warning to stop its personnel from
observing the area. Such activity highlights the risk in the operational envi ronment
on Mount Hermon.

17-09140

3/10

S/2017/486

14. On 30 March, following medical treatment in Israel, a civilian shepherd, who
had been injured on 5 January in a mine incident in the vicinity of United Nations
observation post 73, was transferred back to the Bravo side in coop eration with
representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross. In coordination
with the Israel Defense Forces, UNDOF transferred the individual from the Alpha
side across Mount Hermon to the Bravo side. Throughout the operation, the injured
shepherd remained under medical observation by an UNDOF Medical Officer. He
was then transferred to the Syrian authorities. The shepherd continued his
rehabilitation in Damascus, and has since returned to his home and community in
Hadar. UNDOF commended the humanitarian spirit in which both parties to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement acted in order to achieve the successful
conclusion of the incident.
15. In the context of the ongoing Syrian conflict, combat in the northern part of
the area of separation and limitation on the Bravo side continued in the vicinity of
Hadar and Tall al-Hamariyah, also known as the “Castle”, which remains contested.
During the reporting period, combat also continued in the Bayt Jinn pocket,
consisting of the towns of Bayt Jinn, Mazra’at Bayt Jinn and Mughur al-Mir.
16. The Mount Hermon complex remained stable throughout the reporting period,
with the exception of the firing incident of 5 May described in paragraph 13 above.
The level of transborder movements of unidentified individuals increased as the
weather conditions improved, with two instances recorded in March, three in April
and four in May.
17. In the central part of the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side,
military combat remained at low levels between armed groups and the Syrian Arab
Armed Forces, albeit with consistent reports of direct and indirect firing. Firing
continues to be observed along the front lines in the vicinity of Syrian Arab Armed
Forces positions towards positions held by armed gro ups in south Gharbiyah,
Qunaytirah and Umm Batinah and the contested area of Samdaniyah.
18. In the southern part of the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side,
which remain for the most part under the control of non -State armed groups, clashes
continued between the Khalid ibn al-Walid Army on the one side and the Free
Syrian Army and Jabhat Fath al-Sham (formerly the Nusrah Front) on the other.
Significant spikes in military activity were observed on 20 February and again on
8 May in the area of limitation on the Bravo side.
19. UNDOF protested all violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement
that it observed to both parties, including the presence of unauthorized equipment in
the area of separation and firing into the area of separation. The Head of Mission
and Force Commander reminded the parties of their obligation to abide by the terms
of the Agreement and to ensure the safety and security of United Nations personnel
on the ground.
20. During the reporting period, United Nations personnel on four occasions
observed persons on the Bravo side unearthing and removing mines in close
proximity to United Nations positions. On 11 February 2017, United Nations
personnel at temporary observation post 4 observed a civilian picking up objects
from the ground in the vicinity of the Charlie gate. The individual collected the
items in a white box and returned to the area of separation. On 14 February, United
Nations personnel at observation post 53 observed three persons digging up mines
from the ground and then proceeding towards Kudnah. On 11 and 19 March, United
Nations personnel at observation post 54 observed several persons who appeared to
be civilian shepherds searching the ground and digging up items.

4/10

17-09140

S/2017/486

21. During the reporting period, UNDOF observed seven locations where 487
tents and other structures appeared to have been set up for internally displaced
persons in the area of separation and in its proximity. The number of people in the
camps could not be ascertained and appeared to fluctuate. As a result of the closure
of the established crossing point at Qunaytirah between the Alpha and Bravo sides
since late August 2014, UNDOF remains unable to facilitate, in cooperation with
the International Committee of the Red Cross, humanitarian crossin gs, including for
students, between the two sides.
22. Since its temporary relocation from a number of positions in September 2014,
and pending its full return to the area of separation, UNDOF has continued to
maintain visibility of the area of separation and the ceasefire line from its positions
on Mount Hermon, Camp Faouar, position 80, in the southern part of the area of
separation, and position 22, on the Alpha side. UNDOF operations continued to be
supported by United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) military
observers in Observer Group Golan, who are under the operational control of
UNDOF and maintained five fixed and four temporary observation posts along the
Alpha line. The focus of the activities of Observer Group Golan was on continuo us
static observation and situational awareness. Observer Group Golan -Damascus
resumed operations on Mount Hermon on 8 May, following mine clearance
operations by UNDOF.
23. Through Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly
inspections of equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side.
Liaison officers from the Alpha side accompanied the inspection teams. Inspections
in the area of limitation on the Bravo side remained suspended because of the
security situation. As in the past, UNDOF faced several instances of restriction of
its freedom of movement; however, UNDOF, through its engagement with the Israel
Defense Forces, endeavours to reduce the delays and challenges experienced by
United Nations personnel in crossing through the technical fence to United Nations
observation posts and positions.
24. During the reporting period, UNDOF observed 155 mm artillery weapons on
the Alpha side within 10 kilometres of the ceasefire line on 21 February and 28 and
29 March. Repeatedly throughout the reporting period, United Nations personnel
observed a multiple-rocket launching system and Iron Dome systems at locations
within the 20 kilometre zone in the area of limitation on the Alpha side.
25. UNDOF, in consultation with both parties, continued to review the situation in
the area of separation to assess whether the conditions on the ground permitted an
incremental return to vacated positions in the area of separation. In this regard, the
UNDOF leadership conducted reconnaissance missions to former United Nations
positions and observation posts on the Bravo side on 2 April and 8 May, visiting
Camp Faouar, observation post 71, position 10, observatio n post 72 and position 25
in Khan Arnabeh and observation post 56 in Jaba. The UNDOF Force Commander
also continues his frequent visits and inspections of Camp Faouar and Mount
Hermon on the Bravo side.
26. During the reporting period, UNDOF continued to make progress towards the
limited return to Bravo side operations in line with the phased UNDOF plan. Work
in the current phase of the plan, phase 1, has continued to progress satisfactorily
since 14 November 2016, when UNDOF re-established an initial presence at Camp
Faouar, and conditions have steadily improved in line with the mission support plan.
Building of key infrastructure and accommodation has continued. From an
operational perspective, the security and defence of the Camp have been
continuously practised, and all deployed elements have been integrated into a
cohesive and effective component with clear command and control. Seven armoured
17-09140

5/10

S/2017/486

personnel carriers were deployed to UNDOF on 24 March. This is a positive
development; the armoured personnel carriers form an integral part of the enhanced
force protection and mobility required for current UNDOF operations, particularly
in position 80 in the southern part of the area of separation.
27. Since the commencement of phase 1 in November 2016, no adverse reaction to
the return of UNDOF to Camp Faouar has been perceived. There has been no
increase in combat or threat surrounding the Camp, and no deliberate actions have
been taken by any armed group to threaten the presence of UNDOF on the Bravo
side. This positive assessment is tempered by the continuation of low to medium
levels of military activity in the areas of separation and limitation during this
period. The Mission will continue to monitor the situation so as to ensure force
protection and the safety and security of UNDOF personnel.
28. From 31 March to 6 April, a planning team from United Nations Headquarters
visited UNDOF to develop jointly with the Mission options for progressing the
incremental return to activities on the Bravo side. This included the development of
options for mobile patrolling by the new mechanized infantry company that is
expected to deploy to UNDOF in July 2017 and the finalization of a list of security,
military and logistics/support requirements. Conditions permitting, the ne xt phase
(phase 2) will commence in July 2017 and will include, over a period of six to eight
months, an initial phase of limited patrolling by the mechanized infantry company
from Camp Faouar into the northern part of the area of separation. The movement of
the UNDOF and Observer Group Golan headquarters from Damascus to Camp
Faouar, as well as the movement of the Force Reserve Company from Camp Ziouani
to Camp Faouar, are envisaged in phase 3. That phase will also involve the
refurbishment of physical infrastructure and security preparations for the
reoccupation of select observation posts. A more mobile concept of operations with
heavier reliance on modern technology is required in view of the prevailing and
fluid security situation. The plans envisage an increase in the UNDOF troop
strength from 828 currently to 990, representing 150 troops of the mechanized
infantry company and 12 additional staff officers. The plans also consider the
requirements for the reoccupation of observation post 52, including in terms of
situational awareness and security aspects. Observer Group Golan military
observers would not be deployed at observation posts on a permanent basis until
such time that adequate accommodation is in place and security conditions allow.
During his visit to UNDOF from 7 to 12 May 2017, the Military Adviser of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat reviewed the plans for
the continued incremental return of UNDOF and visited the areas intended to be
patrolled and the observation posts that are planned to be reoccupied.
29. UNDOF continued to resupply its positions on Mount Hermon and Camp
Faouar from Damascus. UNDOF convoys between Damascus and United Nations
positions were conducted almost daily and with an UNDOF security escort,
accompanied by a liaison officer from the Syrian Arab Armed Forces. UNDOF
continued to carry out contingency planning for the reinforcement and evacuation of
United Nations positions and observation posts and to update its contingency
planning for the relocation and evacuation of United Nations personnel on both the
Alpha and Bravo sides, as well as in Damascus. The implementation of risk
mitigation, including force protection measures recommended in the military
capability study of UNDOF, continued at observation posts, positions and the
operational base at Camp Ziouani.
30. As at 15 May, UNDOF comprised 832 troops, including 30 women. Troops are
currently deployed from Bhutan (2), Czechia (3), Fiji (301), Finland (2), India
(195), Ireland (136), Nepal (191) and the Netherlands (2). In addition, 77 military

6/10

17-09140

S/2017/486

observers from UNTSO, including eight women, assisted the Force in carrying out
its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
31. In its resolution 2330 (2016), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to implement immediately its resolution 338 (1973), decided to renew the
mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 30 June 2017, and
requested the Secretary-General to report every 90 days on developments in the
situation and the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for
a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made at various
levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), will be addressed in my report on the
situation in the Middle East, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its seventy second session pursuant to Assembly resolutions 71/24 on the Syrian Golan and
71/25 on Jerusalem.
32. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict is further reducing the
prospects for their resumption and for progress towards peace between Israel and
the Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in
the Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive,
just and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Se curity Council in its
resolution 338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

IV. Financial implications
33. The General Assembly, by its resolution 70/279, appropriated the amount of
$47.7 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2016 to
30 June 2017. As at 18 May 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special
Account for UNDOF amounted to $16.8 million. The total outstandin g assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$1,613.5 million. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to
31 January 2017, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned equipment
has been made for the period up to 31 December 2016, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

V. Observations
34. I note with concern the recent escalation of military activity across the
ceasefire line. In particular, the incident of spillover fire and Israeli retaliatory
action on 21 April, as well as other strikes reportedly conducted by the Israel
Defense Forces in the Syrian Arab Republic, has the potential to escalate tensions
and jeopardize the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. While the majo rity of the
alleged Israel Defense Forces air strikes were reported to have taken place outside
the UNDOF area of responsibility, the increase in military engagement between the
parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement is a serious cause for concer n. I
encourage the members of the Security Council to support efforts to sensitize both
parties and regional stakeholders to the risks of such escalation and the need to
preserve the long-standing ceasefire.
35. As previously reported by UNDOF, the Israel Defense Forces hold the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic responsible for any spillover fire incidents
to the Alpha side, regardless of the point of origin of the fire. It remains critical that

17-09140

7/10

S/2017/486

the parties maintain their liaison with UNDOF in the first instance to prevent any
escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line. It is not acceptable for UNDOF
to be reliant on open sources to determine the extent of a deliberate violation of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement. In addition, the viola tion of the ceasefire line
by the Israel Defense Forces on 13 May increased tensions. For its part, the United
Nations will maintain its efforts to ensure that the long -standing ceasefire between
Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic continues to hold.
36. I remain gravely concerned by the prevailing security situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, its impact on the Syrian population and its implications for the
stability of the wider region. The continued fighting on the Bravo side between the
Syrian armed forces and armed groups, and between different armed groups,
including listed terrorist groups, such as Jabhat Fath al-Sham, and ISIL affiliates,
such as the Khalid ibn al-Walid Army, in the southern part of the areas of separation
and limitation on the Bravo side, as well as the firing of missiles by the Israel
Defense Forces across the ceasefire line, jeopardize the long -term ceasefire between
Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic and continue to significantly affect the UNDOF
area of operation.
37. The presence of the Syrian armed forces and unauthorized military equipment
in the area of separation are violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
The continued use of heavy weapons by the Syrian armed forces and armed groups
in the ongoing Syrian conflict is disturbing and continues to significantly impede
the successful implementation of the UNDOF mandate. I note that while there is a
reduction in the levels of firing in the northern part of the UNDOF area of
operation, listed terrorist groups and other armed groups continue to maintain
control over significant sections of the areas of separation and limitation in the
UNDOF area of operation on the Bravo side. The established crossing between the
Alpha and Bravo sides remains closed.
38. There should be no military forces in the area of separation other than those of
UNDOF. I call upon all parties to the Syrian conflict to cease military actions
throughout the country, including in the UNDOF area of operation, and to remove
all military equipment and all armed personnel from the area of separation.
39. The Israel Defense Forces should refrain from firing across the ceasefire line.
The firing of missiles across the ceasefire line by the Israel Defense Forces has the
potential to escalate tensions between the two sides. The continued presence of
unauthorized weapons and equipment in the area of limitation on the Alpha side is
also of concern.
40. Interaction between the Israel Defense Forces and unidentified individuals
from the Bravo side, including in the area of Mount Hermon, has the potential to
lead to clashes between armed elements and the Syrian Arab Armed Forces. I
reiterate my call to both parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement
regarding the requirement to maintain stability in the area. Al l military activities in
the area of separation conducted by any actor pose a risk to the ceasefire and to the
local civilian population, in addition to the United Nations personnel on the ground.
I call upon all parties to take all measures necessary to protect civilians.
41. As UNDOF consolidates its presence at Camp Faouar and continues its efforts
to intensify its operations in the area of separation, it remains critical that the safety
and security of United Nations personnel be assured. The circumstan ces under
which the troops and military observers are operating remain complex and
challenging, and require continued vigilance and risk mitigation measures. I renew
my call on the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to fulfil its primary
responsibility for the safety and security of United Nations personnel in the areas of
separation and limitation on the Bravo side. I also renew my call on countries with
8/10

17-09140

S/2017/486

influence to strongly and urgently convey to the armed groups in the UNDOF area
of operation the imperative to cease any action in violation of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement, bearing in mind that such actions also jeopardize the safety and
security of United Nations personnel, and to respect the freedom of United Nations
personnel to carry out their clear and important mandate safely and securely. The
safety and security of United Nations personnel must be ensured.
42. Both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated their continued
commitment to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the
presence of UNDOF in calling for a return to vacated positions in the area of
separation. The full return of UNDOF to the area of separation remains a priority for
the Mission. In the next phase, conditions permitting, the deployment of a
mechanized infantry company in July 2017 will enable UNDOF to commence
limited patrolling from Camp Faouar into the northern part of the area of separation.
I count on the continued cooperation of both parties with UNDOF in order for the
Mission to advance its planning for the incremental return to operations and
positions in the area of separation. As a matter of priority, the technology and
equipment necessary to enhance the UNDOF observation of the area of separation
and the ceasefire line, and to improve force protection, remain critical. At the same
time, the parties must continue to support the enhancement of the liaison function of
UNDOF.
43. It is equally important that the Security Council continue to bring to bear its
influence on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate in a safe and secure manner and freely. As long as the area of separation
remains militarized and the presence of armed groups and/or the Syrian Arab Armed
Forces continues, UNDOF will only fulfil its mandate in a limited manner. It is
essential that this issue be addressed by the parties to the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement and in the wider framework of the Syrian political process. Furthermore,
the reopening of the established crossing point at Qunaytirah would benefit the
ability of UNDOF to implement its mandate. It is also necessary for UNDOF to
continue to have at its disposal all means and resources necessary for it to return
fully to the area of separation, conditions permitting.
44. The confidence and commitment of troop-contributing-countries in UNDOF
remains a key factor for the Mission’s ability to carry out its mandate. I continue to
count on the support of troop-contributing countries as UNDOF proceeds with its
planning, including in relation to the augmentation of required capabilities, in
preparation for the envisaged increased operations in the area of separation. I am
grateful to the Governments of Bhutan, Czechia, Fiji, Finland, India, Ireland, Nepal
and the Netherlands for their contributions, their commitment and their resolve. I
am also thankful to the Member States contributing military observers to UNTSO.
45. I consider the continued presence of UNDOF in the area to be essential, and
all the more so under the prevailing circumstances. I therefore recommend that the
Security Council extend the mandate of the Force for a further period of six months,
until 31 December 2017. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has given its
assent to the proposed extension. The Government of Israel has also expressed its
agreement.
46. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Major General Jai Shanker Menon, and the military and civilian
personnel serving under his leadership, who continue to perform the important tasks
assigned to them by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment under
challenging circumstances.

17-09140

9/10

S/2017/486

Annex

10/10

17-09140
