S/2015/163

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 March 2015
Original: English

Special report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2148 (2014), the Security Council endorsed the findings of the
strategic review presented in my special report dated 25 February 2014
(S/2014/138). The review identified three strategic priorities for the African Union United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID):
(a) Mediation between the Government of the Sudan and non-signatory
armed movements on the basis of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, while
taking into account ongoing transformation at the national level;
(b) The protection of civilians, the facilitation of the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and the safety and security of humanitarian personnel;
(c) The provision of support, in conjunction with the United Nations country
team, to the mediation of community conflict, including through measures to
address its root causes.
2.
The review also identified the three main challenges that were impeding the
effective discharge of the mission’s mandate, namely:
(a) The cooperation and partnership of the Government in mandate
implementation;
(b)

Major shortfalls in several troop- and police-contingent capabilities;

(c) The need for improved coordination and integration structures within the
mission and between the mission and the United Nations country team.
3.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council
resolution 2173 (2014), by which the Council requested me, in close cooperation
with the African Union, to conduct an analysis of the implementation of the review
of UNAMID, including specific achievements reached under the revised strategic
priorities, progress in addressing the challenges facing the mission, as identified by
the review, any significant developments in the situation in Darfur and their impact
on the mission’s mandate and tasks, and a road map to transfer to the United
Nations country team those tasks where it had a comparative advantage, taking into
account the contributions of donors and other relevant actors. In addition, the
present report provides recommendations on the future mandate, composition,

15-03224 (E)

190315

*1503224*

S/2015/163

configuration and exit strategy of UNAMID and on the mission’s relationship with
other United Nations actors in Darfur and the Sudan.

II. Main achievements in relation to the three strategic priorities
A.

Inclusive peace process
4.
Efforts towards an inclusive peace process included the continued high-level
engagement of the African Union and the United Nations Joint Special
Representative and Joint Chief Mediator for Darfur with the parties towards direct
negotiations and the facilitation role of UNAMID in the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur.
High-level mediation
5.
The Joint Special Representative and Joint Chief Mediator focused on bringing
the Government and the non-signatory armed groups to direct negotiations, their
persistent divergence of views notwithstanding. The armed groups continued to
press for a comprehensive national process to address the political challenges in the
Sudan and to insist on entering into direct talks as the Sudanese Revolutionary
Front. For its part, the Government insisted on the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur as the exclusive framework for the talks with the Darfur armed movements
and rejected negotiating with the Sudanese Revolutionary Front jointly. During the
first half of 2014, the Joint Special Representative and Joint Chief Mediator
engaged with the parties separately, urging the non-signatory movements to join the
peace process on the basis of the Doha Document and without preconditions and the
Government to create an environment conducive to the resolution of the confli ct.
6.
The discussions were held in the context of the announcement on 27 January
2014 by the President of the Sudan, Omer Hassan A. Al -Bashir, of an all-inclusive
national dialogue that would focus on political and economic reform and
democratization. On 8 August 2014, the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and the
National Umma Party signed the Paris Declaration, in which the former declared its
readiness to cease hostilities as a basis for a credible national dialogue.
7.
Following a meeting on 18 August 2014 in Khartoum between the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, the Special Envoy to the Sudan of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, my Special Envoy for the Sudan and
South Sudan and the Joint Special Representative and Joint Chief Me diator, it was
agreed that the Panel was best placed to leverage its broader mandate to urge and
facilitate the Sudanese armed movements to join the national dialogue, that pre -talks
and confidence-building activities were essential to bridging the gap bet ween the
parties, that the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur should continue to be the
framework agreement addressing the Darfur-specific root causes of the conflict and
that direct talks between the parties would begin in September 2014 to influence
progress on the dialogue.
8.
In that spirit, from 30 August to 3 September 2014 the High -level
Implementation Panel, the Joint Special Representative and Joint Chief Mediator
and the special envoys of the United Nations and the Intergovernmental Authority
for Development held a series of meetings with the leaders of the Justice and

2/18

15-03224

S/2015/163

Equality Movement-Gibril Ibrahim (JEM-Gibril), the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid (SLA/AW), the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM), the
Eastern Front and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North, as well as
representatives of the National Umma Party and the Democratic Unionist Party, to
discuss modalities for their participation in the national dialogue. On 4 September
2014, talks facilitated by the Panel between representatives of the preparatory
committee for the dialogue, composed of representatives of the National Congress
Party, the political opposition and the Paris Declaration Group, resulted in an
agreement on initial talks, facilitated by the Panel, on the cess ation of hostilities
between the Government and armed groups in Darfur and the Two Areas on separate
mediation tracks (referred to as “one process, two tracks”). It was also agreed that
the Panel would facilitate preparatory talks on procedural issues pert aining to the
dialogue.
9.
Since then, tangible progress has been slow. After some delay, the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel convened direct talks between the
Government and SLA/MM and JEM-Gibril in Addis Ababa on 23 November 2014.
The concerted efforts to include all non-signatory rebel groups notwithstanding,
SLA/AW decided not to participate in that round of negotiations. During the talks,
the Government reiterated that it would not reopen the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur for negotiation, while the armed movements insisted that they were not
bound by its provisions. On 26 November 2014, the Panel proposed the inclusion of
security arrangements, political issues, humanitarian issues, the relationship
between the talks and the dialogue and the overall method of work as agenda items.
The Government rejected the inclusion of humanitarian issues as a separate agenda
item, while the armed movements insisted on that point and proposed the addition
of other issues such as development, land and reconciliation. In the light of the lack
of agreement, the Panel adjourned the talks on 30 November 2014 for the parties to
consult their constituencies on the draft framework agreement.
10. The political and armed opposition in the Sudan, including the Darfur armed
movements, adopted a joint declaration known as the “Sudan Call” on 3 December
2014 in Addis Ababa. They pledged to create a comprehensive solution, beginning
with a cessation of hostilities, for the resolution of the conflicts in Darfur and t he
Two Areas and to establish mechanisms with the aim of achieving a popular
uprising or a comprehensive political solution that would lead to the dismantling of
the one party-regime in Khartoum.
11. In January 2015, as the stalemate continued, the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, the Acting Joint Special Representative and Joint Chief
Mediator and my Special Envoy visited Khartoum to engage with the Government
and opposition stakeholders on ways of reviving the negotiations. They also visite d
Doha, N’Djamena and Addis Ababa to brief regional leaders on the process and seek
their support on the way forward.
Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
12. Very gradual and limited progress was made in the further implementation of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur in 2014. As part of the agreement on final
security arrangements, the Government and the Liberation and Justice Movement
(LJM) agreed in February 2014 to integrate three battalions of ex -combatants from
LJM into the Sudanese military and the police. In December 2014, the Darfur

15-03224

3/18

S/2015/163

Security Arrangements Implementation Commission began the integration of 4,664
ex-combatants from LJM in South Darfur and East Darfur. The integration of LJM
combatants in West Darfur began early in February 2015. Meanwhile, the
Implementation Commission began the integration of 1,350 ex -combatants from the
Justice and Equality Movement-Sudan (JEM-Sudan) into the armed forces in August
2014. In November 2014, in collaboration with the World Fo od Programme and the
United Nations Development Programme, UNAMID provided technical and
logistical support to the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission for the demobilization of 534 ex-combatants from JEM-Sudan in
Turbo, North Darfur.
13. JEM-Sudan, which had acceded to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur in
April 2013, was absorbed into its power-sharing arrangements in 2014. Other
important institutions, such as the panels of experts established under the Judicial
Service Commission and the National Civil Service Commission, remained
non-functional, even though their office holders had been named. The Truth, Justice
and Reconciliation Commission and the Special Court for Darfur also remained
non-functional owing to a lack of necessary funds. The Chair of the National
Human Rights Commission, Amal Hassan El Tinay, resigned in August 2014, but
the President of the Sudan did not accept her resignation. The subcommittees of the
Commission to monitor, protect and promote human right s in Darfur have not been
established owing to financial constraints.
14. At the end of 2014, the Darfur Regional Authority indicated that 70 per cent of
the 315 projects launched in the first phase of a three -phase programme under the
Darfur Reconstruction and Development Fund, with funds from the Government of
the Sudan, had been completed. The Government of Qatar provided $88.5 million in
September 2014 to support development projects, but only $10 million has been
disbursed to date.
15. The Darfur internal dialogue and consultation process was launched on
25 January 2015 following the provision of seed money by the Government of
Qatar. Nevertheless, 75 per cent of the funding required for the process has yet to be
provided.

B.

Protection of civilians
16. In 2014, UNAMID provided protection to displaced persons in camps and
around team sites, to wider vulnerable communities through patrolling, including
targeted patrols in relation to firewood and grass collection and farming activities,
and through the strategic redeployment of peacekeepers. The most significant
achievements with regard to the protection of civilians in 2014 were related to the
establishment of protective areas within, or in the vicinity of, the UNAMID team
sites at Saraf Omra and Korma, North Darfur, and Khor Abeche, South Darfur, and
instances in which peacekeepers repelled or prevented attacks against civilians at
Kalma, Labado and Kabkabiya in South Darfur, East Darfur and North Darfur,
respectively.
Saraf Omra, North Darfur
17. During the outbreak of violence between the Northern Rizeigat and Gimir
tribes early in March 2014, an estimated 50,000 people fled to the UNAMID team

4/18

15-03224

S/2015/163

site at Saraf Omra. UNAMID responded swiftly and proactively, constructing a
protective area adjacent to the site, deploying two additional companies to provide
physical protection and redeploying 60 formed police officers to assist with crowd
control and security. The enhanced strength of the site increased the mission’s
capacity to conduct confidence-building patrols. UNAMID also deployed a medical
team to the site and set up an emergency clinic, delivered water and first aid to the
displaced and evacuated 24 seriously injured individuals to El Fasher for medical
treatment. A joint crisis management team comprising members of the UNAMID
military, police and civilian components and selected members of the United
Nations country team was mobilized at the sector level to respond to the crisis.
UNAMID escorted 27 humanitarian vehicles with food and non-food items for those
affected.
18. The mission also provided technical support to the mediation process, which
resulted in the signing on 12 March 2014 of an agreement on cessation of hostilities
between the two tribes. UNAMID has since been actively involved in the
monitoring and implementation of the agreement. All the efforts of the mission and
the United Nations country team to stabilize the situation ultimately led to the
successful return of 66,473 people to their places of origin.
Korma, North Darfur
19. Also in North Darfur, following an attack by armed men on the town of Kobe
on 21 March 2014, 4,000 displaced persons fled to the UNAMID team site at Korma
the following day. As with the case of Saraf Omra, a formed police unit was
pre-emptively redeployed from March to April 2014 for public order management
operations within the camp and to bridge potential gaps in the physical protection of
internally displaced persons during rotations of military battalions. Security and
confidence-building patrols around the site were also enhanced, and the mission
provided the security and logistical support necessary for the delivery and
distribution of humanitarian assistance to displaced persons sheltering at the site.
Khor Abeche, South Darfur
20. On 22 March 2014, some 4,000 people sought refuge at the UNAMID team
site at Khor Abeche, South Darfur, reportedly fleeing attacks by the Rapid Support
Forces (a 5,000-6,000-strong counter-insurgency force raised by the Government)
and unidentified militia. UNAMID personnel provided water and shelter and
enhanced patrols around the newly constructed protective area, while working
closely with the humanitarian community to facilitate the provision of emergency
support. The creation of the protective area follo wed an earlier example of provision
of protection at the site, when clashes between SLA/MM and the Abu Bashar militia
group had led 100 displaced persons to flee to the site on 9 January 2014. In that
instance, increased patrols conducted in and around the area assisted in easing the
tensions and prevented retaliatory attacks.
Kabkabiya, North Darfur
21. An example of a robust protection response with tragic consequences for the
mission was seen on 24 May 2014, when UNAMID troops intervened to protect
civilians at the Birgi market in Kabkabiya from a group of 60 Arab militiamen.
Following earlier altercations between the Arab militiamen and Fur tribesmen from

15-03224

5/18

S/2015/163

the village of Al Salam, UNAMID peacekeepers intervened to facilitate a mediation
meeting in the hope of averting an imminent attack on civilians. During the meeting,
the Arab militiamen became hostile and began shooting at the peacekeepers, who
returned fire. The ensuing firefight resulted in the wounding of four Rwandan
peacekeepers, one of whom later succumbed to his injuries. The mission’s attempts
to defuse the prevailing tensions have since been seen as key factors in ultimately
controlling and preventing a further escalation of the situation.
Kalma, South Darfur
22. In August 2014, upon learning of the Government’s plan to conduct cordon
and search operations inside the Kalma camp, which houses some 250,000
internally displaced persons, UNAMID proactively engaged with the national and
local authorities in an attempt to avert violence and urged them to uphold
international human rights standards and humanitarian law while implementing any
security measures. While the local authorities continued to assert their sovereign
right to enter the camp, they agreed that any government operation wou ld be
coordinated with UNAMID. On 20 August, the Joint Special Representative and
Joint Chief Mediator met the camp’s leaders to reassure them of the mission’s
protection and to urge cooperation with the Government. UNAMID and the United
Nations country team also developed response preparedness plans in the event of an
escalation of tensions in the camp. To enhance its ability to provide protection, the
mission established a temporary operating base near the camp, increased daily
patrols and reinforced the presence of formed police units and individual officers.
The police component also used existing good relations with the internally displaced
community and the local police in Nyala to coordinate mitigation measures and ease
the tensions. Continuous engagement by the UNAMID leadership at the national
level further helped to improve the security situation. No government operation has
been conducted in the camp since those preventive actions were taken by the
mission.
Labado, East Darfur
23. On 8 October 2014, representatives of the estimated 13,200 internally
displaced persons residing at the Labado camp approached the UNAMID team site
at Labado to seek protection, fearing retaliatory attacks by the some 400 armed Arab
militiamen stationed on the outskirts of the camp following clashes with the
Northern Rizeigat. UNAMID proactively engaged with key community leaders, the
leaders of the internally displaced persons and the Government to resolve the issue,
which ultimately led to an agreement and the withdrawal of the militiamen.
Simultaneously, UNAMID worked closely with humanitarian agencies to gain
access to remote locations and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance by
providing escorts and logistical support, undertaking integrated joint mis sions and
contributing to the security of the area.
Um Baru, North Darfur
24. Following reports of aerial bombardment and ground fighting between the
Government and SLA/MM from 7 to 13 January 2015, internally displaced persons
consistently sought shelter in the protective area established by UNAMID adjacent
to its team site at Um Baru, North Darfur. As at 19 February 2015, some 7,500
internally displaced persons had been registered by humanitarian agencies at the

6/18

15-03224

S/2015/163

site, while personnel at the site estimated that up to 23,000 civilians from affected
and nearby villages were seeking protection within its proximity.
25. UNAMID troops in Um Baru provided protection within and in the vicinity of
the team site and, to prevent further displacement, conducted confidence-building
patrols in accessible nearby villages that were not directly affected by the hostilities.
UNAMID supported humanitarian efforts by providing tents, water tanks and
containers, as well as medical assistance to pregnant women, older perso ns and the
unwell, complementing the work of international non-governmental organizations
on the ground. UNAMID police officers assisted women and children, including by
establishing facilities for the delivery of babies. A formed police platoon was
deployed to assist with crowd management during the distribution of relief items.
By early February 2015, humanitarian partners and UNAMID had arranged flights
containing nutrition, water and sanitation supplies and basic household items,
following the denial of road access from El Fasher by the Sudanese authorities.
Meanwhile, food, additional nutrition and water and sanitation items were
dispatched by road from El Geneina, with an escort from the mission.

C.

Intercommunal conflict
26. Four major tribal conflicts occurred in 2014, all of which were contained, to a
certain extent, through the conclusion of peace or cessation of hostilities
agreements.
Ma’alia and Southern Rizeigat, East Darfur
27. The Ma’alia and the Southern Rizeigat clashed three times in May 2014 in the
localities of Adilla and Abu Jabra, East Darfur, over livestock theft, leaving six
Southern Rizeigat and seven Ma’alia tribesmen dead. On 5 July 2014, renewed
clashes in the village of Al Fadul near El Daein left 18 Rizeigat and an u nconfirmed
number of Ma’alia dead. UNAMID engaged with the leaders of both communities at
the state and national levels, including their respective Shura Councils. A
reconciliation conference between the two tribes began on 10 June 2014 in Al Foula,
Western Kordofan, with support from UNAMID, focusing on the need for
government security forces to strengthen the monitoring of the cessation of
hostilities agreement and to ensure the permanent opening of the road between
El Daein and Khartoum.
28. In July and August 2014, hostilities resumed following cattle theft by Southern
Rizeigat at a Ma’alia village. The clashes, involving the Rapid Support Forces and
the Border Guards, left 320 people dead. UNAMID actively engaged with the state
authorities, tribal leaders and members of civil society, calling for immediate
measures to be taken to stop the fighting. A task force consisting of eight
representatives of the two tribes was formed to invigorate the reconciliation process.
Four investigators and five judges were appointed to investigate and prosecute
persons suspected of involvement in the clashes. Those efforts notwithstanding,
tensions remained high because disagreements over ownership, control and
utilization of land and resources had not been resolved sustai nably.

15-03224

7/18

S/2015/163

Ma’alia and Hammar, East Darfur
29. Fighting between the Ma’alia and the Hammar erupted in late May and again
early in July 2014 in the border area between East Darfur and Western Kordofan,
reportedly owing to rustling of Hammar cattle by Ma’alia. The intervention of the
state authorities, through the deployment of government forces, stabilized the
situation. UNAMID engaged with youth leaders to de-escalate the situation and
supported the talks between the two communities in July and August 2014 .
Following a reconciliation conference mediated by a committee composed of tribal
leaders and witnessed by the second Vice-President, an agreement between the
tribes was signed in Al Foula, Western Kordofan, on 27 September 2014. The
agreement was aimed at addressing resource sharing, the amount of blood money
(diya) to be paid and the return of Hammar living in Ma’alia territory and vice
versa. By the end of October, the tribesmen had returned to their respective tribal
areas.
Beni Hussein-Northern Rizeigat, North Darfur
30. Renewed fighting and retaliatory attacks between the Northern Rizeigat and
the Beni Hussein triggered by cattle rustling occurred in El Sireif, North Darfur.
From April to June 2014, the El Sireif-Kabkabiya-Saraf Omra road was blocked by
the Northern Rizeigat to prevent movement by the Beni Hussein. To draw the
Government’s attention to the fighting and increase in killings and attacks in
El Sireif, Beni Hussein community members demonstrated in front of the National
Assembly in Khartoum on 29 June 2014 and submitted a memorandum stating that
1,013 people had been killed and 700 injured since the escalation in violence in
2013.
31. To contain the conflict, UNAMID engaged with tribal leaders, the local and
state authorities and the Sudanese security agencies and provided technical and
logistical support to a reconciliation conference held from 5 to 7 June 2014, which
brokered the release of seven Beni Hussein abducted by Northern Rizeigat on
26 May 2014 and established committees to strengthen existing reconciliation
mechanisms. In addition, a command order was issued on 26 July 2014 to prohibit
the recruitment and use of children as fighters.
32. Fighting subsequently flared up in the localities of El Sireif and Saraf Omra,
where the Beni Hussein and the Northern Rizeigat clashed five times from 25 to
28 August 2014, leaving at least 16 Northern Rizeigat and 25 Beni Hussein dead.
UNAMID engaged extensively with the native administration and tribal leaders
from North Darfur and West Darfur, the state authorities and the Sudanese armed
forces in an effort to contain further clashes and pursue genuine reconciliation.
From 18 to 21 September 2014, Northern Rizeigat and Beni Hussein leaders from
Central Darfur, South Darfur and West Darfur established a peace committee and
conducted campaigns in the Jebel Amer gold-mining area. Those efforts resulted in
the end of the conflict and the restoration of relative calm in El Sireif. UNAMID
encouraged the leaders to continue consultations with t he Northern Rizeigat to open
the blockade of the El Sireif-Kabkabiya-Saraf Omra road, which was hindering the
movement of civilians and curtailing commercial activities in the area. The road
reopened on 28 September 2014. Tensions persist, however, because issues
pertaining to the management of the gold mine remain unresolved.

8/18

15-03224

S/2015/163

Salamat-Misseriya, Central Darfur
33. In February 2014, the Salamat and Misseriya tribes clashed in the village of
Salih, near Um Dukhun, Central Darfur, after the killing of a M isseriya. The
violence left 28 people, mostly Salamat, dead. The deterioration in security in
Um Dukhun following the incident led to the displacement of some 5,000 civilians
who fled to Chad and 10,000 who fled to camps for internally displaced persons i n
South Darfur. UNAMID supported mediation efforts undertaken by traditional
leaders, which helped to quell tensions and prevent further escalation, and provided
technical and logistical support to the Darfur Regional Authority for the
establishment of a reconciliation follow-up mechanism in Central Darfur.
34. In June 2014, violence flared up again near Um Dukhun and Mukjar over
competing land and resource claims, causing significant casualties on both sides. As
a result of the conflict, some 3,700 civilians fled towards Chad; since then, most
have returned to Um Dukhun. More than 100 people from both communities
accused of fomenting the clashes were reportedly arrested. UNAMID engaged with
the Government and the local authorities of both communities with regard to the
root causes of the conflict to encourage the implementation of the cessation of
hostilities agreement of July 2013.

III. Three challenges
A.

Cooperation and partnership of the Government of the Sudan in
mandate implementation
35. Over the course of 2014, the time taken to clear contingent -owned equipment
and issue visas improved somewhat, and measures were taken to address denials of
access. The overall situation, however, remains a cause for concern.
36. With regard to the issuance of visas, of a total of 2,699 requests, 2,616 were
granted, 46 were rejected and 37 remain outstanding after the agreed processing
period of two months.
37. Many long-standing issues pertaining to contingent-owned equipment were
resolved during the year. After more than two years of impasse regarding the
deployment of a utility helicopter unit, however, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the Secretariat decided, in coordination with the troop -contributing
country in question, to deploy the unit to another theatre. Another troop-contributing
country has now pledged to replace the unit and the Department is working to
deploy it by the middle of 2015, assuming that the Government grants all necessary
clearances. Furthermore, in late 2014 and early in 2015, incoming Bangladeshi and
Pakistani troops experienced delays in the issuance of visas and clearances for
contingent-owned equipment, causing inadequate military coverage on the ground.
38. UNAMID developed standard operating procedures whereby patrol teams
were instructed to negotiate access and not turn back until they had received orders
to do so by their higher command. The military component also created an
operational readiness assessment and support team, which visits team sites to ensure
the proper implementation of standard operating procedures, directives and
instructions. Moreover, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations launched a
process of reporting regularly to the Security Council on denials of access. Such

15-03224

9/18

S/2015/163

practices have allowed the mission, with the support of the Council, to pinpoint
sources of denials more accurately and to engage with the Government and armed
movements thereon.
39. Nevertheless, access restrictions, especially in the early stages of conflict,
continued to impede the discharge of the mission’s mandate to protect civilians.
With the beginning of the dry season and the outbreak of hostilities between the
Government and the non-signatory armed movements in January 2015, access
restrictions on routine and verification patrols and humanitarian escorts increased
significantly.
40. In October 2014, following allegations of mass rape in Thabit, North Darfur,
restrictions on access to the area increased considerably. In a press statement on
16 November 2014, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Sudan stated that
UNAMID would not be allowed to visit Thabit owing to the security situation.
41. With the launch of offensive operations in December 2014, the Government
prevented UNAMID from gaining access to East Jebel Marra, including the
localities of Rokero and Golo in Central Darfur, Tawila and Kabkabiya in North
Darfur and Deribat in South Darfur. UNAMID was on 20 occasions denied access to
both the conflict-affected areas and camps for internally displaced persons betwee n
1 December 2014 and 17 February 2015.
42. From 15 February 2014 to 15 February 2015, 502 of 564 requests from United
Nations agencies for security clearance were granted (89 per cent). Similar to the
situation with UNAMID, however, access was frequently denied in the immediate
aftermath of the conflicts that displaced many people in 2014. Six requests for
assessment missions to the areas affected by the conflicts were denied in March and
April 2014, undermining initial efforts to conduct assessments. For the localities of
Al Tawisha and Al Lait in North Darfur, where the armed conflict displaced more
than 61,000 people in March 2014, humanitarian actors were permitted to conduct
an assessment only in mid-April, causing a significant delay of more than a mo nth
in the provision of humanitarian assistance. The localities of Adila and Abu Karinka
in East Darfur, hosting an estimated 123,000 people displaced in 2013 and 2014,
also experienced significant delays in receiving assistance owing to the continuous
denial of access by the local authorities between September 2013 and November
2014. In addition, some areas remain cut off from humanitarian assistance,
including North Jebel Marra in Central Darfur and Sharq Jebel Marra in South
Darfur. Although a breakthrough in access to a part of Jebel Marra came in June
2014 when an inter-agency mission to Guldo in West Jebel Marra was able to
provide some assistance to people in need, no further access has since been granted.
Moreover, the local authorities granted access and requested agencies to provide
assistance in some areas while denying them access to others. The quality of access
was also affected by government-imposed arbitrary conditions, which included the
compulsory use of government escorts, restrictions on the participation of
international staff and requests for the mandatory participation of Humanitarian Aid
Commission staff in assessments.

10/18

15-03224

S/2015/163

B.

Troop- and police-contingent capabilities
Military
43. Over the course of 2014, measures implemented by UNAMID and engagement
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations with troop - and police-contributing
countries helped to improve the effectiveness of the military and police components
of UNAMID. The military component undertook structural and compositio nal
changes, including the establishment of two additional sectors to improve command
and control and the reduction of redundant staff officers, military observers,
enablers and combat units. With the establishment of two additional sectors, the
military sector now mirrors the civilian and police sectors. This has improved
mission coordination and integration. The military component was reduced by
200 military observers, staff officers and liaison officers following a review of their
deployment and tasking. A heavy transport company was also repatriated.
44. The serious shortfalls in contingent-owned equipment have largely been
addressed, with a serviceability rate of close to 90 per cent having been reached. In
that regard, UNAMID and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations engaged
closely with troop-contributing countries during the year to ensure that worn-out
armoured personnel carriers were replaced and spare parts made available to keep
them serviceable. Eight contingents now have an armoured personnel carrier
serviceability rate of 100 per cent, six of between 75 and 99 per cent and only three
of below 75 per cent. The current average total serviceability rate is 92.62 per cent,
compared with 91.98 per cent in the previous quarter.
45. The UNAMID military leadership stepped up its oversight and field -level
guidance to troops on the ground through more regular operational visits to team
sites and crisis locations and the issuance of updated orders, guidelines and standing
operational procedures to enhance operational preparedness, including with regard
to movement restrictions, joint military and police operations, the establishment and
operation of temporary operating bases, the work of the Joint Operations Centre at
the team site level, the handling of armed combatants seeking refuge at UNAMID
camps and convoy operations. The military component also issued guidelines for the
protection of civilians and is training military contingents thereon, which has
resulted in enhanced standardization of procedures.
46. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations stepped up consultations with
troop-contributing countries on requirements to enhance operational efficiency and
predeployment training regarding the protection of civilians. In addition to other
measures, a small arms firing range has been constructed in Sector South, and
additional sectors are using Sudanese armed forces firing ranges in order to
periodically verify that weapons are functioning.
47. In the light of several incidents in which military unit s failed to respond
effectively to armed attacks, UNAMID introduced measures that provide for the
sanctioning and repatriation of relevant contingent members. The mission also
placed added focus on the production of after-action reports to implement lessons
learned and thereby improve military operational capability.
48. Lastly, the military component increased efforts to cooperate with the local
government, carrying out engineering projects to repair and maintain roads and
airfields as well as participating in the rehabilitation of a school in Nyala and a

15-03224

11/18

S/2015/163

hospital in El Geneina. It also provided medical assistance to injured civilians in
government military hospitals and performed 19 medical evacuation missions,
transporting 77 Sudanese citizens, including 30 soldiers, during the period under
review.
Police
49. By December 2014, the UNAMID police component had completed the
streamlining of its strength and command and control structures. At the same time,
it had increased its operational flexibility, proactively deploying formed police units
and individual police officers in response to urgent security threats and providing
immediate protection to internally displaced persons.
50. Moreover, the component established a selection committee and a new
assessment tool to review the skill sets of individual officers. It revised induction
training modules based on actual scenarios on the ground. Several police contributing countries also reviewed their predeployment training and nomination
policies to meet the mission’s requirements.
51. The police component reduced its strength by 723 individual police officers,
four formed police units and four Professional posts. The repatriation of the four
formed police units was completed in July 2014. The remaining 13 un its are based
in 10 team sites, covering 49 camps for internally displaced persons. The overall
serviceability rate for the contingent-owned equipment of the formed police units
was 91.8 per cent as at October 2014, an increase of 9.1 per cent from the fig ure for
December 2013 (82.7 per cent). Furthermore, the situation in relation to armoured
personnel carriers improved during the same period, with an increase of 13.3 per
cent in the serviceability rate from 72.4 per cent (76 serviceable armoured personnel
carriers of the 105 required under the memorandum of understanding) to 85.7 per
cent (72 of the 84 required under the memorandum of understanding). The
improvement stemmed from the repatriation of units with long -standing compliance
issues and continuous engagement with those countries contributing formed police
units.

C.

Need for improved coordination and integration structures within
the mission and between the mission and the United Nations
country team
Internal restructuring
52. Over the course of the year, UNAMID recalibrated its activities towards the
three strategic priorities, discontinued other tasks and conducted a comprehensive
assessment of and adjusted its structures, personnel and material capacity. In that
context, 1,260 posts were identified for abolishment: 770 by 31 March 2015 and the
remaining 490 to follow during the subsequent budget year.
53. The mission substantially revised its management structures, including by
introducing two Deputy Joint Special Representative pillars to provide leadership,
guidance and oversight to 10 substantive sections and the Office of Legal Affairs.
The new configuration allows the Joint Special Representative to focus more
comprehensively on the management of the mission, while at the same time
ensuring that the substantive section chiefs receive the leadership guidance and

12/18

15-03224

S/2015/163

support of the Deputy Joint Special Representatives for the implementation of the
mission’s three strategic priorities. UNAMID has also put in place several new
management and coordination structures that support strategic and operational
decision-making for the implementation of the mandate.
54. At most team sites, military and police personnel are co -located and undertake
some degree of operations jointly (e.g. monthly and long-range patrols). In addition,
the military component has reconfigured its operations to include five sectors, rather
than the previous three, meaning that it is now in line with the civilian substantive
and support configurations. Both the Mission Support Division and substantive
sections have also begun to deploy staff to sector offices and team sites in a more
concerted manner, in order to further strengthen and support mandate implementation
at those levels.
55. The implementation of the recommendations of the strategic review regarding
integration and coordination among UNAMID components and sections included
the continuous improvement of an integrated joint operations centre, including at
the sector headquarters and team sites. A functional three -tiered joint operations
centre is being made operational, with the appointment of its Chief and personnel at
the sector headquarters under way to ensure more seamless communication between
the team sites and the sector headquarters in the field, the mission he adquarters and
United Nations Headquarters. Regarding external communication, the Chief Public
Information Officer has been recruited and a revised communications strategy is
being developed. Nevertheless, the gains made to date in terms of ensuring accura te,
timely and transparent reporting of incidents and issues in Darfur notwithstanding,
there remains significant room for improvement by the mission in that regard.
56. The Mission Support Division has been restructured to better streamline its
operational activities and align them with the global field support strategy. It has
re-engineered the Property Management Section to enable increased oversight with
regard to the management and safeguarding of United Nations assets. The mission
has also introduced a centralized warehousing system and reorganized the Mission
Support Centre to enhance the coordination and support role of the Division,
especially with regard to identifying the needs of all mission components and
coordinating coherent, effective and efficient support plans and strategies for
implementation. The Centre is also being reorganized to better interact with the
United Nations country team and strengthen relations with the host Government and
other external parties.
57. With regard to cooperation between and among the mission’s civilian
substantive sections, the Human Rights Section and the Rule of Law, Judicial
System and Prison Advisory Section have successfully strengthened their
relationships with a view to conducting complementary operations. This has
included the introduction of joint trial monitoring — an initiative that represents a
fresh way of looking at rights within the justice sector in Darfur. The two sections
are also jointly building the capacity of the prison system in Darfur t o manage
institutions in accordance with human rights standards. The Human Rights Section
focuses on compliance with human rights and both sections are concerned with
accountability for grave human rights violations. Consequently, in accordance with
the revised strategic priorities of the mission, the Rule of Law, Judicial System and
Prison Advisory Section has refocused its efforts towards strengthening the capacity
of national actors, with the expectation that those activities will gradually be handed
over to the United Nations country team.

15-03224

13/18

S/2015/163

Collaboration between the mission and the United Nations country team
58. Collaboration between UNAMID and the United Nations country team saw
measured improvement in 2014, both strategically and operationally. At the strategic
level, a joint task force comprising UNAMID and country team staff successfully
revised the integrated strategic framework. A second joint task force was created to
revise the mission’s strategy for the protection of civilians. A coordinatio n
mechanism between UNAMID and the country team also now exists, with meetings
held periodically in Khartoum and El Fasher. In addition, from 4 to 6 November
2014, the Acting Joint Special Representative and Joint Chief Mediator and the
United Nations Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator for the Sudan
undertook a joint visit to Doha for consultations with Qatari officials, during which
funds were approved for the Darfur internal dialogue and consultation process. Also
during the period under review, a support plan under the joint global focal point for
the police, justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in post -conflict and other
crisis situations was finalized. It foresees a joint United Nations rule of law
programme aimed at strengthening the role of the country team in taking on rule of
law activities in line with the mission’s revised priorities. This includes the strategic
co-location of a senior corrections officer at the headquarters of the General
Directorate of Prisons to facilitate the implementation of the five-year strategic
development plan for the Darfur prisons, covering the period 2014 -2018.
59. In the light of evolving concerns with regard to the protection of civilians and
to promote a more coordinated response, together with the United Nations country
team, to the challenges facing UNAMID in implementing its mandate, a joint
UNAMID-country team task force was also established to revise the mission’s
strategy for the protection of civilians, the finalization of which is continuing.
UNAMID continues to review the ways in which it engages with the country team
and the humanitarian country team on matters pertaining to the protection of
civilians. This includes the sharing of information and analysis, as well as the extent
to which existing coordination mechanisms such as the joint protection group can
provide a platform for all partners to contribute to the identification of priorities,
and, ultimately, the provision of a measured protection response. The frequency of
meetings of the group, which is chaired by UNAMID, increased in 2014, allowing
for enhanced coordination between the humanitarian protection sector and the
mission. To increase coordination at the operational level, UNAMID invited United
Nations humanitarian partners to participate in daily operational meetings.
60. Further collaboration is being undertaken on the establishment and
implementation of an effective Darfur-wide early warning and response system,
which will include a monitoring and evaluation mechanism to assess the impact of
the mission’s activities to protect civilians. The monitoring system is a joint effort
between the UNAMID military, police and civilian components and the United
Nations country team and the humanitarian country team (in particular those
agencies within the protection cluster). It aims to review, evaluate and report on the
mission’s responses to protection incidents and overall effectiveness in doing so.
While the mechanism is still being refined at the mission headquarters level, it is
expected to be an integral part of the early warning and response system and will
also be used at the team site and sector levels. A more fully coordinated response
between the mission and the country team and the humanitarian country team is still
required to improve early warning capabilities. This is particularly important for
durable solutions to displacement and migration issues, given that many related

14/18

15-03224

S/2015/163

activities are run by national and international non-governmental organizations. The
enhancement of early warning information, in particular that of a security nature, is
therefore crucial to improving the timely sharing of information with such partners.

IV. Significant developments in the political and
security situation
61. Since the formation of the Sudanese Revolutionary Front in 2011 as a loose
alliance of armed opposition movements, the field of conflict of the armed
movements in Darfur has broadened. In particular, JEM-Gibril divided its efforts
between Darfur and the Two Areas, which, coupled with the absence of its
leadership on the ground, has significantly weakened its presence in Darfur. In
2013, the Government launched a major military offensive in Darfur and the Two
Areas using the Rapid Support Forces, causing large-scale displacement of civilians
in Darfur. From February to May 2014, with aerial and ground support from the
Sudanese military, the Rapid Support Forces succeeded in dislodging the armed
movements from many of their traditional strongholds in the central corridor, as
well as in areas south of Nyala. SLA/MM in particular sustained heavy losses.
62. Clashes decreased between June and early December 2014 owing to the rainy
season and the prospect of direct negotiations with SLA/MM and JEM -Gibril. With
no progress in the talks held in Addis Ababa, however, the Government resumed
offensive operations early in December. Whereas the earlier phase of the operation
had targeted SLA/MM, the second phase concentrated on dislodging SLA/AW from
the hilly terrain of Jebel Marra.
63. The two phases of Operation Decisive Summer have given the government
forces the upper hand in the conflict in Darfur. The non-signatory armed movements,
especially SLA/MM and JEM-Gibril, have been considerably weakened, while
SLA/AW has been confined to a very small geographical area.
64. Intercommunal fighting also led to heavy casualties and some displacements in
2014. Given that the root causes remain largely unaddressed, mediation efforts
leading to peace agreements relieve the underlying problems and grievances of the
communities only temporarily. Of particular concern is the management of the
artisanal gold mines in the Jebel Amer region of North Darfur, which has been at the
heart of repeated clashes between the Northern Rizeigat and Beni Hussein tribes,
and the control over pastures and potential oil-producing areas in the localities of
Adila and Abu Karinka in East Darfur, the battleground of the Southern Rezeigat
and Ma’alia tribes.
65. Lastly, crime, targeting both the local population and Uni ted Nations and
UNAMID personnel and assets, remained a significant source of insecurity. There
were 762 crimes committed against civilians from 15 February 2014 to 15 February
2015, compared with 684 in the previous year (an increase of 12 per cent). The key
factors in the situation include wide circulation of arms, weak rule of law
mechanisms and impunity. Reports indicate that armed Arab tribesmen, unidentified
armed groups and disgruntled and unemployed young people and gangs perpetrated
most of the crimes. Armed Arab nomads often accused internally displaced persons
of initiating attacks against them and, as a result, demanded exorbitant compensation.
The internally displaced persons usually gave in to such demands out of fear of

15-03224

15/18

S/2015/163

retaliatory attacks. Livestock theft and looting often lead to tribal conflict if not
resolved swiftly.
66. A total of 384 crimes targeting United Nations and international
non-governmental organizations were recorded during the period under review,
compared with 373 in the previous period. In 11 incidents of armed attacks on
UNAMID personnel, 5 peacekeepers were killed and 13 injured. The seven cases of
abduction recorded involved 11 United Nations or international non -governmental
organization personnel.
67. The announcement by the President of the Sudan of a national dialogue on
27 January 2014 was followed by significant work towards a comprehensive and
inclusive process in which national grievances could be addressed. In November
2014, with the breakdown of the talks on a cessation of hostilities on Darfur and the
Two Areas, which would have allowed the armed groups to participate in the
dialogue, and the implementation by the Government of measures curtailing
political freedom, the likelihood of holding the dialogue befor e the elections in
April 2015 is in doubt. The Government has suggested, however, that talks can
continue before and after the elections.
68. While the Government is now focused on preparations for the elections,
opposition parties, especially the major parties, have decided to boycott the
elections and suspend their participation in the national dialogue, arguing that
elections should be an outcome of a genuine national dialogue.
69. The humanitarian situation in many parts of Darfur deteriorated signific antly
in 2014. Humanitarian actors estimated that more than 450,000 people fled their
homes as a result of violence — the highest volume of displacement in any single
year since the peak of the crisis in 2004. Of the newly displaced, at least 300,000
are estimated to have remained displaced, for the most part in established camps.
This has driven the total number of internally displaced persons in Darfur to in
excess of 2.5 million, including 1.4 million children, putting further strain on an
already underresourced humanitarian response operation. The suspension or forced
departure of key humanitarian partners, in particular the International Committee of
the Red Cross (which did not resume operations until September 2014), created
additional challenges. The broadly negative trajectory of key humanitarian
indicators has continued in 2015, with at least 40,000 new internally displaced
persons confirmed since the beginning of the year. In North Darfur, the global acute
malnutrition rate is at 28.3 per cent, above the emergency threshold of 15 per cent.
70. While the operating environment for humanitarian actors was extremely
challenging, significant assistance continued to be provided. Some 2.2 million
people, mainly internally displaced persons, received food a ssistance. Another
400,000 people received vouchers allowing them to purchase food in local markets,
a scheme that contributed to the local economy and ensured basic levels of food
security. In rural areas, around 600,000 people received assistance under a food-forassets programme involving the provision of food in exchange for activities
benefiting local communities. Some 1 million people benefited from animal health
services and agricultural inputs such as seeds and tools, while 1.1 million were
provided with sustainable access to improved drinking water. An estimated
3.4 million people were reached with health services and more than 140,000
severely or moderately malnourished children received specialized treatment. There
is scope to scale up that assistance across all sectors if additional resources are made

16/18

15-03224

S/2015/163

available. Nevertheless, just 54 per cent of requirements set out in the humanitarian
community’s strategic response plan had been covered by the end of 2014.
Increased donor support in 2015 will be critical.

V. Recommendations
A.

Mandate, configuration and composition
71. Over the past 12 months, the security and political situation continued to
evolve, with no tangible progress towards a comprehensive resolution of the conflict
in Darfur. In the light of that situation, the three strategic priorities of UNAMID
remain a top priority.
72. The current force deployment is generally aligned with the mission’s mandate
and strategic priorities. The evolution of the security situation on the groun d,
however, suggests that it may be possible to close some team sites or move them to
locations closer to civilians under threat of physical violence. Rising crime in
Darfur has also had a direct impact on the military component, forcing it to assign
significant resources to protecting the mission’s administrative movements and
facilities at the expense, at times, of its ability to take protective measures in
support of the local population in line with its core mandate to protect civilians. A
military capability study will be undertaken in the second quarter of 2015 to assess
current capacity in relation to those challenges. It will make recommendations on
possible adjustments to deployments and the rightsizing of the mission’s military
strength.
73. There are structural and managerial aspects that the mission still needs to
refine and improve. They include its reporting and analysis, its communication
(both internal and external) and the recruitment of staff to fill some key vacant
posts. Over the coming months, UNAMID will focus on finalizing its restructuring
process and further improving its output in accordance with its three strategic
priorities.

B.

Road map for handover to the United Nations country team
74. Pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 2173 (2014), UNAMID
has been working to identify relevant tasks that could be transferred to the United
Nations country team following the revision of the mission’s strategic priorities. In
December 2014 and January 2015, UNAMID and the country team held discussions
on the transfer of tasks, following which a matrix of strategic and operational
activities was prepared. The matrix will be further refined with the country team
over the coming months and presented in my report in May.
75. It is envisaged that the transfer of tasks will be implemented strategically and
pragmatically over the short term, medium term and long term, depending on the
security situation, the availability of funds and capacity. Once an agreement on the
matrix has been reached, an objective assessment of the capacity of the United
Nations country team to take over the tasks identified within it will be carried out.
This will serve as the basis of a realistic road map for the gradual transfer of tasks.
Preliminary indications, however, are that, given the nationwide remit of United

15-03224

17/18

S/2015/163

Nations agencies, funds and programmes in the Sudan, fundamental issues of
security, financial resources and human resources, as well as obvious capacity
constraints, are likely to arise. This will require appropriate intervention by the
Government, donors and other actors to enable the country team to take over tasks
as UNAMID continues to focus on its revised strategic priorities.

C.

Exit strategy
76. Further to the request from the Security Council in resolution 2173 (2014) and
requests from the Government of the Sudan, the assessment team agreed with its
Sudanese interlocutors to establish a joint working group to develop plans for an
exit strategy for UNAMID. During those meetings, the team and the Government
discussed the possibility of implementing the strategy in a phased manner,
beginning with an immediate downsizing of UNAMID military and other
capabilities in relatively safe and stable parts of Darfur where crime was the main
driver of insecurity. The mission’s presence in other parts of Darfur would be
downsized based on benchmarks relating to, among other things, the capacity of the
Government to protect civilians, begin recovery for war-affected communities and
facilitate the return of internally displaced persons. Any downsizing would also
assume the existence of sufficient access and donor support for other United
Nations actors.
77. Following further consultations in Khartoum from 15 to 18 February 2015, the
Government, the African Union and the United Nations agreed on draft terms of
reference for the working group. According to those terms of reference, the
objective of the working group is to develop an exit strategy that would enable a
gradual and phased handover of mandated tasks from the mission to the
Government and the United Nations country team. This would also include an
analysis of those activities that would not continue and the resulting impact on
civilian protection activities. The working group would begin it s work with a
comprehensive review of the situation in Darfur in March 2015, followed by the
development of the road map for the strategy by April 2015. Upon the completion of
its work, the working group would submit a report on the strategy to the
Government, the African Union Commission and the Secretariat. The report would
then be submitted to the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council for consideration and endorsement.

18/18

15-03224
