132

43/15.

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

Prevention and control of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned that acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) has assumed pandemic proportions affecting all regions of the world and represents a threat to the
attainment of health for all,
Recalling its resolution 42/8 of 26 October 1987, Economic and Social Council resolution 1988/55 of 27 July
1988, World Health Assembly resolution WHA4 l.24 of
13 May 1988 2 and other relevant resolutions,
Recalling also the London Declaration on AIDS Prevention, adopted by the World Summit of Ministers of
Health on Programmes for AIDS Prevention on 28 January 1988, 3
Noting with satisfaction the development and implementation of the global strategy for the prevention and control
of AIDS prepared by the World Health Organization, including the establishment of appropriate inter-agency
mechanisms, and noting with appreciation the efforts of
the World Health Organization, other United Nations
agencies and funds, and national Governments,
Recognizing the urgent need to pursue multilateral efforts to promote and improve human health, control disease and extend health care in order to accomplish the objective of health for all by the year 2000,
I. Reaffirms the established leadership and the essential role of the World Health Orgamzation in the global direction and co-ordination of AIDS prevention, control, research and education, commends those Governments
which have initiated action to establish national programmes for the prevention and control of AIDS in line
with the global strategy for the prevention and control of
AIDS prepared by the World Health Organization, and
urges other Governments to take similar action;
2. Takes note of the World Health Organization Global Programme on AIDS, and stresses the continued need
for adequate resources for its implementation and the corresponding need to continue to share the pool of worldwide medical and scientific knowledge and experience in
the control and prevention of the disease;
3. Notes that the World Health Organization has declared I December 1988 World AIDS Day, and stresses
the importance of the appropriate observance of that occasion;
4. Affirms that the struggle against AIDS should be
consistent with and not divert attention from other national public health priorities and development goals or divert international efforts and resources needed for overall
health priorities;
5. Calls upon all States, in addressing the AIDS problem, to take into account the legitimate concerns of other
countries and the interests of inter-State relations;
6. Invites the World Health Organization to continue
to facilitate the exchange of information on and promotion of national and international research for the prevention and control of AIDS through the further development of Collaborating Centres of the World Health
Organization and similar existing mechanisms;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in view of all the aspects of the problem, in particular the socio-economic and
2 See World Health Organization, hirly-jirst World Health Assembly.
Geneva, 2-13 May 1988. Resolutions and Decisions. Annexe,
(WHA41 / 1988/REC/ I).
3 A/43/341-E/1988/80, annex. appendix L

humanitarian aspects, to continue to ensure, in close cooperation with the Director-General of the World Health
Organization and through the appropriate e~isting m~chanisms, a co-ordinated response by the United Nations
system to the AIDS pandemic;
8. Urges all appropriate organizations of the United
Nations system, including the specialized agencies, bilateral and multilateral agencies and non-governmental and
voluntary organizations, in conformity with the global
strategy, to continue to support the world-wide struggle
against AIDS;
9. Invites the Director-General of the World Health
Organization to report to the General Assembly at its
forty-fourth session, through the Economic and Social
Council, on further developments in the global AIDS pandemic, and requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider the report in accordance with its mandate.
38th plenary meeting
27 October 1988

43/52.

Special programme of assistance to the Sudan

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 43/8 of 18 October 1988 on
emergency assistance to the Sudan, in which it recognized
the disastrous impact of torrential rains and unprecedented floods that devastated Khartoum and the north of
the country in August 1988, causing the destruction of
over 300,000 dwellings and widespread damage to the
country's social and economic infrastructure,
Recalling the Substantial New Programme of Action for
the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries,4
Deeply concerned about the serious plight of over two
million Sudanese nationals who have been displaced or
seriously affected by civil strife, famine and drought,
Noting that these grave problems are in addition to those
already created in the country by the presence of over
one million refugees,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need to take emergency
action to alleviate the suffering of these victims and improve the conditions of life of the displaced population,
Conscious of the great efforts of the Government and the
people of the Sudan in responding to the urgent
humanitarian needs of the displaced population,
Noting with satisfaction the prompt response made by a
number of Governments, international agencies and nongovernmental organizations in providing emergency relief,
Recognizing that the magnitude of these disasters and
their long-term consequences will require, in addition to
the ongoing efforts of the Government and the people of
the Sudan, a demonstration of international solidarity and
humanitarian concern to ensure broad support in order to
meet immediate emergency as well as longer-term
rehabilitation needs,

4
Report of the L'ni1ed \atiom Conji>rence on the Lcmt Developed
Countries, Paris. /-14 S,ptc111hcr /9/i/ (llnited "lations punlication, Sales
No E.~2.1.8). part one. ,eel. A.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seco·nd Committee

- - - - - - - ~ - · - - ·----

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 5 concerning the findings and recommendations of a high-level
mission, which assessed the conditions of the displaced
population and assisted in the formulation of an interim
assistance programme focusing on the urgent
humanitarian and rehabilitation requirements of the displaced,
1. Expresses its solidarity with the Government and the
people of the Sudan in facing a grave and complex
humanitarian and economic situation;
2. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to Governments and international and non-governmental organizations that provided support and assistance to the Government of the Sudan in its relief and rehabilitation efforts;
3. Recognizes the valuable efforts of the Government
of the Sudan to provide assistance to the people affected;
4. Recognizes also the importance of intense and wide
co-operation with international relief organizations, as
well as non-governmental organizations, to ensure the
provision of humanitarian assistance where needed in all
areas affected;
5. Takes note of the interim assistance programme
contained in the report of the Secretary-General; 5
6. Calls upon all States to contribute generously to
programmes for the relief and rehabilitation of displaced
persons;
7. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts to make the international community more
aware of the enormous difficulties facing the displaced
population and to mobilize assistance to the Sudan;
8. Welcomes the decision of the Secretary-General to
organize, as requested by the Government of the Sudan
and in close co-operation with the United Nations Development Programme and the World Bank, a meeting of
bilateral donors and pertinent international institutions
and non-governmental organizations in order to mobilize
resources needed to implement a follow-up emergency assistance programme covering the rehabilitation and resettlement needs of displaced persons;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to apprise the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of
1989 of his efforts and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session.
70th plenary meeting
6 December 1988

43/53.

Protection of global climate for present and future generations of mankind

The General Assembly,
Welcoming with appreciation the initiative taken by the
Government of Malta in proposing for consideration by
the Assembly the item entitled "Conservation of climate
as part of the common heritage of mankind",
Concerned that certain human activities could change
global climate patterns, threatening present and future
generations with potentially severe economic and social
consequences,
Noting with concern that the emerging evidence indicates that continued growth in atmospheric concentrations of "greenhouse" gases could produce global warming with an eventual rise in sea levels, the effects of which
could be disastrous for mankind if timely steps are not
taken at all levels,

5 A/43/755.

133

Recognizing the need for additional research and scientific studies into all sources and causes of climate change,
Concerned also that emissions of certain substances are
depleting the ozone layer and thereby exposing the earth's
surface to increased ultra-violet radiation, which may pose
a threat to, inter alia, human health, agricultural productivity and animal and marine life, and reaffirming in this
context the appeal, contained in its resolution 42/ 182 of
11 December 1987, to all States that have not yet done so
to consider becoming parties to the Vienna Convention for
the Protection of the Ozone Layer, adopted on 22 March
1985, and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, adopted on 16 September 1987, as
soon as possible,
Recalling its resolutions 42/186 and 42/187 of 11
December 1987 on the Environmental Perspective to the
Year 2000 and Beyond and on the report of the World
Commission on Environment and Development, respectively,
Convinced that changes in climate have an impact on development,
A ware that a considerable amount of valuable work, particularly at the scientific level and in the legal field, has already been initiated on climate change, in particular by
the United Nations Environment Programme, the World
Meteorological Organization and the International Council of Scientific Unions and under the auspices of individual States,
Welcoming the convening in 1990 of a second World
Climate Conference,
Recalling also the conclusions of the meeting held at Villach, Austria, in 1985, 6 which, inter alia, recommended a
programme on climate change to be promoted by Governments and the scientific community with the collaboration
of the World Meteorological Organization, the United
Nations Environment Programme and the International
Council of Scientific Unions,
Convinced that climate change affects humanity as a
whole and should be confronted within a global framework so as to take into account the vital interests of all
mankind,
1. Recognizes that climate change is a common concern of mankind, since climate is an essential condition
which sustains life on earth;
2. Determines that necessary and timely action should
be taken to deal with climate change within a global
framework;
3. Reaffirms its resolution 42/184 of 11 December
1987, in which, inter alia, it agreed with the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
that the Programme should attach importance to the
problem of global climate change and that the Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment Programme
should ensure that the Programme co-operates closely
with the World Meteorological Organization and the International Council of Scientific Unions and maintains an
active, influential role in the World Climate Programme;
4. Considers that activities in support of the World Climate Programme, approved by the Congress and Executive Council of the World Meteorological Organization
and elaborated in the system-wide medium-term environment programme for the period 1990-1995, which was approved by the Governing Council of the United Nations

6 See Un ired Nations Environment Programme, Annual Report of the
Executive Director. 1985 (UNEP/GC.14/2), chap. IV, paras. B8-140.
