s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/24623
6 October 1992
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3120th meeting, on 6 October 1992, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "Oral report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM II)":
"The Security Council has followed closely the electoral process
which took place in Angola on 29 and 30 September 1992 in accordance with
resolution 696 (1991), which it adopted on 30 May 1991 following the
peace agreements. The Council is gratified that the presidential and
parliamentary elections were held throughout the country in a calm
atmosphere and with the participation of a large number of voters. It
also wishes to express once again its full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and its gratitude for the
outstanding efforts that she has made, together with all the personnel of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II), to ensure the
implementation of that resolution and in particular the smooth conduct of
the electoral process.
"The Council expresses its concern at the reports it has received,
according to which one of the parties to the peace agreements is
contesting the validity of the elections. It is also concerned that
certain Generals belonging to the same party have announced their
intention of withdrawing from the new Angolan Armed Forces.
"The Council calls upon all the parties to respect the obligations
they have assumed within the framework of the peace agreements, and in
particular the obligation to respect the final election results. Any
challenge must be settled through the mechanisms established for that
purpose.

92-48447

3512h (E)

I • ••

S/24623
English
Page 2
"The Security Council has decided to send to Angola as quickly as
possible an ad hoe commission, composed of members of the Council, to
support the implementation of the peace agreements, in close cooperation
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The membership
of this Commission will be established in the near future following
consultations among the members of the Council."
