S/PV.7533

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7533rd meeting

Tuesday, 13 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rajoy Brey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Delgado
Mr. Cherif
Ms. Maira
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Baroness Verma
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2015/716)
Letter dated 1 October 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Spain to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/749)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-30986 (E)
*1530986*

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2015/716)
Letter dated 1 October 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of Spain to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/749)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In my capacity as President of the Government of
Spain, I should like to pay tribute to all those killed last
weekend in Turkey, Chad and Cameroon, as well as to
those injured who are still struggling between life and
death. My Government has strongly condemned these
terrorist attacks, and I wish to extend my condolences
to the families and express my solidarity with the
people of Turkey, Chad and Cameroon.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the following countries to participate
in this meeting: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Algeria, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab

2/96

13/10/2015

Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women; Ms. Julienne Lusenge
and Ms. Yanar Mohammed, both of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security; and Ms. Alaa
Murabit, of Voice of Libyan Women.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principal Adviser for Gender
Issues, European External Action Service of the
European Union; and Her Excellency Ms. Bineta Diop,
Special Envoy of the Chair of the African Union, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
representatives to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Alexander Vershbow, Deputy Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization; His Excellency
Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States; His Excellency Mr. Francisco
Laínez, Chief of Staff of the Assistant SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of American States; and
Her Excellency Ms. Miroslava Beham, Senior Adviser
on Gender Issues of the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/716, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/749, which contains a letter dated
1 October 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
Spain to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept note on the item under
consideration.
15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Spanish presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this important meeting.
(spoke in English)
Fifteen years ago, resolution 1325 (2000)
underscored the pivotal link between gender equality
and international peace and security. Since then, the
Council has adopted several resolutions on women and
peace and security, each of them a call to action for the
international community.
I am personally committed to implementing those
resolutions. I have highlighted women’s leadership in
peacebuilding as a priority. I have appointed five women
who are now serving as my Special Representatives in
peacekeeping missions from Haiti to Côte d’Ivoire, from
the Western Sahara and South Sudan to Cyprus. I have
also appointed the first-ever female Force Commander,
Major General Kristin Lund, in Cyprus.
But all of us must do much more. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1) emphasizes the centrality of gender
equality and the need to step up our efforts for women’s
empowerment to achieve Planet 50-50. Our strategies
for implementing resolution 1325 (2000) must be
aligned with the vision of the Sustainable Development
Goals.
On the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), I suggested that the Council
convene a ministerial-level review every five years
to assess progress, renew commitments and address
obstacles. I thank Member States for having come
forward today to share their achievements. I look
forward to hearing their plans for even stronger action.
This year we have conducted three major reviews
of United Nations peace operations, our peacebuilding
architecture, and women and peace and security. One
common theme has emerged: any reforms must include
gender equality and women’s leadership as central
ingredients and must be strongly grounded in human
rights.
We must also pay particular attention to those
women who are most vulnerable. Facing a compound
disadvantage of gender and ethnicity, indigenous
women suffer from multiple forms of discrimination,
especially in times of conflict. We must also do
much more to combat the growing spread of violent

S/PV.7533

extremism. Groups such as Daesh and Boko Haram have
mercilessly targeted women and girls. For example,
the systematic acts carried out by Daesh against the
Yazidi community, which include killings, torture,
rape and sexual slavery, may amount to war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. We must ensure
accountability.
As we look ahead, we have an ambitious agenda.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
restructuring the gender architecture at Headquarters
and in field missions, strengthening the partnership
with UN-Women and improving the accountability of
senior managers.
The Department of Political Affairs has highlighted
the need to deploy gender advisers to all special
political missions. It is working to bolster the capacity
of its gender team at Headquarters and to keep
expanding the engagement and participation of women
in peacemaking.
The Department of Field Support is implementing
strengthened measures to address sexual exploitation
and abuse, and to increase the representation of women
in peacekeeping, especially at the senior management
level. With my appointment of a Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, we have seen strategic
leadership and unprecedented advances on this critical
aspect of the women and peace and security agenda. We
must ensure that these gains are reinforced, particularly
the concerted focus on prevention, accountability and
the critical needs of survivors of sexual violence.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs will ensure that the outcomes and commitments
of the upcoming World Humanitarian Summit, to be
held in Istanbul in May, have a strong focus on gender
equality. We will also boost efforts to ensure that
women and girls affected by crises are systematically
prioritized in the planning and implementation of
humanitarian responses.
I personally commit to do all I can to ensure
that we reach the target of devoting 15 per cent of
peacebuilding funds to projects that address gender
equality and the empowerment of women. We must also
expand this target to our efforts in emerging areas of
peace and security threats, in particular the countering
of violent extremism. The Under-Secretary-General,
Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) will present these and other commitments

15-309863/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

as part of the highlights of my annual report on women
and peace and security.
In preparation for this high-level review, I
commissioned an independent expert’s assessment.
The global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) is an important part of the United
Nations agenda for change. I thank the lead author,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the high-level advisory
group, UN-Women and other United Nations entities,
Member States and civil society for their important
contributions.
At a time when armed extremist groups place the
subordination of women at the top of their agenda, we
must place women’s leadership and the protection of
women’s rights at the top of ours. In the face of daunting
challenges, I am encouraged and inspired by the recent
commitments of everyone from world leaders to grassroots activists. I expect a similar level of determination
and ambition from the long list of Member States that
have requested to participate in this open debate today.
Let us heed the call for action and work together to
empower women and girls, protect their human rights
and advance world peace for everyone — all cornerstones
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and a
life of security and dignity for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: Today marks the first
time — and a welcome opportunity — that a Head of
Government is presiding over the Council’s meeting on
women and peace and security. I thank His Excellency
the President of Spain for presiding over this debate
today, for the priority Spain has given to this issue since
joining the Council, and for Spain’s championing of
gender equality for many years. I also thank the United
Kingdom for its leadership on women and peace and
security in the Council.
I would like to recognize our three civil society
briefers, Julienne Lusenge from the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Yanar Mohammad from Iraq, and
Alaa Murabit from Libya. The voices of women leaders
and front-line activists for peace are rare in this forum,
but I suggest they are the most important voices that will
be heard today. Our work with human rights defenders
has taught us that they are the true unsung heroes.

4/96

13/10/2015

Friday’s announcement of the awarding of this year’s
Nobel Peace Prize to the Tunisian National Dialogue
Quartet underlined civil society’s vital contribution
to promoting reconciliation and human rights, and we
celebrate this recognition. Such peacemakers include
the vibrant women’s movement, which continues to
work tirelessly to safeguard some of the gains made
in the context of the Arab Spring and elsewhere, and
realize justice and reconciliation through their active
engagement in civic life.
In my first two years as Executive Director of
UN-Women, I have travelled and followed our work
in displacement camps in Central Africa, Syrian
refugee camps in Jordan, and in South Sudan, where
women peace activists shoulder the unseen burden of
keeping communities together in the worst of times and
under the worst of circumstances. I have seen both the
relevance of resolution 1325 (2000) and, conversely,
the many missed opportunities where it has not been
put into effect, with dire costs. More recently, I have
been to the Philippines and to Colombia, where women
continue to make extraordinary efforts to secure
peace. Their presence at the table contributed to
positive outcomes. The agreements reached represent
the interests of women and of society as a whole.
UN-Women is honoured to continue to support the
formidable Colombian women.
Where women are at the peace table, they are able
to make compromises that allow for faster progress,
but not at the expense of core aspects of long-term
sustainability. In Colombia, where the talks are still
ongoing, in the most recent agreement on justice,
women have secured an agreement that states that there
would be no amnesty for sexual-violence crimes.
We face new challenges. Extremist groups are
targeting women’s rights as a deliberate, devastating
method of subjugation and control. We have to take this
very seriously and we continue to focus on it. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s commitment, in his
upcoming plan of action to prevent violent extremism,
to addressing women’s participation, leadership, and
empowerment as keys to addressing the drivers of
extremist violence. We welcome also his call to extend
the 15-per cent financing goal on peacebuilding within
the United Nations to cover funds addressing violent
extremism. I would like to pay tribute to the work of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Zainab Bangura, who has done

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

much to raise the profile of this issue and ensure that it
is taken as seriously as it warrants.
A growing body of evidence shows that perhaps
the greatest and most underutilized tool we have for
successfully building peace is the meaningful inclusion
of women. This is the highlight finding of the global
study that informs this high-level review. The study
found that women’s leadership and participation ensure
the inclusion of community needs to achieve deeper
peace benefits, improve our humanitarian assistance,
strengthen the protection efforts of our peacekeepers,
contribute to the conclusion of peace talks and the
sustainability of peace agreements, enhance economic
recovery after conflict, and help counter violent
extremism. It is backed by extensive evaluations,
statistical databases and academic research.
This is an area in which the whole United Nations
family, including the Security Council and regional
bodies, are now confronted by the need to make
irreversible change. That change is to ensure that women
are not the missing, yet vital factor to make the lasting
peace for which we all long and strive. I am grateful
to the study’s author, Radhika Coomaraswamy, and the
members of the high-level advisory group for the global
study, for their time and dedication, which often went
beyond the call of duty. I also thank the Department
of Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and all other United Nations partners for
their increased efforts to support gender equality.
Let us now turn to some of the detail of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716) that I have the
privilege to present to the Security Council today on
his behalf. It recognizes several markers of progress.
Between 1990 and 2010, only 11 per cent of peace
agreements even mentioned women or gender issues. In
recent years, this has climbed to half of all agreements,
and the percentage is higher when the United Nations is
involved. There are more women in mediation support
teams and more regular consultations with civil society
leaders. Countries and regional organizations are
beginning to take more robust action against sexual
violence. Courts and commissions of inquiry are
paying more attention to gender-based crimes, even
though this has not yet translated into higher levels of
prosecution. All three reviews on international peace
and security — peace operations, peacebuilding,
and women and peace and security — have made
important commitments to strengthening our capacity

S/PV.7533

and stepping up our actions in this area. I welcome the
Secretary-General’s invitation to review the genderrelated implications of all three reviews before the end
of the year.
But the report also notes many areas of concern
and stagnation. Fifteen years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), it finds that political will,
financing, accountability, attitudinal and institutional
barriers, and a lack of expertise and awareness continue
to be obstacles. Women’s participation is still symbolic
or low at peace tables. This is as unreasonable as peace
tables that would exclude men. The large investments
in rebuilding countries typically neglect women’s
economic activities or confine women to the informal
economy.
Donors do not go far enough to target women’s
organizations for support, yet it is the latter’s dedication
to peace that has proven to be the only way that women’s
needs are noticed and serviced. In fact, only 10 per cent
of aid to peace and security interventions in fragile
States targets gender equality as a principal objective.
Gender equality is almost completely ignored in
reforms of the security sector even in the most genderaware nations.
This is a space that is in need of role models. We
need many more women in police forces, military
forces and our peacekeeping operations to enhance our
operations and peace efforts. Currently, 97 per cent
of peacekeepers and 90 per cent of police officers are
men. Further, alarmingly, the percentage of girls in
secondary education in conflict countries has dropped,
and rates of maternal mortality in these settings are
more than double the global average. In the midst of the
biggest wave of displacement on record, with countless
families torn apart or separated, 27 countries still have
nationality laws that discriminate against women,
thereby contributing to render children stateless.
The United Nations itself has not yet met its targets
in gender equality, including gender balance or having
gender equality as a focus for spending. For example, we
spend more than $9 billion a year on our peacekeeping
and special political missions, but we are currently
unable to track how much of it is invested in advancing
gender equality. And there are still cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse in our missions. We are thankful
that the Secretary-General has again been raising the
alarm over the unacceptable price of inaction on this
issue.

15-309865/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

On a positive note, I am pleased to announce the
establishment of the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action. This new fund will channel more resources to
women’s organizations building peace and responding
to humanitarian emergencies. I invite all countries to
support it as one concrete way to respond to the study.
As part of the paradigm shift that can be associated
with the study’s findings, let us note that the study
shows the benefit of investing in preventive action and
early warning, rather than retaliatory action. Military
spending has a direct impact on the increased suffering
of women for generations. Militarization is on the rise
and the global cost of violence is estimated at over
$14 trillion. We must have faith in our original vision
for resolution 1325 (2000) not to make armed conflict
safer for women and girls, but to prevent war in the
first place. Our challenge now will be taking steps
toward proper funding and execution of the study’s
ambitious targets. Many of the much-needed changes
are in the hands of the Member States represented in
this Chamber.
As I close, let me remind the Council of the
inescapable logic of the study’s findings, reflected
in the Secretary-General’s report, and which should
galvanize us to action. These are some key areas.
Every peace process we wish to be sustainable must
include women. We must incentivize countries to
transform the security forces in all United Nations
Member States, increasing the numbers of women
in leadership positions; we must also learn to value
the voice of civilians in peacemaking. We must take
strong action against violators, working as a group to
ensure that individual countries are not able to shield
perpetrators of crimes from justice. We must take steps
to build the status of women’s human rights defenders,
and we must act and invest to prevent conflict. Where
conflict is entrenched, we must move away from a view
of peacekeeping as a series of short-term projects and
treat peacebuilding as a long-term action, with longterm funding, and women as core partners. Preventing
conflict and peacebuilding is an institution we need to
build and invest in, as we do for the health or education
institutions that we cannot do without.
As we look forward now to implementing the new
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), we should recall the strong
interdependence between all the goals. Goal 16, on
just, peaceful and inclusive societies, is intrinsically

6/96

13/10/2015

linked to Goal 5, on achieving gender equality and
empowering all women and girls.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Lusenge.
Ms. Lusenge (spoke in French): I am the Director
of the Congolese Women’s Fund and the President of
Solidarité féminine pour la paix et le développement
intégral. I am also here on behalf of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.
Seven years ago, in 2008, I came to New York
to speak in the Security Council. I described the
conflict in my country, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I set out in detail the sexual violence, murders
and massacres. I came to ask for concrete action for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the integration of the fight against sexual violence
in peacekeeping missions. Today, 15 years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and seven years
after my first briefing to the Council, I am once again
addressing this body. I thought long and hard before
deciding to come back here, and wondered whether or
not it was worth the effort.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was replete with hope.
But what change has it brought about in women’s
lives — we women in conflict situations? Yanar, Alaa
and I come from different regions and situations, but
we share common experiences: the exclusion of women
in the political, social and economic spheres. That is
precisely why nothing has changed. Women should
be actively included at all levels of decision-making
and peace processes. If we want — and if the Council
wants — genuine security and world peace, the Council
should at last seriously and definitively include women
in all stages of the peace process, whether at the level of
women in villages or at the Government level. Coming
from the violence in our daily lives, we Congolese
women force the door to participate and thus take our
place in peace processes, in accordance with resolution
1325 (2000).
In 2013, during the talks with the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) armed group in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as that group was decimating
the population and women were suffering violence and
unimaginable atrocities, women in North Kivu asked to
participate in the process. Does the Council know the
answer? There are only two sides in the conflict: either
you are with the Government or you are with the М-23.
15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

Therefore, what is the message to our brothers, our
sisters and our young people? We must take up arms
to be able to come to the table for peace talks. There
will never be lasting peace without the participation of
women.
Women are the first victims of the war, but they are
the key to peace. At the moment, women in Rutshuru,
Beni and my own region in North Kivu are being
murdered, massacred, slaughtered and eviscerated.
They suffer rape and sexual violence, abduction and
sexual slavery. They are us: my nephew was killed
by rebels of the Ugandan Allied Democratic Forces. I
could even provide the number and names of the women
killed in the course of a year. In Beni, more than 234
were either killed, strangled or eviscerated.
That is why I and all women ask the Council to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) via concrete actions.
The Council has heard the desperate cries of women
many times, without really hearing them. Do not let
them go ignored today. I hope today will finally be the
day to put an end to this cycle of violence.
On the ground, we are ensuring that victims become
survivors by providing a holistic approach. We help
women acquire skills for economic empowerment and
to know their rights. We facilitate their reintegration
into their communities so that they can participate
in development as agents of change. In that way they
regain their dignity. The Council must therefore support
women’s grass-roots groups and the environment for
peace they create at all levels.
Women are actively working to build peace. Armed
groups attack us and threaten us. They injure us. They
try to rape our colleagues. But despite all that, we
continue to work. Unprotected, we sensitize young
people to dissociate themselves from armed groups
and create a welcoming environment for dialogue that
can build lasting peace in villages, the country and
the region. Those efforts must be supported, not only
with words and applause but with concrete actions and
means.
The United Nations must identify various
approaches to ensure that women have official positions
in the building of peace. In that regard, I welcome the
Secretary-General’s briefing today. I also welcome
the appointment of a woman to lead the peacekeeping
mission in my country. The platform for women
with regard to the Addis Ababa Accord, initiated by
Ms. Mary Robinson as Special Envoy to the Great

S/PV.7533

Lakes Region, is a mechanism that can involve women
in the peace process. Unfortunately, the Members of
the United Nations are not supporting that innovative
mechanism. In the end, three countries have indeed
supported it. That has enabled us to bring together
the women of Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo around the Addis
Ababa framework agreement. The United Nations and
the international community must demand the presence
and participation of women in the peace talks. We must
provide women with the means to enable them to attend
formal negotiations, and not only at the junior level of
the talks.
Justice consolidates peace, and peace is nourished
by justice. My colleagues and I contribute to the training
of police and magistrates so that they understand the
law and the participation of women, so that women
can bring complaints to the police and the latter can
carry out fair investigations. Police commissioners
and certain magistrates and judges now call on us
and work with us when there are new cases of sexual
violence. And we have won judgements, always in the
quest for fair justice. For us, therefore, justice reform
boils down to the effective training, equipping and
staffing of judicial actors, as well as improving their
working conditions and rebuilding prisons. A victim
reparations programme should urgently be developed.
All perpetrators of crimes of sexual violence, including
United Nations peacekeeping soldiers, must be brought
to justice.
We urgently need specialized mixed chambers such
as those set up for Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, so as
to address the serious international crimes that have not
been addressed by the International Criminal Court.
Beyond that, however, we also need a comprehensive
reform of our national justice system.
The international community must continue to
support the peace efforts in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to root out armed groups and secure
the places were women live. The leadership of
peacekeeping missions should meet regularly with
women’s organizations and community leaders. They
must listen to and quickly investigate allegations made
by the local population, and not just dismiss them as
rumors. The voices and needs of local people must
drive the missions. The Security Council and the United
Nations should continue to support local efforts towards
stability. A peacekeeping mission cannot become a
career; it must be focused and produce concrete results.

15-309867/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

The destruction of the Congo has lasted for over
20 years. That is enough now. After 15 years of good
intentions, it is high time to give women the authority
and the tools with which they can build a better world
for everyone.
In conclusion, sanctions must be put in place against
leaders who carry out acts of terror and violence during
elections. For there can be no democracy and lasting
peace without fair elections under safe conditions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Lusenge for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mohammed.
Ms. Mohammed: I am here today as the co-founder
and President of the Organization of Women’s Freedom
in Iraq. On behalf of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, as we reflect on the
fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), I
implore the Security Council and the entire international
community to take action on implementing its women
and peace and security commitments.
Much of what Ms. Julienne Lusenge has said is
applicable to my country, Iraq, and to neighbouring
Syria. These situations illustrate why peace will never
be established as long as Governments fail to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and consider the rights and
concerns of women.
As the world’s attention is on the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), let us remember that ISIS
arose from ongoing conflicts in Syria and Iraq in which
the rights of women, girls, lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender persons and other marginalized groups
had already been devalued, leaving them far more
vulnerable to abuse by ISIS and other combatants.
This violence has helped to produce the largest wave of
refugees in modern history.
To understand the crisis for Iraqi women today,
one cannot ignore what has happened, beginning in
2003. A Government was formed as a result of politics
of division based on sect, ethnicity and gender. This
Government failed to uphold the basic rule of law,
allowing extremists to take up positions of power. Ten
years ago, Iraqi women spoke to the Security Council
about their situation. What would Iraq look like if the
Council had heeded those calls then and promoted an
inclusive process in which women and minority groups
were fully engaged?

8/96

13/10/2015

The situation that we now have in Iraq bears the
twin hallmarks of what eventually occurred — the
subjugation of women and the disenfranchisement of
minority groups. Indeed, instead of building a unified
democracy, those empowered by the occupation
designed the State and the new Constitution to guarantee
their own rule. Speaking in the name of religion, these
politicians denied Iraqi women their rights as citizens
and as political leaders who could truly represent
women.
Women’s rights were hijacked by articles of the
Constitution that guaranteed the interests of religious
groups at the expense of human rights, making Iraqi
women vulnerable to sharia law. Since then, Iraqi women
have experienced unprecedented disempowerment and
violence. In fact, within a decade, a century of women’s
struggles for better social and legal status was halted
by the creation of a State that claims to be democratic
but that marginalizes entire portions of its population
in policy and practice.
It was only a matter of time before such a
Government began marginalizing minority groups,
most notably the Sunnis of western Iraq. Building a
State on a corrupt foundation subjected millions to
poverty and hunger in a climate of sectarian hatred.
These are the politics that paved the way for the creation
of ISIS and the enslavement of Iraqi women for the first
time in our modern history.
When I speak about the enslavement of women, I
am speaking of the countless women being trafficked,
in both ISIS- and Government-controlled areas. For
example, over 3,000 Yazidi women and other minorities
were enslaved by ISIS fighters. We, at the Organization
of Women’s Freedom in Iraq, have documented the
execution of over 150 women in one area controlled by
ISIS, because they refused to obey the so-called Islamic
State.
In the absence of Government-sponsored services,
local women’s groups meet the needs of those most
vulnerable to the conflict. We are at the forefront of
providing aid and services in places unreachable by
international aid organizations. Yet, we remain vastly
underrepresented in our efforts to prevent and address
conflict and violent extremism. Our rights are not
protected, let alone promoted.
The use by ISIS of sexual and gender-based
violence has been discussed at length in this Chamber,

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

yet civil society efforts that seek to combat this violence
are stifled. Iraqi authorities do not allow women’s
organizations to provide shelter to the thousands of
women fleeing conflict-related violence. Furthermore,
independent radio stations that promote peace across
sectarian divides, dispel misogyny and combat
homophobia have been shut down.
Discriminatory laws and policies prevent women who
are fleeing armed conflict, honour crimes, trafficking,
abductions, sexual and gender-based violence and forced
marriage from obtaining legal identification without
the approval of a male family member. Perpetrators of
honour killings receive mitigated sentences, if they are
punished at all. Reforming these laws now will build
more equitable and inclusive foundations for the long
term. Such reforms must also be pursued in times of
peace, for without them, discriminatory practices and
social norms, including the denial of services and
stigmatization of rape survivors, become exacerbated
in times of conflict.
Research demonstrates that women’s meaningful
participation improves peacebuilding and sustains
efforts to counter extremism. The inclusion of Syrian
women in the Geneva peace process is therefore critical,
not only to safeguard women’s human rights but also
to produce an accord that will prevent a resurgence of
violent extremism in the region.
With support for ISIS and other violent extremist
groups being voiced by individuals from the Philippines
to Yemen and from Europe to West Africa, extremism
is not just an Iraqi or Syrian problem; lessons from
our region must be applied globally. Together we
have the tools, evidence and resources to implement
strategies for inclusive and lasting peace. The full
and holistic implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and international human rights standards provides a
comprehensive road map for the prevention of armed
conflict and the integration of gender equality across
all peace and security actions.
What is primarily lacking is the political will. I
urge the Security Council to act now to condemn all
forms of violence against civilians on all sides of the
conflict; remove legal and practical barriers preventing
non-governmental organizations from providing vital
services, including shelters; increase support and
protection for women’s organizations and women’s
human rights defenders; call on Iraq and all other
Member States to fully implement and fund national
action plans on resolution 1325 (2000), in consultation

S/PV.7533

with civil society; and prosecute those responsible for
violations that amount to genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, including sexual and genderbased violence. We are documenting these abuses and
their perpetrators and will be ready for the day when
they will be held accountable.
I urge the Security Council and the entire international
community to take action on its commitments. We
cannot wait another 15 years for the women and peace
and security agenda to be implemented.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mohammed for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Murabit.
Ms. Murabit: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to address it on this historic occasion.
When I was growing up, my mother told me she
always saw everything, courtesy of the two extra eyes
she had in the back of her head. I made many attempts
to disprove her, and needless to say, I was caught every
time. What I did not know then was that my mother had
just taught me a valuable lesson and that I would use it
daily in my work as a peace and security advocate: that
the very women who lead families and societies know
first and best what is happening in them and how to
address it.
My organization, the Voice of Libyan Women,
launched its first national project, the Libyan Women’s
Charter, in 2011. In the midst of revolutionary euphoria,
we spoke with thousands of women nationally, who
expressed their excitement at the potential opportunities
that awaited them. But even then, they recognized and
spoke of the challenges, of how tensions would grow if
transitional justice and reconciliation were not sought
out through legitimate structures, of the growing
security risk of the open Sahara border, and of their
increasing exclusion from the political arena. They
listed their priorities with clarity and purpose: to get the
weapons out of their homes and their family members
back to work. As history has since proven, their words
were the truest reflection of the impact of unaddressed
conflicts and increasing insecurity.
Women did not just speak while men vied for
power and property. It was women who began to piece
the country back together. It was women who in record
numbers founded organizations and initiatives and
who through education, media, political reform and
economic empowerment were fighting for a truly free

15-309869/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

Libya. During the next three years, women were the
first to feel the effects of ongoing fighting and the first
to notice the signs of rising extremism. In fact, as early
as 2012, they warned of the increasing danger in driving
alone, the increasing calls for school segregation and
how religious manipulation was being used by religious
and political leaders to promote polarization in their
society.
It was on that basis that my organization launched
the Noor Campaign, led by women and built on
their partnership with men and religious actors to
build peace and security in Libya. By leveraging the
strengths of women in our national network — their
ideas, community credibility, unparalleled networks
and influence — we were able to reach communities,
men and boys in particular, in staggering numbers,
enlisting them as our partners in countering extremist
messages and preventing violence.
As a member of the high-level advisory group
concerned with resolution 1325 (2000), I can tell the
Council that our experience in Libya is not unique. In
conflict and post-conflict countries around the world,
women are seen as less threatening politically and
economically and, for that reason, garner more societal
trust than their male peers. In fact, the importance
of including women seems to be a glaringly obvious
strategy. As recent events have made clear, extremist
organizations not only recognize women’s agency but
are extremely effective in speaking to and working
with women for their own advantage, to the detriment
of global peace and security.
We know how much the women and peace and
security agenda needs the continued commitment of the
United Nations. That is an undeniable fact. However, a
less acknowledged truth is that the United Nations and
its Member States are not meeting the expectations of
the global community, and that is because they continue
to ignore the one tool that has never been more urgent
for us to utilize — the participation of women at all
levels.
The ongoing peace process in Colombia, for
example, has so much to teach us. After more than 60
years of war and countless peace processes, all exclusive
and all failing, the political process was opened up with
the help of the United Nations and Norway’s mediation.
Both sides brought victims’ voices and experiences to
the negotiating table, 60 per cent of whom were women.
They humanized the war, mobilizing their communities
to support the peace talks. I wish we had a civil society
10/96

13/10/2015

representative from Colombia in the Chamber today
to show us what gains can be made when the United
Nations and Member States work together to ensure
inclusive peace processes.
From my own experience in Libya, I know that the
only reliable requirement for admission to peace talks
is a gun. The lack of actionable commitment by the
United Nations and its Member States to women and
peace and security beyond these walls only validates
those who exclude women from negotiations at home.
The United Nations must prioritize the inclusion of
women here.
A few years ago, religious and political actors met
with members of the international community in Libya
to discuss transitional justice and rising city and tribal
tensions. As they were seated, one of the international
representatives thanked the Libyan counterparts
for attending. Noting the low number of women in
attendance, he asked: “Where are the women?” His
Libyan counterpart looked around and replied with a
laugh: “Well, where are yours?”
Women’s inclusion is paramount to global stability,
and their action on the ground needs to reflect our
commitments on paper. I would like to make three
recommendations based on the my own extensive work
and that of my civil society colleagues working on the
issue of women and peace and security globally.
First, conflict prevention is paramount to ensuring
global peace and security, rather than only reactively
addressing erupting conflicts and adopting overly
militarized, band-aid strategies, which promote rather
than diffuse local conflicts. The United Nations,
Member States and the Security Council should instead
address underlying drivers of conflict. Resources,
expertise and influence should be concentrated on the
prevention and mitigation of conflicts. That means
focusing on justice, global disarmament, effective
economic policies, representative political structures,
accountable media and social freedoms.
The participation of women is critical in the
prevention of conflict. Women already engage in
unofficial prevention practices in their communities.
That should be recognized and institutionalized into
official early warning systems and programmes.
The engagement of women cannot continue to be
one of convenience, when women are included only
to implement processes that the United Nations and
Member States have decided in their absence. Women

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

must be engaged at the very onset at the decision- and
policy-making level. An example is the countering of
violent extremism strategy; the narrative is one that is
very militant. The aim of women peace activists is to
prevent violent extremism.
Secondly, we urgently need a mechanism to address
crisis situations. Emergencies are not gender-neutral.
Research has proven that they disproportionately affect
women and girls, who are often assaulted, exploited
and abused for personal and economic gain. Women’s
rights are violated as they are forced into marriage by
armed groups and forced into religious conversion, and
women’s rights activists are targeted for violence for
their own activism or for that of male family members.
While there have been increased efforts to ensure
more effective gender programming by organizations
and Member States alike, they are uncoordinated,
unenforced and insufficient. The United Nations
needs to create an accountable and authoritative firstresponse structure within the Security Council, such
as an informal expert group that will guarantee greater
coordination throughout the multilateral system and
provide greater relief to defenders of women’s human
rights who are at risk on the ground.
Finally, there is an arguable need to allocate adequate
resources and increase the financial commitments
made to women and peace and security. That must be
accompanied by the removal of structural, political
and bureaucratic barriers that limit the accessibility
of funds and resources to activists on the ground.
Dedicated contributions specific to programmes led
by women that address the distinct needs of women in
conflict and post-conflict environments are vital.
There is no doubt that resolution 1325 (2000)
was a tipping point for the global community and the
women and peace and security agenda, opening doors
and shifting the political discourse. I am of the new
generation of women peace activists, from a country
that was under dictatorship 15 years ago. Yet the 1325
agenda proved to be relevant to me and no doubt will
be to women and societies in other countries for years
to come. But we cannot forget that it was the relentless
leadership of civil society activists, veterans of the
struggle for peace, that ensured the adoption of that
very resolution 15 years ago.
We are not backing down. Every day, we put our lives
on the line and do our part for peace. It is time for the
United Nations and Member States to do theirs. Only by

S/PV.7533

partnering with women and civil society organizations
on the front lines can we counter the rising threats of
insecurity, whether extremism, resource exploitation,
mass migration, global warming or any of the myriad
causes of conflict. It is time we shifted our support
back to where it matters most — women.
When the Security Council finds it unthinkable
to address a crisis without addressing women’s rights,
when humanitarian responders have full funding for
their gender-specific services, when women grass-roots
leaders find their work fully funded and politically
supported, when it is unimaginable that peace talks be
held without women’s full engagement, only then will
the full potential of resolution 1325 (2000) be realized.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Murabit for her briefing.
It is my understanding that the Council is now ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/774, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Algeria, Andorra,
Angola, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, the Congo,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Monaco, Morocco, Namibia,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft

15-3098611/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

resolution has been adopted, unanimously, as resolution
2242 (2015).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Government of Spain.
Gender inequality is a threat to international peace
and security. That is one of the main conclusions
reached in the work on the issue of women and peace
and security that led to resolution 1325 (2000). I would
like to add that such inequality is an injustice and is
immoral and a hindrance to the progress of humankind.
Resolution 2242 (2015), which we have just adopted, is
the outcome of the collective efforts of States Members
of the United Nations and civil society. We are
establishing a renewed, solid and ambitious basis for
the upcoming 15 years with regard to the women and
peace and security agenda. I would like to highlight the
dedication and enthusiasm that everyone has shown in
this undertaking, and I wish to highlight the leadership
shown by the Secretary-General and express my
gratitude to the United Kingdom, the pen-holder with
whom we have worked in perfect harmony.
I would also like to thank the Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and
representatives of civil society for their contributions
during the opening of this debate. Their testimonies
have given us the inspiration for this meeting.
Achieving peace, combatting terrorism and
developing disarmament processes has a greater chance
of being successful if there is growing participation by
women. We are pursuing a dual objective with resolution
2242 (2015). First, we are seeking to enhance the
protection of women and girls in situations of conflict.
We must spare no effort in combating sexual violence,
which is used as a weapon of war and terror. Very often,
in conflicts, it is more dangerous to be a woman than to
be a soldier. Secondly, we are seeking to substantially
increase the role played by women in areas ranging from
conflict prevention to peacebuilding. Experience has
taught us that it is vital to bridge the gaps between what
is approved here and what takes place on the ground.
Women are key to preserving and building peace.
Their contributions are vital in response to the folly of
conflicts. In places such as Colombia, the Philippines,
Central America, Liberia, Nigeria, Afghanistan and so
many others, women present an example of dignity and
courage.

12/96

13/10/2015

Spain has a praiseworthy past in this area. That
reflects our total commitment to equality between
women and men. At home, we have approved a strategic
plan for equal opportunities and a national strategy
for the eradication of violence against women. We
have a national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and we are promoting a gender
focus in peacekeeping missions. Spanish cooperation
also has specific guidelines for establishing a strategic
relationship with UN-Women and the United Nations
Population Fund. Nonetheless, our collective effort with
regard to the women and peace and security agenda
must be renewed and strengthened, and we commit to
do the following.
We will update our national action plan, and we
will approve periodic follow-up reports, which will be
submitted to our Parliament. We will establish a national
focal point and create an international network of focal
points. We will involve civil society in designing and
providing follow-up to our actions. We will enhance
training on gender equality for members of the armed
forces and the state security forces, particularly those
who are deployed on international missions. We will
continue to promote the participation of female soldiers
in peacekeeping operations and ensure that women are
present in mediation teams. We will continue to strictly
implement the zero-tolerance policy with regard to
incidents of sexual violence involving members of
Spanish civilian and military missions abroad. We will
also increase the percentage of our official development
assistance earmarked for women and peace and security.
We will contribute to funding the Gender Unit within
the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat in
2016. In addition, in 2016, we will make a contribution
of €1 million to the new Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action and the multi-agency Fund for Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We must establish certainty and reasons for hope
to replace uncertainty and unease. The enhanced
protection of women and girls in situations of conflict
and a greater role for women in preventing conflict and
fostering peacebuilding are necessary for building a
fairer, more peaceful and united world. Resolution 2242
(2015) serves as a guide and calls us to act. I invite
all gathered here today to roll up our sleeves and work
together.

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Baroness Verma (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and civil
society speakers present here today for their leadership
on this agenda. We welcome resolution 2242 (2015),
which was adopted today. It makes clear that leadership
and accountability for implementation are required
by all actors. We echo our thanks to the Spanish
Prime Minister for working with us on this important
resolution. I strongly echo the call for everyone here
to make meaningful and practical commitments to
fully implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The United
Kingdom firmly believes that the fifteenth anniversary
must represent the start of a new era on women and
peace and security. Let us begin that change today. I
will, therefore, announce eight areas where the United
Kingdom will act.
First, in arranging all future peacebuilding events
hosted by the United Kingdom, we will identify women
involved in the conflict and shine a torch on them to
ensure that their voices are heard. We will promote the
active participation of women in such peacebuilding
discussions through political and/or financial support.
We will also provide support, including lobbying, at
the highest levels, to ensure that women’s voices are
represented in wider peace processes, negotiations and
State-building. We will also provide support at the local
levels so as to build the capacity of women to participate
effectively.
Second, the United Kingdom will contribute
$1 million of start-up funding to the Global Acceleration
Instrument for Women, Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action to help address the global deficit
in funding for the implementation of the resolution. We
will also provide additional funding of over $800,000,
each year for two years, to support new research at the
Centre for Women, Peace and Security at the London
School of Economics, bringing total Government
funding from the United Kingdom for the Centre to
over $3 million.
Third, the United Kingdom will ensure that all
future relevant military doctrine is gender-sensitive. By
November 2016, all United Kingdom troops deployed

S/PV.7533

on overseas missions will receive training on women
and peace and security and on preventing sexual
violence. We are reviewing the external training we
provide through our peace support operation training
centres with a view to delivering additional training on
women and peace and security and on preventing sexual
violence to overseas troop-contributing countries.
The review will also help to develop train-the-trainer
packages, which can help further disseminate this
work. We are expanding and strengthening the pool of
gender advisers within the Ministry of Defence.
Fourth, conflict prevention and early warning
remain at the heart of this agenda. The United Kingdom
will ensure that, by September 2016, all our early
warning and joint conflict analysis and assessment
tools are fully gender-sensitive. Next, over the next
five years, the United Kingdom will drive forward
the preventing sexual violence in conflict initiative.
We will tackle impunity for sexual violence crimes,
while ensuring widespread implementation of the
international protocol on the documentation and
investigation of sexual violence in conflict.
Fifth, we will encourage greater support for
survivors, including children and men, and we will
work with other Governments to deliver a more effective
multilateral response.
Sixth, the United Kingdom will champion the road
map to action to protect women and girls in emergencies
and help secure positive outcomes for women and girls
at the World Humanitarian Summit in 2016.
Seventh, the United Kingdom will continue to
provide technical and other support to help other
Governments develop, implement and measure the
impact of their own action plans on resolution 1325
(2000). We will also help Iraq and Afghanistan
implement their action plans.
Finally, the United Kingdom will ensure that
our overseas work to counter violent extremism
includes upstream activity targeted specifically at
women. Women will be at the centre of the delivery
of programming of overseas extremism work, both
nationally and locally.
We strongly support the recommendations
for the United Nations on women and peace and
security set out in the three major reviews this year,
and we will work with others to ensure that they are
implemented. Just as we, Member States, must deliver
on our responsibilities, the roles of the Department of

15-3098613/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme
and many other United Nations entities are critical to
move matters forward at Headquarters and in the field.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom will pledge to
update the Security Council on our commitments at
the annual debate on this agenda item and, to that end,
I call on others in the Chamber today to join in our
ambition and do likewise.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Family and the Promotion of
Women for Angola.
Ms. Delgado (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): At the outset,
we wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Mariano Rajoy
Brey, Prime Minister of Spain, for presiding over this
open debate, which demonstrates the commitment
of Security Council member States to the high-level
review of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). We also thank the Secretary-General for his
leadership on the subject under consideration and for
his comprehensive briefing.
We welcome and thank Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, for her
long-standing commitment to the defence and protection
of women’s rights and for introducing the 2015 report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716) on women and
peace and security. We furthermore welcome Ms. Yanar
Mohammed, President of the Organization for Women’s
Freedom in Iraq; Ms. Julienne Lusenge, Director of
Fonds pour les Femmes Congolaises and President of
the Executive Board of Solidarité féminine pour la paix
et le développement intégral; and Ms. Alaa Murabit of
the Voice of Libyan Women. We thank them for their
contributions and for sharing the experiences of civil
society on this issue.
The year 2015 is crucial for women’s rights, the
efforts of the United Nations towards gender equality
and strengthening the women and peace and security
agenda. We recognize the importance of this year’s
important dates for the United Nations and for the
improvement of the gender issues on its agenda,
namely, the seventieth anniversary of the Organization;
the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security; the twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action; and the inclusion of gender equality in the

14/96

13/10/2015

2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1).
We express our concern with the growing number
and the nature of armed conflicts, the new and emerging
threats to peace and security, the increase in violent
extremism and terrorism and the exponential growth of
civilian victims, with women and children as the main
victims. According to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on women and peace and security, over the past
decade the number of people in need of international
humanitarian assistance has tripled, with 50 per cent of
them affected by armed conflicts.
We recognize that prevention is the best channel
to address potential conflict situations. We believe that
women play a crucial role in conflict prevention and
resolution and in peacebuilding.
Over the years, the Security Council has proved
its invaluable commitment to furthering the women
and peace and security agenda by adopting several
resolutions, including in the area of leadership in
conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding. However, obstacles and challenges
still persist that prevent the full implementation of
this agenda when it comes to the implementation
of the four pillars of resolution 1325 (2000), namely,
prevention, protection, participation and peacebuilding
and recovery.
In Angola, women’s participation was a decisive
factor in efforts to achieve peace. The post-conflict
experience was confirmed in their direct involvement
in the peacebuilding efforts. It also showed that they
were instrumental in providing psychological support
to the victims of the armed conflict as counsellors of
peace for national reconciliation and social harmony.
In that regard, the Government established
counselling centres to raise awareness of women’s civil,
political, economic and social rights as a tool for the
participation of families in the country’s development,
in accordance with the Constitution of Angola. Through
partnerships with civil society organizations, efforts
have been deployed in order to solidify their social
participation in the country’s political and economic
life.
The non-governmental organization Peace Roots
was born with the objective of bringing together women
from all political parties represented in Parliament
to participate in the efforts to consolidate peace and

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7533

democracy. Also, an association called Pro-Change
Country was established to raise awareness among
men of the need to eradicate all forms of gender-based
violence.

to poverty eradication. And lastly, we should include a
gender perspective in the national budget with a view
to fulfilling the commitments established by resolution
1325 (2000).

Owing to the experience accumulated in conflict
prevention and resolution processes, Angola has been
playing a role in the preservation of peace and democracy
in Africa, especially in the Great Lakes region, as well
as in promoting the culture of peace, dialogue and
national reconciliation. We underscore the inclusion of
many women in the various levels of defence, security,
domestic order and migration services.

Finally, we hope that the high-level review will
help to lead us to a world where women can effectively
play the role they deserve and enjoy their full rights.
We hope that a strong political will and commitment
to attaining those objectives will make a tangible
contribution to expanding the role and participation
of women in maintaining and building a more just and
peaceful world.

The country has also made significant progress in
the formulation of its national plan of action to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), to be carried out starting in
2016. This plan sets out seven strategic objectives, with
specific activities, goals and performance indicators as
follows.

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing and presiding over
today’s debate. Your presence is a real show of Spain’s
leadership on the issue of women’s empowerment.
I thank the Secretary-General for his continuing
leadership in the area and Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for
her briefing and her stewardship of UN-Women. My
deepest respect and admiration go to Ms. Lusenge,
Ms. Mohammed and Ms. Murabit for the extraordinary
work they do and for taking the time to come and
speak to us today. Their bravery in pushing women’s
empowerment in their own societies leaves us in awe,
and their bluntness today in describing the dashed
hopes of many over the 15 years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) should motivate us all.

First, we should increase the participation
of women and integrate gender equality into all
stages of peacebuilding processes, including at all
decision-making levels.
Secondly, we should provide training and ensure
the empowerment of all women, girls and boys, as
well as military and policy officers, in peacebuilding
processes, both with regard to gender equality and
gender-based violence as well as other relevant aspects
of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).
Thirdly, we should promote and protect the human
rights of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations, their economic and social empowerment
and their participation in civil society, taking into
account the need to prevent and eliminate gender- and
conflict-based violence and promote the empowerment
of women.
Fourthly, we should deepen and broaden
understanding of the subject of women and peace and
security, including through training and awarenessraising in all ministerial departments, civil society and
among political decision-makers.
Fifthly, we should encourage civil society’s
participation in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
Sixthly, we should promote rural communities’
socioeconomic development while raising awareness of
their rights, increasing food security and contributing

Fifteen years ago, the Council adopted a resolution
recognizing that the inclusion of women’s voices in
decision-making on peace and security leads to more
equitable, sustainable and resilient results. That is not a
theory; it is a fact. The global study commissioned by
the Secretary-General on the resolution’s impact and the
challenges we still face offers ample evidence of that.
One qualitative study found that peace processes with
female participants demonstrated a 20 per cent increase
in the probability of an agreement lasting at least two
years. In the Security Council, we are not faithfully
advancing international peace and security if we are
not doing everything possible to ensure that women are
included and empowered in peace processes.
As others have noted today, the past 15 years have
seen some measurable progress. That is evident in the
advances of individual countries, particularly in the
area of women’s participation. When resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted, women in Afghanistan could not
leave their homes unaccompanied by a man. Today,
Afghanistan has two women governors, four women

15-3098615/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

Cabinet members, 150 women in the judiciary and a
28 per cent representation of women in Parliament.
Progress is also apparent in the greater involvement
of women and greater attentiveness to gender issues in
peace processes. Over the past 15 years the percentage of
peace treaties referencing women has increased nearly
two and a half times, to 27 per cent, and, as others have
noted, during the ongoing peace talks in Colombia, a
dedicated gender subcommittee was established to
ensure that gender issues were considered and women’s
rights recognized.
But the numbers and stories also reflect how far
we still have to go. The number of women members of
parliament around the world has roughly doubled over
the past two decades, but the current proportion is still
a mere 22.5 per cent. In my country it is at a record high
of just 19 per cent. Even in the case of the Colombian
peace negotiations, there is nothing close to gender
parity, and the increased inclusion of women came after
active organizing and lobbying by female leaders. Mary
Robinson, the former President of Ireland and current
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Climate
Change, recalls a female leader in civil society once
telling her that “a typical peace process involved bad
men forgiving other bad men in fancy hotels in front
of television cameras”. Not every aspect of that image
rings true today, but it is still entirely too familiar.
Moreover, women continue to be harassed,
assaulted and murdered for daring to speak up or get
involved. Last year a prominent, remarkable woman
named Salwa Bugaighis, a friend and colleague
of Ms. Murabit who had previously resigned from
Parliament in Libya to protest its lack of women, was
murdered in her home on election day. Just yesterday, an
Afghan woman named Toorpaki Ulfat, a human rights
defender and employee of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, was killed as she headed to
work in Kandahar. Around the world, too many other
women continue to be harassed or imprisoned by their
Governments for doing nothing more than speaking up
on behalf of their communities, including 18 of the 20
women profiled last month by my Government on the
occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration.
In the face of such continued challenges, there are
two areas I want to highlight today in which the Council
should play a particularly active role. The first is
peacekeeping. As the Secretary-General has reported,
the insufficient number of women peacekeepers

16/96

13/10/2015

interferes with core mission tasks such as protection
and engagement with female members of communities.
That is why, at last month’s peacekeeping summit,
President Obama called for more women leaders in
critical mission roles. It is why we will all benefit from
the fulfilment of the pledges made by several nations,
including Rwanda and India, to contribute more female
troops and police.
In addition to more women wearing blue helmets,
we must take every possible step to root out sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers, which is too
prevalent. Countries must train their peacekeepers
better in order to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse,
and must hold any soldier or staffer who commits such
crimes fully accountable. As President Obama said last
month and as the Secretary-General has made clear,
there should be zero tolerance for them. Yet too often
today their perpetrators enjoy impunity.
Secondly, the Council must ensure that women
are full participants in combating the threat of violent
extremism. That is essential not just because women
and girls are often the victims of groups such as
Boko Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, it is because defeating those groups will
require women’s leadership and active involvement
as community influencers and leaders, whether in
village councils or here in the Security Council. That
fact has been recognized by some diplomats, leaders
and States; the United Nations Special Envoy for
Syria, Staffan de Mistura, has worked actively with
civil society and women’s rights organizations during
his consultations and negotiations. The Iraqi Council
of Ministers endorsed an emergency plan in May that
made reference to resolution 1325 (2000) and called for
measures to address the needs of women and girls in
conflict situations and facilitate their involvement in
post-conflict reconstruction.
Well beyond ensuring the Council’s engagement
in those two core areas, there is much more that
each of us here can do. In all of our respective roles
as States Members of the United Nations, national
representatives and individual leaders, we must look
inward. Within the United Nations family we must
continue to integrate and act on the goals of resolution
1325 (2000). That includes supporting the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to elevating the work of senior
gender advisers and including more women in the
senior ranks of the United Nations. It means ensuring
that all United Nations agencies and bodies engaged in

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

peace, security and development take responsibility for
integrating women’s voices into their work, and that
should be measurable.
As national representatives, we must hold our own
Governments to account. In the United States, our
Government has been moving forward with its national
action plan. The Department of Defense, to take just one
example, has taken important steps, including through
integrating objectives relating to women and peace and
security into its policy strategy and planning. At the
State Department, 35 per cent of mission chiefs are now
women — an improvement of the 10 per cent level of
20 years ago, but still not yet half.
As part of this national action plan, we are also
assisting other nations in their own efforts, and today I
am pleased to announce new commitments to that end
totalling $31 million. To describe just a few examples
here, that includes more than $40 million for initiatives
to protect women from violence and promote their
participation in peace processes and decision-making,
as well as more than $8 million to implement United
States Secretary of State Kerry’s accountability
initiative to fight impunity for sexual violence in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Liberia. Another $1 million will be
allocated to a justice initiative based in South Kivu
province in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
seeks to educate 50,000 women on their human rights
and how to use basic judicial procedures.
Finally, as individual leaders we must look inward
to see what more we can do in our own positions. For
women, and particularly for men, it is not enough to
be passively supportive of women’s participation.
Whether it is pressing one’s capital about progress on
one’s national action plan, or pressing for women’s
participation in internal decision-making processes, all
of our support must be active and vocal.
Just last week, the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded
to the four leaders of the Tunisian Dialogue Quartet.
One is a woman — Wided Bouchamaoui. She is not a
politician or a lifelong activist; she is a businesswoman
and the head of a Tunisian employers’ union. Her
contributions and the accomplishments of the Quartet
are a timely reminder that even in the midst of grave
national crises, there is still reason for hope, above
all when women are able to join men at the table. As
she put it last week, “We did it together”. I would only
elaborate, “We will do it together, or we will not do it
at all”.

S/PV.7533

Ms. Maira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Spain for convening this important debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and the
testimony given by each of the briefers. Women and
peace and security is one of the priorities of Chile’s
multilateral foreign policy. That was demonstrated
during our term as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council and within the Group of Friends of
Resolution 1325 (2000). In those forums, we renewed
our commitment to the implementation and promotion
of that resolution.
We welcome the adoption this morning of resolution
2242 (2015) in the context of the 2015 high-level review
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In particular, we emphasize the work done by
members of civil society over the past 15 years, and the
establishment of follow-up mechanisms to improve and
broaden the implementation of the agenda on women
and peace and security throughout the United Nations
system.
Chile was the first Latin American country to have
an action plan in 2009 on the safety and protection
of women in armed conflicts. That commitment
was reaffirmed in a second national plan of action
announced by the President of the Republic Michelle
Bachelet on International Women’s Day on 8 March.
This second plan defines four areas and objectives that
we would like to share as good practice: prevention,
participation, protection and relief and recovery. We
have incorporated quantitative indicators and designated
institutions responsible for their implementation in
order to enhance transparency and accountability.
We firmly believe that improving the status of
women is a collective responsibility of our region. We
are aware that the intensification of armed conflicts
and violence in post-conflict situations have particular
repercussions. That is why we are working from a
global perspective and through regional cooperation
to broaden the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) by designing training and capacity-building
programmes to advance Latin American women in that
regard.
At the regional level, Chile participated in
the workshop on gender and security organized in
Asunción by the Ministries for Foreign Affairs and
Defence of Paraguay. We also hosted the regional
training workshop on gender and security and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), at which the
participanties shared their countries’ experiences with

15-3098617/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

respect to gender mainstreaming and gender equality
policies.
In August, President Michelle Bachelet delivered
the closing statement at the regional training workshop
on gender and security and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) that was organized for countries
members of the Central American Integration System
in El Salvador. Under the auspices of the Union of
South American Nations, we sponsored a seminar on
mainstreaming gender in military training and defence
institutions and a workshop on the adoption of gender
concepts in the South American Defence Council.
In New York last April, Chile co-sponsored
with the Netherlands an international workshop on
the integration and implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) in operations in the
security sectors, organized by the non-governmental
organization Global Network of Women Peacebuilders.
The workshop made recommendations as a contribution
to a global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), entitled “Preventing conflict, transforming
justice, securing peace”, which will be officially
launched tomorrow.
At the national level, this year the Ministry of
National Defence of Chile has coordinated various
activities for Chilean troops deployed in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. They have been
trained in gender issues, the scope of resolution 1325
(2000), human rights and international humanitarian
law, the responsibility to prevent and protect against
gender violence and sexual abuse in peacekeeping
operations, sexual violence and the prevention of
sexually transmitted diseases. In addition, Chile’s
National Academy of Political and Strategic Studies
will be launching a joint academic programme with the
Inter-American Defence College that will mainstream
gender in academic activities and in the dissemination
and research conducted by the two institutions.
Today, the women and peace and security agenda
represents a substantive effort to promote inclusive
development as an overarching strategy for conflict
prevention, its resolution and for the maintenance of
peace and its consolidation in the world. The goal is
to make decisive progress in the implementation of the
spirit and substance of that resolution, incorporating
compliance indicators and expanding mechanisms for
action and dissemination of its contents. However, it is
not enough to abide by the principles of the resolution

18/96

13/10/2015

and increase the female contingent and civilian
personnel deployed in peace operations in which our
countries are cooperating.
We must be able to translate those principles into
inclusive public policies that guarantee women the full
exercise of their rights in all areas of human endeavour.
Because, ultimately, how can we promote greater
participation by women in decision-making in peace
and security work if in our nations they are barely
represented in the halls of power, do not participate on
equal terms in the labour market and violence against
them is still a serious social problem?
Resolution 1325 (2000) recognizes and promotes
the participation of women in decision-making bodies
for conflict resolution advocating a profound cultural
change that recognizes women as subjects of law
and agents of reform for the rebuilding of peace and
security in conflict and post-conflict situations. Chile
is committed to strengthening the institutional policy of
Chile’s Ministry of National Defence by mainstreaming
gender in all predeployment training for peacekeeping
operations in which Chile is involved.
We shall monitor accountability regarding gender
violence among staff serving in United Nations
peacekeeping operations within two years, and we
shall appoint gender advisers and a national focal point
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in
relevant ministries and departments within one year,
as well as for receiving and sending information to and
from missions. We shall also establish an observatory,
consisting of representatives of civil society, to report
on progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) in
our country.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
continues to be one of our national and collective
responsibilities, because it is becoming increasingly
clear that no peace and security are possible without
the effective participation of women in the political,
economic, social and cultural processes that cut across
all our societies.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes you,
Mr. President, to the Security Council and thanks the
Spanish delegation for organizing this seminal debate.
We acknowledge the presence of participating ministers
and welcome them to the Security Council.
Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General
for his abiding commitment to the cause of women, to

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

the Executive Director of UN-Women for her powerful
exposition, and to Ms. Lusenge, Ms. Murabit and
Ms. Mohammed for their courage and soul-searching
testimonials.
Nigeria welcomes the opportunity to reflect on
the broad progress made in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda 15 years after
the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000).
Periodic reviews of this nature could help in galvanizing
action and resources to address existing challenges
and gaps in advancing the role of women within the
context of the global peace and security architecture.
We also welcome the positive developments achieved
at the strategic and operational levels across the pillars
of prevention, participation, protection, relief and
recovery in implementing the women and peace and
security agenda.
Despite the significant achievements, significant
gaps and challenges remain. Those include the
leadership and political participation of women in
decision-making, women’s involvement in peace
efforts to prevent and resolve conflict, insufficient
resources and funds, lack of disaggregated data, forced
displacement exacerbated by persistent armed conflict,
and continuing unprecedented levels of sexual violence
and assault. Meeting those challenges is critical to
making progress in the women and peace and security
agenda. It requires a multistakeholder approach
involving actors at the global, regional, subregional
and national levels. Communities, civil society and
individuals also have a pivotal role to play.
At the global level, the Security Council has
provided the leadership necessary to give impetus to
the women and peace and security agenda. Beginning
with resolution 1325 (2000), which set up the scaffold
for subsequent Council resolutions that utilized the
scaffold to build the women, peace and security agenda,
the Security Council has been at the forefront of that
evolving approach.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) has also played a constructive role in advancing
the women and peace and security agenda by promoting
the greater involvement of women in peacekeeping.
According to United Nations data, 29 per cent of the
6,800 international civilians working in special political
missions and peacekeeping missions are women. That
is highly significant. Even more significant is the

S/PV.7533

fact that women lead five peace operations as Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General.
In addition, three all-female police units are
deployed in three United Nations missions around the
world. According to DPKO, the participation of women
as peacekeepers provides a greater sense of security to
women and children, improves access to local women and
makes United Nations peacekeepers more approachable
to women. In view of the spectacular challenges that
women face in post-conflict situations, those are highly
significant considerations. We commend DPKO for the
importance it attaches to the situation of women in the
context of peacekeeping operations.
Other important actors within the United Nations
system are UN-Women and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. We take this opportunity to pay special
tribute to the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for their astute leadership
and untiring efforts to advance the women, peace and
security agenda.
At the regional level in Africa, the African Union
(AU) has been a valid instrument and platform for the
advancement of the women, peace and security agenda.
In January 2014, the African Union Commission
signed the Framework of Cooperation Concerning the
Prevention and Response to Conflict-related Sexual
Violence in Africa, with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Its major focus is on preventing
and responding to sexual violence in conflict and postconflict situations.
The agreement complements the ongoing efforts of
the African Union Peace and Security Council, which
is working to institute a code of conduct and a zerotolerance policy that clearly outlines the AU’s strong
position against sexual violence and exploitation by AU
troops. The agreement strengthens the collaboration
and common commitment of the African Union and
the United Nations to combat impunity and promote
accountability, implement capacity-building and
training programmes, foster better coordination,
national ownership and leadership, facilitate the
provision of multisectoral services, and alleviate the
stigma and trauma of victims.

15-3098619/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

The African Union Agenda 2063, which was
adopted by African heads of State and Government in
Addis Ababa in January, is designed to build a more
prosperous and peaceful continent. The Agenda places
particular emphasis on the engagement of women and
youth in the continent’s development.
At the subregional level in West Africa, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has been a major driver of the women,
peace and security agenda. In collaboration with the
United Nations Office for West Africa, in September
2010 ECOWAS developed a subregional and integrated
plan of action for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan of action emphasizes the importance
of the role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution, mediation and peacebuilding efforts, and in
the rebuilding of post-conflict societies.
ECOWAS has put in place very strong mechanisms
regarding the role of women in conflict prevention
and management, such as the Protocol on Conflict
Prevention, Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping
and Security and the Supplementary Protocol on
Democracy and Good Governance. Those mechanisms
serve as the basis for the ECOWAS conflict-prevention
framework. The women, peace and security component
of that framework aims at consolidating women’s
role, participation and impact at all stages of conflict
management, including humanitarian provisions, while
reinforcing various national and regional mechanisms
for protecting and promoting them.
At the national level, in August 2013 Nigeria
launched a national action plan to fully implement
the relevant provisions of resolution 1325 (2000). The
plan reflects the federal Government’s commitment
to ensuring the security of women and girls during
armed conflict and enhancing their active and direct
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
We are also committed to the provisions of resolution
1820 (2008) on ending acts of sexual violence against
women in conflict situations.
In concert with our neighbours Chad, Cameroon,
the Niger and Benin, we are cooperating within the
framework of a multinational task force to fight the Boko
Haram insurgency, which is targeting women and girls.
We are resolutely determined to defeat the terrorists.
Because of the transnational nature of terrorism, we
take this opportunity to call on all people and nations

20/96

13/10/2015

of good will to renew their pledge to support the fight
against that menace.
We acknowledge the contributions of civil society
organizations as partners in peacebuilding, prevention
and the management and resolution of disputes. The
Nigerian Government will continue to engage them as
key stakeholders and partners in the women and peace
and security agenda.
Nigeria remains fully and firmly committed to
the promotion and protection of the rights of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations. We
shall work assiduously to enhance the participation
of women in peace and security initiatives. We are
determined to reinforce and implement the principles
of resolution 1325 (2000) and, within that context, to
address the factors that impact negatively on the lives
of women and girls.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes Spain’s initiative in
convening this open debate. We welcome Prime
Minister Rajoy Brey to preside over today’s meeting. I
wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing, and the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Mlambo-Ngucka, for hers as well. China has
also listened attentively to the briefings by the
representatives of civil society.
This year coincides with the twentieth anniversary
of the holding of the fourth World Conference on
Women, and also with the fifteenth anniversary of the
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
On 27 September, China and the United Nations
jointly sponsored a global summit on women: the
Global Leaders’ Meeting on Gender Equality and
Empowerment. The President of China Xi Jinping and
representatives from over 140 countries, including
more than 80 Heads of State and Government, attended
the meeting. The summit was the first of its kind in
which commitments on women were made at the
State leadership level. It is another milestone of the
international cause of women following the Beijing
Conference and is of trailblazing significance. The
leaders of countries committed to further implement
the outcome of the Beijing Conference. That is of great
and far-reaching significance for the development of
the global cause of women. Resolution 2242 (2015),
which was just adopted, also acknowledged the global
summit on women.

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

With the efforts of the broad membership, of
United Nations bodies and of regional and subregional
organizations, the international community in recent
years has made progress in implementing resolution
1325 (2000), with major achievements in promoting a
greater role for women in peace and security. On the
other hand, the present international security situation
remains complex and grave. Regional conflicts crop up
here and there. Women often bear the brunt of rampant
terrorism and violent extremism. The international
community has a long way to go in protecting women’s
rights in conflict. In that regard, I would like to stress
the following points.
First, we need to step up efforts to find political
solutions to hotspot issues and foster an international
environment favourable to women’s development. The
international community should stand firmly by the
values of peace, development and win-win cooperation;
vigourously take forward the political process of the
relevant conflict-affected countries to promote national
reconciliation and resolve differences through dialogue
and consultations; and provide security protection and
humanitarian assistance to conflict-affected women.
At the same time, effective measures must be taken
to ensure that women have full rights to participate in
every stage of peace processes and that their voice and
demands are heard.
Secondly, we need to tackle both symptoms and
root causes in order to promote the simultaneous
development of various issues in conflict-ridden
countries, including women’s issues and economic
and social development. The international community
should help conflict-affected countries to actively carry
out post-conflict reconstruction, and in the affected
countries the focus should be on capacity-building
and socioeconomic development in order to remove
the root causes of conflict and ensure that women
and the population as a whole will have a fair share
of the dividends of development. The international
community should provide development assistance and
technical support to developing countries in their efforts
to achieve gender equality and women’s empowerment,
and attention should be paid to providing guidance to
women’s organizations and civil society in playing a
positive and constructive role.
Thirdly, efforts should be made to shape a
harmonious and inclusive social culture. In their
rebuilding efforts, post-conflict countries should
strengthen the rule of law, eliminate discrimination,

S/PV.7533

bias and acts of violence against women; to vigourously
promote gender equality; to remove the roots and
soil in people’s mindsets that inhabit women’s peace
and development; and to facilitate harmonious social
development in post-conflict countries so that society
will be more inclusive and dynamic.
Fourthly, the existing mechanisms of the United
Nations should be fully enabled to act so that each
can play its own role, creating synergy. The Security
Council should fully perform its primary role of
maintaining international peace and security, with a
focus on properly addressing women and peace and
security. It should strengthen coordination with the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and UN-Women, among others, in line with their
respective responsibilities. With respect to addressing
issues of women and peace and security, United
Nations agencies should give full play to the existing
mechanisms, tapping their potential to improve their
effectiveness. They should be cautious about setting up
new mechanisms.
At the Global Leaders’ Meeting on Women
that was held on last month, President Xi Jinping
announced new commitments in support of the global
cause of women. First, with respect to funds, China
will donate $10 million to UN-Women to support
the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Programme of Action, as well as the relevant Goal
of the post-2015 Sustainable Development Agenda.
Secondly, as a project commitment, within the next
five years China will take a series of measures to help
developing countries address the challenges facing
women and girls in the areas of health and education
and will strengthen the training of local women. It
will jointly set up with the United Nations, under the
relevant fund, a project to support capacity-building for
women in developing countries.
Those commitments fully embody China’s firm
determination and concrete action to promote the sound
development of the global cause of women. China
will fully implement the new commitments made by
President Xi Jinping at the Global Leaders’ Meeting
on Women and is ready to work with all parties in
our continued, unremitting efforts to promote the
implementation of the goals of women and peace and
security and to push for greater development of the
global cause of women.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Let me begin by thanking Spain for organizing

15-3098621/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

this open debate. We are grateful to the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UN-Women and all
the other speakers for their substantive contributions to
today’s discussion.
This month marks the fifteenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), which enshrined the topic
of women and peace and security on the Council’s
agenda. The importance of its implementation and
the commitment of States to achieving its objectives
were recently underlined once again at the Global
Leaders’ Meeting on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment, which was recently organized at United
Nations headquarters by the People’s Republic of China
and UN-Women. We congratulate the organizers on its
successful holding, which once again underscored the
importance of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, which remain key guidelines in the context
of expanding the rights of and opportunities open to
women over the past 20 years.
In the Beijing Declaration, States reaffirmed their
determination to take the steps necessary to achieve
peace so as to promote the advancement of women and
recognized the leading role that women have played in
the promotion of peace.
We voted in favour of resolution 2242 (2015),
which was prepared by Spain and the United Kingdom
and was designed to take stock of the 15 years of
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to set
out the main guidelines for further efforts by Member
States and the United Nations system as a whole in the
important task of ensuring the participation of women
in conflict prevention and resolution. There is no doubt
that, given the particular importance of the resolution
and its comprehensive character, which encompasses
various areas of activity of the United Nations and the
international community as a whole, the preparation of
this document was a very difficult and ambitious task.
Unfortunately, the late issuance of the global review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the lack of time to carefully study and consider all the
aspects of the recommendations made had an impact on
negotiations on the draft. As a result, we believe that,
in a number of cases, it was impossible to come up with
tried-and-tested language that fully corresponds to the
various mandates and remits of the various entities,
including those of the Security Council involved in
counterterrorism activities.

22/96

13/10/2015

In the course of negotiations, our position was
that it was important to avoid any distortions and to
maintain the existing divisions of labour, as doing
otherwise could have an adverse effect on the work of
all those bodies.
We do not believe that it is justified, in the format
of the discussion of the resolution adopted today, to
prejudge the outcome of other review processes under
way in the Security Council on issues of peacebuilding
and peacekeeping operations. We do not agree with the
view that there is a need to set up an informal expert
group on issues relating to women and peace and
security. We believe that the creation of new bodies
is no guarantee of the effectiveness of the work of the
Council. Overall we feel that it is a dubious approach
that is aimed at establishing more and more auxiliary
bodies covering various items on the agenda. It is also
inappropriate to refer this issue to such a structure
within the Security Council, owing to its informal
character.
Given the increase in the number of armed
conflicts, we believe that it is important for the Security
Council to focus specifically on issues relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
believe also that specific violations of human rights,
including those of women, should be considered in
specialized international bodies.
Despite the aforementioned shortcomings, we
hope that the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015) will
contribute to the effective implementation of the
multifaceted tasks facing the international community
in the framework of the women and peace and security
agenda. Given the importance and relevance of this
issue, we deemed it necessary to vote in favour of the
draft.
The report of the Secretary-General outlining the
results of the global review of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) clearly indicates that over the
past 15 years, progress has been achieved in promoting
the participation of women in the prevention and
resolution of armed conflicts and in post-conflict
reconstruction. We would like to individually thank all
of those who participated in the preparation of these
documents.
We find it encouraging that in 2014, women were
part of every mediation effort by the United Nations,
as well as the majority of national delegations, in

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

nine of the 12 peace processes involving the United
Nations. The number of peace agreements containing
specialized provisions pertaining to women has
increased significantly. The number of women in
parliaments and Governments in countries emerging
from armed conflict has also increased, and work in
this area should continue.
In this context, we support a number of the
conclusions reached by the Secretary-General,
for example, the fact that there is still insufficient
participation of women in conflict-resolution and postconflict-reconstruction processes, despite the existence
of an official normative framework. We agree that there
is a need to prevent conflicts at an early stage. At the
same time, we believe that conflict prevention must be
based on international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations.
The recommendation of the global review on taking
a localized approach to the issue of women and peace
and security is very useful. This takes into account the
specific features of each individual conflict. We agree
that cookie-cutter, one-size-fits-all approaches based
on so-called best practices that are applicable to all
countries and situations are not effective.
We continue to call on the Security Council, in
considering the issue of women and peace and security,
to work on the basis of the existing divisions of labour
within the United Nations system, without duplicating
the role of such bodies as the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council and the Commission on the
Status of Women, all of which have their respective
mandates. Consideration of issues related to the topic
of women and peace and security cannot substitute
for the whole broad range of commitments related to
gender equality and the empowerment of women that
have been undertaken by each State.
Our position continues to be that national plans of
action on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
cannot be used as an instrument to assess national
policies aimed at enhancing the status of women. Such
plans should be drawn up on a voluntary basis by those
States that are in the grip of armed conflict or at the
post-conflict reconstruction phase. As noted by the
Secretary-General, the drawing up of such plans is not
an end in itself; the outcome is what is important.
The Russian Federation, for example, does not
have such a plan. However, we have put in place all of
the conditions necessary to fully realize the potential

S/PV.7533

of women. This has made it possible to attract many
bright, highly qualified women to politics. Russian
women are also active participants in the social and
political spheres. For example, they make up more than
70 per cent of civil servants. Women currently occupy
the positions of Chairperson of the Federation Council,
Deputy Speaker of the State Duma, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Government of the Russian Federation
and Minister for Health Care, and also serve as highranking officials of local executive bodies in a number
of regions.
Women are actively involved in the work of civil
society in Russia. To date, one third of all non-profit
organizations, and we have tens of thousands of them,
are women’s organizations, which do a great deal of
social and charity work aimed at supporting women,
children and families; prevent domestic violence,
human trafficking and sexual violence; and other
activities important to the community.
Today women face new and increasingly serious
threats. In areas controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra, Boko Haram and
other terrorist organizations, women are increasingly
becoming the victims of targeted violence, forced
marriage, sexual slavery and human trafficking.
Violence against women is used as a means of
intimidating the local population and disrupting
established social connections.
There is no doubt that the international community
must put an end to this appalling situation. The combat
against terrorism and the coordination of efforts in
this area should remain a priority in the work of the
Security Council and other specialized agencies of
the United Nations system. Consideration of crosscutting issues, including gender equality and the
advancement of women, should be carried out based
on the appropriate mandates, so as not to decrease but
enhance the effectiveness of the work of those bodies.
Only through joint efforts and appropriate coordination
of the efforts of all stakeholders, first and foremost
all Member States, based on strict compliance with
international law, can we achieve the desired results.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General and
the Prime Minister of Spain, Mr. Mariano Rajoy Brey,
for their outstanding efforts to promote the women and
peace and security agenda of the Security Council.
This has allowed us to celebrate today the fifteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), which is at the

15-3098623/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

heart of so many of the other resolutions adopted by the
Council and also at the heart of France’s priorities.
I also wish to acknowledge the outstanding work
of the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, whose coordination role to promote
this agenda and gender equality within the United
Nations is absolutely essential.
Finally, I wish to thank Ms. Lusenge, Ms. Mohammed
and Ms. Murabit for their poignant testimonies and
their relentless commitment to giving Congolese, Iraqi
and Libyan women a voice, a place and a chance in their
respective societies. Their commitment is a source of
admiration and inspiration for us all.
This high-level meeting on the issue of women and
peace and security does not only mark the anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) 15 years ago,
nor is it a simple review of the progress made since
2000. It represents a new start for the women and peace
and security agenda — a new start for more equality.
In that regard, I welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2242 (2015), which will allow us to pave the
way for a revival of the women and peace and security
agenda in the years to come. I wish to emphasize two
aspects of that relaunch.
First, it is a political revival, in the best sense of
the term. Indeed, the women and peace and security
agenda is a political agenda and should be treated as
such by States and the United Nations. States have the
responsibility to ensure the more active participation of
women in political processes, peace negotiations and
conflict resolution and prevention mechanisms. States
have the responsibility to involve women’s organizations
in policy discussions, not only to hear their voices but
above all to enable them to contribute to decisions. It is
also the responsibility of States to appoint more women
to key positions, including with respect to the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. The United Nations also
bears this political responsibility. The appointment of
more women to the positions of special envoy or highlevel expert alongside the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General is a step in the right direction.
Such policy decisions must multiply. It a question not of
symbols but of added value critical to the Organization.
The review of the women and peace and security
agenda also represents a new operational framework. In
particular, the maintenance and consolidation of peace
require more women, not only in peace operations, but
also through all the issues related to peacekeeping and

24/96

13/10/2015

peacebuilding. The planning and mandates of operations
should take these issues into account at all stages of
a crisis: upstream, to prevent risks; during, to protect
women from violence; and afterwards, to help victims
to rebuild. Good cooperation between the Departments
of Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support with
UN-Women is indispensable to that end. I commend the
efforts of those Departments to take better into account
the situation of women in peacekeeping operations.
I have stressed the responsibility of Member
States and the United Nations for the implementation
of measures related to the women and peace and
security agenda. I wish to conclude my remarks by
citing France’s actions in that regard. Since 2010, the
French Government has adopted two national action
plans for the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. These national action plans are
subject to an evaluation of the National Consultative
Commission on Human Rights and our Parliament. To
that end, France has mobilized several million euros to
support some 50 projects dedicated to strengthening the
capacities of women in countries in conflict, such as
Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to
Syrian refugee women living in camps in neighbouring
countries, with the support of UN-Women and several
non-governmental organizations.
You have asked, Sir, that this high-level review
serve as an opportunity for States to announce specific
commitments. I wish to share three instances of
France’s commitments.
At the political level, France is committed
to strengthening its mobilization to promote the
women and peace and security agenda nationally,
internationally and regionally. At the national level,
we will increase the visibility of our plan of action.
France, more than 20 per cent of whose ambassadors
are women, is committed to achieving the target of
40 per cent women appointed to high-level diplomatic
positions by 2018. That process is well under way.
At the international level, we will pursue our efforts
in the Security Council to ensure that the provisions of
resolutions on women and peace and security are well
represented in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
as they are in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

the Central African Republic. In the European Union,
we continue to advocate for the inclusion of women
in the Common Security and Defence Policy and to
support the protection of women in conflict situations
and in crisis resolution.
At the operational level, France — which,
through the deployment of over 900 military and
police personnel, is contributing to six peacekeeping
operations — is committed to the utmost vigilance and
resolve to ensure compliance with the rules laid down
by the United Nations in the fight against sexual abuse
and respect for human rights. The recruitment, training
and deployment of our personnel to operations will
continue according to a national process that ensures
compliance with these rules. In the case of recent
allegations of sexual abuse, our political leaders are
deeply committed to the adoption of the most stringent
sanctions, in addition to the judicial response, where
such cases prove legitimate.
Finally, at the financial level, I am pleased to
announce that France will contribute €50,000 to the
United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to
Eliminate Violence against Women. The most recent
biennial General Assembly resolution on the fight
against violence against women (resolution 69/147),
which France and the Netherlands have led since 2006,
calls on States to contribute to the Fund. We hope that
other States will follow. This contribution complements
the financial support to the tune of €100,000 that France
will offer UN-Women to strengthen women’s access to
justice.
This high-level meeting marks not the end but the
beginning of an ambitious reform of the women and
peace and security. France is determined to accompany
this reform for more equality so as to promote change in
the perception and treatment of issues related to women
in the United Nations. As the French poet Louis Aragon
once said, “Woman is the future of man”. Woman is
also the future of peace.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank Spain
for having organized this high-level open debate to
review the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and assess its concrete outcomes. I also thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his statement, as well as
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, and the civil society activists Ms. Julienne
Lusenge, Ms. Yanar Mohammed and Ms. Alaa Murabit
for their briefings and testimony.

S/PV.7533

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by Ms. Bineta Diop, African Union Special
Envoy for Women, Peace and Security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted by the
Security Council 15 years ago, and was followed
by other resolutions calling for enhanced efforts to
protect women and to promote their equal participation
in reconciliation and reconstruction processes. The
Secretary-General’s global study on this issue and his
most recent report in that regard (S/2015/716) reflect
the significant progress that has been made at various
levels in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
At the same time, however, it highlights certain
serious gaps and failings. The involvement in women
in conflict prevention and management and their
appointment to high-level positions at the national,
regional and international levels remain inadequate. In
such circumstances, it would be very difficult — indeed,
almost impossible — to ensure any time soon the gender
equality that the international community has set as its
goal. It is against the backdrop of that challenge that, at
its seventieth session, the General Assembly Summit
for the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals
decided to make gender equality a central pillar of the
new development road map at all levels.
Much remains to be done in that regard, beginning
with the United Nations itself, which should set the
example by further promoting the recruitment and
appointment of competent women to various senior
posts in the Organization. For its part, the Security
Council should fully embrace the commitment it
undertook in resolution 2122 (2013) to uniformly
implement resolution 1325 (2000) in the context of its
work by putting in place a follow-up strategy for its
work in that regard.
Moreover, we would like to underscore the
importance of close cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in achieving the
goals of Security Council resolutions on women and
girls. In that connection, I would like to welcome the
African Union’s adoption, in 2014, of its women, peace
and security programme, which was an important step
in strengthening efforts to raise awareness and improve
the capacities of its member States with regard to
resolution 1325 (2000).
In the face of the new challenges linked to sexual
and gender-based violence posed by such armed
groups as Boko Haram and Daesh, which carry out

15-3098625/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

kidnappings, traffic in women and girls and practice
forced prostitution, the entire international community
and individual States should further marshall their
efforts to wage a battle commensurate with the stakes
involved.
While fully acknowledging the progress made over
the past 15 years, we note that, when it comes to State
efforts, only about 50 countries have developed action
plans, whose implementation is significantly hampered
by the need for financing. In many developing countries,
including Chad, the persistence of negative cultural
aspects and misguided interpretations of religious
principles remain genuine obstacles on the path towards
achieving the commitments undertaken in resolution
1325 (2000). Those obstacles could and should be
overcome via robust involvement on the part of local
communities and traditional and religious leaders,
whose major role appears to be ignored in favour of
State institutions and non-governmental organizations
in the course of seeking adequate solutions. It should
be noted that perceptions among local communities
have also evolved, and that it is quite possible to make
a real difference using their own institutions that see
themselves as the guardians of tradition. The integration
and participation of women in every aspect of public
and private decision-making will make it possible to
eradicate negative social norms, reduce discrimination
and promote gender equality.
With regard to Chad’s own efforts, despite the
political determination reflected in resolution 1325
(2000), to date we have not been able to complete our
national plan, owing primarily to institutional and
technical shortcomings and a low level of ownership.
Nevertheless, since 2000, the constant efforts of our
national authorities, supported by the agencies of the
United Nations system, have made it possible to further
integrate women at various levels in all aspects of
society. In addition to boosting women’s presence in
the Government and the Parliament, women have been
encouraged to join our domestic security services,
especially the Gendarmerie and in the Garde nationale
et nomade. For some time, our national police have
implemented a 30 per cent quota on recruitment, thereby
contributing to promoting gender equality. Moreover,
this year, in the context of national women’s week and
the observance of International Women’s Day, the focus
has been on the empowerment of women. To that end,
for the past four years a special policy has been in place
to extend microcredit to women.

26/96

13/10/2015

In conclusion, I reiterate Chad’s commitment to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on the issue, in line with our national
legislation, while giving the requisite attention to the
recommendations set out in the global study on the
implementation of that resolution, as set out in the
report of the High-level Panel on Peace Operations and
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): Let me begin by
expressing our appreciation to the Spanish presidency
for convening this open debate. We commend the
Secretary-General’s dedication to promoting the cause
of women. I thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka
and her team for their dedicated work. I also thank
Ms. Julienne Lusenge, Ms. Yanar Mohammed and
Ms. Alaa Murabit for sharing their experiences with the
Security Council today.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), which calls for women’s
increased participation in peace processes, greater
protection from violations of their human rights,
improved access to justice, and measures to address
discrimination. Today we have to reassess what remains
to be done to make our commitments real.
There have been a number of visible achievements
over the past 15 years. Thanks to the Justice Rapid
Response instrument, there are more trained
investigators of sexual and gender-based violence.
The increase in the adoption of national action plans
illustrates a growing commitment by Member States
to implement the women and peace and security
agenda. Five out of the 16 peacekeeping missions are
led by women, and all multidimensional peacekeeping
operations have gender units. However, much more
needs to be done, as a real commitment to the women
and peace and security agenda continues to suffer from
implementation gaps. I would like to underline some
of them.
First, much too often, mediation and peace
processes remain male-dominated. While women are
disproportionately affected by conflict, their critical
role in negotiating, keeping and building peace in their
communities is often overlooked. In Syria, women’s
voices remain a minority in attempts at peace talks.
In Mali, only five out of every 100 participants in

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

negotiations that led to the Accord on Peace and
Reconciliation were women.
What can be done? Education is essential in
empowering women with knowledge, skills and selfconfidence. Unfortunately, in many conflicts, attacks
on schools and the freedom of thought are a common
reality. Furthermore, the development of quota systems
could, in some cases, provide positive impetus for
increased women’s involvement. The inclusion of
women in Yemen’s National Dialogue Conference was
instrumental in achieving a commitment that 30 per
cent of places in the Parliament must be reserved for
women. In Afghanistan, a quota system ensured that
28 per cent of seats in the Parliament now belong to
women. That gives them an opportunity to influence
major political decisions.
Lithuania has adopted measures to increase
women’s representation at all levels of governance.
Consistent and systematic long-term implementation
of gender equality policies and concrete measures,
coordination of actions and synergies of all the relevant
stakeholders led to a number of concrete results.
Women’s education rate stands at 90 per cent. Two of
the country’s highest posts — that of the President and
of the Speaker of the Parliament — are currently held
by women. Female staff amount to 70 per cent of the
public administration.
Our Government will remain a strong advocate
for women’s representation at all levels of governance,
especially in countries recovering from conflicts.
Lithuania
welcomes
the
Secretary-General’s
commitment to earmarking at least 15 per cent of all
United Nations peacebuilding spending for programmes
that further promote women’s empowerment and gender
equality.
Secondly, the spread of terrorism and violent
extremism has had a horrendous impact on the lives of
women and girls. While images and stories of Yazidi
women being enslaved by Daesh or girls forced to
become suicide bombers by Boko Haram capture our
emotions, we need to go beyond the perception of
women as victims of terrorism. Seeing women as a
driving force in the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism is crucial. In September, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, chaired by
Lithuania, held the first open briefing on the subject
with practitioners from the field. Furthermore, as

S/PV.7533

the global study research demonstrates, countries
with relative gender equality are less prone to violent
extremism than those where the human rights of women
are not protected. Therefore, all United Nations counterterrorism strategies must be linked with civil assistance
and human rights programmes aimed at shaping a
different social environment, averting extremism and
radicalization and tackling the root causes of terrorism.
Thirdly, sexual abuse continues to cast a shameful
shadow over United Nations peacekeeping despite
all efforts by the Secretariat and Member States. We
must act consistently to implement the zero-tolerance
policy with a particular focus on prevention, including
predeployment training and integration of gender
advisory staff in all United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Adequate vetting of personnel would further
prevent individuals with a history of abusive conduct or
sexual exploitation from serving.
Lithuania ensures that all its personnel deployed
in peacekeeping missions receive mandatory training
on gender mainstreaming and prevention. We are also
committed to ensuring an adequate response should
sexual exploitation or abuse occur, that is, bringing
perpetrators to account. We will pursue expanding the
involvement of women in peace operations in both the
civilian and military fields.
Last but not least, as emphasized in the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716), women’s
access to justice remains a considerable challenge.
We will not achieve women’s empowerment or gender
equality if perpetrators of violence against women and
girls continue to go unpunished. National capacities
to tackle cases of violence against women, including
sexual violence and rape, must be strengthened. The
international community has to support the capacitybuilding of Member States as they seek to build
independent, impartial and strong judicial institutions.
Lithuania remains committed to supporting
national and international accountability mechanisms
for the investigation of sexual and gender-based
violence and to ensuring that victims are provided with
adequate support and redress for the harm they have
suffered. The International Criminal Court continues
to be an important mechanism in combating sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict and should be used
vigorously to pursue accountability.
There can be no peace if half of the world’s
population is left behind. Women are often at the

15-3098627/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

forefront of positive change. The Council has an
obligation to act to make sure that this priceless
potential is not wasted. In that regard, we welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2242 (2015), which
will improve the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda on the ground.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the presidency of Spain for convening
today’s important meeting. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, the Director of Fonds pour les femmes
congolaises, Ms. Julienne Lusenge, the President of the
Organization of Women’s Freedom in Iraq, Ms. Yanar
Mohammed, and the Founder and President of the Voice
of Libyan Women, Ms. Alaa Murabit.
The importance of today’s meeting lies in the
fact that resolution 1325 (2000), which was adopted
15 years ago, is an important milestone in international
efforts aimed at protecting women from violence and
enhancing their role in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, as well as in the establishment of fair and stable
societies. In the years since its adoption, the resolution
has served to increased international awareness of the
importance of protecting women and girls, encouraging
the participation of women in national, regional and
international institutions, particularly in the areas of
peacekeeping, conflict management and resolution, and
containing risks to humankind. It has also enhanced
the legal and normative frameworks with regard to the
women and peace and security agenda.
Ninety per cent of the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council concerning the establishment or
extension of the mandates of peacekeeping operations
refer to this agenda. In addition, resolution 1325 (2000)
provides a normative framework for many regional
organizations and appears in many peace treaties signed
in recent years, which make clear references to gender.
However, despite the efforts to ensure the full
implementation of the resolution, and despite the time
that has gone by since its adoption, many challenges
remain. In fact, the concepts of peace and security
are now different from what they were 15 years ago.
Indeed, some of the threats against women and girls
are new. We are also now talking about climate change,
the upsurge of religious extremism throughout the
world and the unprecedented increase in the number
of refugees and internally displaced persons, including
women and girls, throughout the world, particularly
28/96

13/10/2015

in the Middle East. The changing nature and form of
conflicts, including civil wars, has also become an
important element in the violation of human rights.
When we talk about the rights of women and girls
in the context of resolution 1325 (2000), it should
be realized that the resolution is not just a means to
guarantee the participation of women in negotiations
during conflicts but it is also necessary for the protection
of women during conflicts. In that regard, I would like
to pay tribute to the Arab women in Palestine, Syria
and Yemen who are still victims of armed conflicts and
related persecution. It is therefore necessary that more
effective measures be taken to implement resolution
1325 (2000).
Jordan welcomes the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716),
such as increasing the participation and representation
of women in decision-making posts in the area of peace
and security and enhancing gender equality at all
levels at the United Nations. We draw attention to the
importance of appropriately funding the women and
peace and security agenda so that its recommendations
can be implemented. That would represent the
qualitative and quantitative leap forward needed to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to meet the
changes and new challenges that the women and peace
and security agenda is facing.
I would like to highlight some of the measures that
we have taken nationally. Jordan signed the political
declaration entitled “Planet 50-50 by 2030: Step It Up
for Gender Equality” just last month, which includes
a commitment to adopt a national plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). For that reason, we are in the
process of modifying our plan of action in order to
harmonize it with the Sustainable Development Goals
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), keeping in mind the
current regional context, including the constant flow of
Syrian refugees into Jordan. We are doing everything
possible to provide protection and basic services for
Syrian women refugees in our country, pursuant to the
women and peace and security agenda.
The role that women can play in countering
extremist thought is also crucial. Women can have a
positive influence on their children, encouraging them
to preserve peace and security and keeping them from
being recruited by extremist groups.
Jordan continues to be committed to the promotion
of women in peacekeeping and in decision-making.

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

In conflict resolution, the Jordanian armed forces,
also known as the Arab Army, have supported the
enhancement of the role of women in the military, with
a view to making the forces more efficient. Jordanian
women have taken part in peacekeeping operations and
humanitarian missions since 2007.
Furthermore, women play an enhanced role in the
Kingdom’s health services through their work in field
hospitals outside the country. Women also play an
important role in welcoming and providing protection
and services for Syrian refugees. In the context of
international cooperation, we are studying the gender
element in security programmes, with a view to creating
a strategy to increase the participation of Jordanian
women in our security forces in collaboration with
NATO.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Jordan will continue to enhance and guarantee the
protection of and respect for the rights of women
and girls in our legislation and to promote women’s
empowerment so that they may increasingly participate
in decision-making. We will also continue to protect the
rights of women and girls from all forms of violence,
and we will enhance capacities with governmental and
non-governmental organizations for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).
Mr. Ramirez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Mariano Rajoy Brey,
President of the Government of Spain, and we thank the
Spanish delegation for its initiative in convening this
important debate. We would also like to commend the
briefings by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and by
Under-Secretary-General Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
whom we congratulate for her tireless and successful
work as the Executive Director of UN-Women. We
would also like to thank Ms. Julienne Lusenge,
Ms. Yanar Mohammed and Ms. Alaa Murabit for their
important briefings.
Gender inequality and diverse forms of violence
against women and girls result from various phenomena
supported by deep religious, political and sociocultural
roots that have prevailed throughout history in many
countries, creating massive and ongoing violations
of the human rights of women and girls. That is an
unacceptable situation.
Exclusion, inequality and the different forms of
sexual violence against women and girls in times

S/PV.7533

of armed conflict only reflect and exacerbate the
imbalances and inequalities that women suffer in
non-conflict periods. Those inequalities generate the
conditions of specific vulnerability that require urgent
attention and the highest political commitment. If we
do not address that injustice in peacetime, we will be
even less able to do so in times of armed conflict.
We are celebrating the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which recognized the
disproportionate and unique impact of armed conflict
on women and girls, and the key role that women play
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts as well as
in peacebuilding and the consolidation of peace. We
welcome that.
There have been significant advances in the
normative sphere in the past 15 years. Nevertheless,
great challenges and a sense of frustration remain,
since women in situations of armed conflict continue to
suffer disproportionately from the brutal consequences
of those conflicts. They remain the objects of recurrent
and systematic violence and sexual abuse. That situation
is, unfortunately, linked to the strategic, ideological and
financial objectives of extremist and terrorist groups,
such as the self-proclaimed Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front, the Army of
Conquerors and Boko Haram, among others.
In addition, women are underrepresented in
forums devoted to peacebuilding and the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. The situation provides
clear evidence that, throughout recent years, genuine
political commitment to the issue has been lacking. We
are convinced that the participation and contributions
of women at all levels, stages and areas related to
conflict management are essential in order to prevent
conflicts and achieve lasting peace. There can be no
international peace and security if we do not include or
have due consideration for and incorporate half of the
world’s population, namely, women and girls.
Venezuela is a land of peace. We have no areas of
armed conflict in our territory, and we do not participate
in any. That is why our Bolivarian revolution is at the
forefront of ensuring gender equality and empowering
women so that they have the possibility of serving
as leaders in our society. Our major battle is against
poverty and exclusion. We understand clearly that
women have a leading role to play in that fundamental
development effort, because women embody and
represent the spiritual foundation of our society and the
umbilical cord to our culture and our future.

15-3098629/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

Under the inspiration of the late President Hugo
Chávez Frías and as part of our 1999 constitutional
process, the Bolivarian Constitution guarantees the
broadest human rights for our people and establishes
gender equality, while also banning any kind of
discrimination against women, whether on religious,
racial or ethnic grounds. We do not tolerate any kind of
exclusion or violence against women.
Over the past 16 years, women have served, in
accordance with our Constitution, as Speakers of our
National Assembly and as leaders in our judiciary and
electoral bodies; they have also served as moral leaders.
We have reformed our penal code to specifically
criminalize violence against women. In the ministerial
composition of our Government, women are in the
majority. In our legislative elections, 50 per cent of the
candidates must be women in accordance with the new
electoral law.
We have created the Ministry for the Popular Power
for Women, and community councils are, in the vast
majority, headed by women, through which they manage
resources and direct projects aimed at benefiting their
communities. Today, women in our country direct
fundamental aspects of our society on an equal basis
with men. We therefore have full moral authority to
demand an end to discrimination and violence against
women and girls, and to repudiate the notion of women
as sex objects in consumer society or as the spoils of
war at the hands of extremists. This world, wracked by
violence and extremism, must act more decisively, and
its leaders must act with greater political determination
to address this injustice.
We welcome the reference in resolution 2242 (2015),
adopted today, to the importance of men and boys
working together to promote the participation of women
in the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts
and in peacebuilding and post-conflict situations. The
“HeforShe” campaign promoted by UN-Women — of
whose Executive Board we are a member and which we
commend — should serve as a commitment and guide
for the actions of everyone, not just women, in times of
armed conflict as well as in peacetime.
The prevention and peaceful settlement of
disputes is always the best and most appropriate tool
for preventing the harmful and devastating effects of
armed conflicts on the civilian population, particularly
on women and children. It is therefore essential to halt
the training, equipping and supporting of non-State

30/96

13/10/2015

actors and extremists, who are used as instruments of
political destabilization to overthrow Governments,
acting in service to the geopolitical ambitions of foreign
actors, and in most cases, they serve only to incite the
commission of atrocities, acting with impunity against
women and children. Such groups today have covered
Africa and the Middle East in blood. They are motivated
by extremist ideologies that target women and girls in
the most abhorrent and unacceptable way.
If, in line with international law, we fully respected
and honoured the ban on the provision of weapons and
financial support to extremist groups, there would
be a decrease in the operational capabilities of those
actors, thus reducing the harmful and irreparable
consequences of armed conflicts on the civilian
population, particularly on women and children.
We welcome the call made today in the resolution
just adopted to continue working to improve the
training of all personnel deployed in the field so as to
strengthen the presence of gender experts and advisers
on the protection of women in the staff of the various
United Nations peacekeeping missions.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
its support for the zero-tolerance policy with regard
to the incidents of violence and sexual abuse that have
had taken place or will take place in operations carried
out by the United Nations. The Organization should
show resolve and coherence regarding the importance
of accountability for any personnel who commit
such crimes. It is also crucial for the international
community to be firm in condemning countries whose
personnel commit these types of crimes and encourage
them to adopt the measures necessary to punish those
responsible for acts of abuse and sexual exploitation
committed by foreign forces not associated with the
United Nations, so that such reprehensible actions do
not go unpunished.
In conclusion, we hope that this wide-ranging and
fruitful debate will enable us to act and move forward
concretely in resolving this issue. As we have stated,
women, girls and boys can no longer be considered the
spoils of war or objects of violence and oppression in
any society or under any circumstance. That would be
an outrage to us as human beings.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We, too, would
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women, and the three civil society
representatives for their briefings. I would like to

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

commend in particular Ms. Lusenge, Ms. Mohammed
and Ms. Murabit for their direct messages and for the
challenges they have laid out to the Council.
We thank and congratulate Spain and the United
Kingdom for their initiative in convening this debate
and for steering us through the adoption of resolution
2242 (2015) this morning. It is right that we take a fresh
look at the situation of women and girls in the context
of global peace and security for, as many have noted,
15 years have passed since resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted.
We can take some satisfaction that, over the past
15 years, we have made progress in ensuring that
the women and peace and security agenda is taken
into account in international conflict prevention
and resolution efforts. That in itself is no small
achievement. However, words in resolutions and other
documents, even in mandate formulations, only take
us so far. As we have heard today, we need to focus
on practical steps to improve the situation for women
on the ground, rather than just achieving rhetoric. The
issue is not new, but the landscape continues to change
and, sadly, is worsening. Rising violent extremism,
increased numbers of refugees and internally displaced
persons, and combatants who take no account of the
civilians in their midst all affect women and girls
disproportionately. The targeted use of sexual and
gender-based violence by terrorist groups such as
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram,
as part of a deliberate strategy, is a horrendous new
development.
This only makes more urgent the need to deal with
the threats posed by such groups and the underlying
causes that give rise to terrorism. In that broader sense,
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism is
gender- and age-neutral, but we must face up to the
reality that women and children suffer inordinately.
That is a reality that must be confronted by the Council,
by the General Assembly and by Member States. None
of us can say that it is someone else’s business. It is
a problem we must all own. At one level, we need
to bring home to people — whatever their country,
religious belief or ethnicity — that the mistreatment of
women and children, whether as a deliberate strategy
or an incidental consequence of conflict, is utterly
unacceptable. It will never be tolerated or accepted.
Bullying, domination, coercion — whatever terms
are used — are despicable. Those that engage in such

S/PV.7533

behaviours should be exposed for the cowards that they
are and they must be held accountable.
At another level, we need to move beyond a security
driven approach to conflict resolution. The recognition
of women’s rights and perspectives must be a part of
all programmes and policies for conflict resolution and
post-conflict development. Women must be able to play
a meaningful and integral part in conflict resolution
processes and outcomes. What does that mean in
practice? It means that women must be advisers,
negotiators, decision-makers and implementers, as
well as receivers of a peace process, if it is to have any
meaningful chance of success.
In our own small way, New Zealand has sought
to play its part. We have had women in front-line
peacekeeping roles since the year 2000. We are working
to ensure that women are included at more senior levels
in future peacekeeping operations. Our national action
plan focuses on improving international deployment
rates of senior staff within the New Zealand Defence
Force and New Zealand Police to increase the numbers
of women at decision-making levels in peacekeeping and
assistance missions. We also recognize the importance
of empowering local women and ensuring equality of
access to justice. During our seven-year engagement
in Afghanistan, New Zealand helped establish the first
Afghan National Police women’s committee at the
Bamyan provincial police headquarters. Key purposes
of the committee are to advocate for and support female
police, and the development and implementation of a
non-discrimination and harassment policies for all
police employees so as to encourage the recruitment
and retention of women police officers.
Another vital aspect of the women and peace and
security agenda for the Organization, in particular, is to
deal effectively with allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse by our own people. It is a stain on the work of
the United Nations and of the Council that allegations
of such behaviour by United Nations peacekeepers
continue to be made with a frequency and particularity
that brook no easy dismissal. We have taken some
satisfaction from the Secretary-General’s strong
statements that such behaviours will not be tolerated
and that perpetrators will be held criminally to account.
We agree that there must be a means for ensuring that
troop- and police-contributing countries exercise
criminal jurisdiction over their nationals participating
in United Nations operations when such allegations
are made. We also agree with the high-level advisory

15-3098631/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

group that States that do not live up to this should
not be allowed to participate in future peacekeeping
operations. Most of all, we insist that effective action
be taken. This, too, is a problem that we must all own if
it is to be dealt with effectively.
In conclusion, I want to affirm that New
Zealand — as the first country to recognize women’s
suffrage, at the national level — remains committed to
achieving the reality that women must play a similarly
equal role in efforts towards any lasting peace.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening and presiding over today’s momentous open
debate and for Spain’s leadership in the women and
peace and security agenda. My delegation wishes to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his remarks,
and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women for her in-depth and insightful briefing.
The voices of civil society are intrinsic to the
women and peace and security agenda, and I therefore
warmly recognize Ms. Julienne Lusenge, Ms. Yanar
Mohammed and Ms. Alaa Murabit for sharing their
experiences and views.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) sparked a sea
of change in the way we viewed women’s involvement
in pursuit of peace and security. Fifteen years and seven
resolutions later, our belief in the integral role of women
in ending and preventing conflict remains unchanged.
However, results on the ground leave much to be
desired. In commemorating the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), this meeting
presents a golden opportunity to make tangible progress
in ensuring the protection, participation, representation
and empowerment of women and girls in situations of
conflict.
In addition, the convergence of the three highlevel reviews on women and peace and security, peace
operations and peacebuilding provides rich sources
for our continued discussion and action. We take this
opportunity to thank the lead author, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, members of the high-level advisory
grooup and UN-Women for their work on the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We believe that the research and recommendations
therein merit full examination and consideration by

32/96

13/10/2015

Member States, the United Nations and all the relevant
stakeholders.
We must acknowledge our collective ownership
over the women and peace and security agenda in
order to realize the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Every stakeholder — Member States, the
United Nations, regional organizations, civil society
and the individual — can play a role.
We commend the Secretary-General for his
renewed initiatives to promote greater representation of
women in United Nations senior leadership, mediation
teams and peacekeeping missions, as well as to promote
better coordination among United Nations entities
in mainstreaming the issue of women and peace and
security.
In implementing this agenda in the immediate
and short term, Malaysia intends to focus on capacitybuilding in the areas of protection and conflict
prevention. United Nations Blue Helmets undertake
a crucial aspect of protection efforts in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We also fully support the
implementation of mandatory predeployment training
for peacekeepers on preventing sexual violence,
exploitation and abuse.
In order to further the women and peace and
security agenda, I am pleased to announce that Malaysia
commits to continuing capacity-building training for
peacekeepers, including on the protection of civilians,
gender and cultural diversity, through the Malaysian
Peacekeeping Centre.
With regard to post-conflict peacekeeping,
Malaysia is presently undertaking efforts to offer
relevant technical assistance and cooperation to women
from countries in transition and that are newly emerging
from conflict, under the auspices of the Malaysian
technical cooperation programme. These commitments
will be reviewed from time to time and will be adjusted
accordingly, taking into account the relevant needs and
requirements of both recipients and donors.
Resolution 2242 (2015) marks an important
milestone in the advancement of the women and peace
and security agenda. It signifies the commitment of
the Security Council to strengthen the integration of
women and peace and security concerns across its body
of work through innovative approaches and enhanced
information sharing.

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

I thank the delegations of Spain and the United
Kingdom for leading this important initiative, while
emphasizing the necessity to build trust and inclusive
cooperation within the Council in support of this
agenda.
Our task for the next 15 years is to ensure that
every woman can succeed, especially women and girls
in conflict and post-conflict situations, and not only
stand in the shadows of men. In that regard, I assure
you, Mr. President, of Malaysia’s steadfast commitment
to this outcome both within the Council and beyond.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber. I would also like to appeal to
speakers to deliver their statements at a normal speed
so that interpretation may be provided properly.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of International Relations and Cooperation of
Namibia. I am especially pleased to do so since Namibia
was the country that presided over the Security Council
when resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted.
Ms. Nandi-Ndaitwah (Namibia): His Excellency
Mr. Hage Geingob, President of the Republic
of Namibia, appreciated the invitation that you,
Mr. President, extended to him to participate in this
debate. He, however, delegated me to represent him
owing to other equally important State responsibilities.
He wishes these deliberations success.

S/PV.7533

important, as it gives us an opportunity to review the
progress made since 2000. No doubt, some remarkable
progress has been made both at national and global
levels. However, much still needs to be done.
I believe that as nations we have a lot to share
when it comes to resolution 1325 (2000). Although the
resolution is known as one on women and peace and
security, the main element is the importance of world
peace. Therefore, the full and equal participation of
women at all levels of peacemaking and peacebuilding
is central to sustainable world peace and for sustainable
development to be achieved. As women, we do not just
want to participate, but we want to live in a peaceful
world.
The successes of this landmark resolution has raised
international awareness on the unique and grave issues
that girls and women face during and after conflict.
In Namibia, we have always recognized the link
between peace and gender equality. That is what we
have learned from our long years of liberation struggle
for independence, in which women, including myself,
fully participated. Before returning from exile, in his
last general address to Namibians in exile, in 1989
in Angola, our founding President and father of the
Namibian nation, then President of the South-West
Africa People’s Organization, Comrade Sam Nujoma,
called on Namibian women to be alert and not to allow
the country to be messed up once independence was
achieved. Therefore, we are convinced, and rightly
so, that women played and continue to play a role in
achieving and maintaining the peace we have enjoyed
since Namibia’s independence 25 years ago.

Namibia supports resolution 2242 (2015), which
was just adopted and which we believe is one of
the instruments that will make it possible to fully
implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security. In the same vein, we would like to thank
Spain for organizing this debate today.

Namibia attaches great importance to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and it will
continue to play its part. Namibia was one of the
first countries of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) to ratify the SADC Protocol on
Gender and Development. That Protocol calls upon
Member States to put in place measures to ensure that
women have equal representation and participation
in key decision-making positions and peacebuilding
processes.

Exactly 15 years ago, on 31 October 2000, under the
presidency of Namibia, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000). That resolution recognizes and
reaffirms the critical role women play in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, as well as their role in
post-conflict reconstruction. Today’s debate is very

I also inform members that we recently reviewed
our national gender policy and we have included
women and peace and security as one of our critical
areas of concern. That explains why Namibia is one
of the largest female police-contributing countries to
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in

15-3098633/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

Darfur, the Sudan. As a matter of fact, during 2010, we
deployed our first full female contingent of 31 officers
to Darfur. Namibian women in peacekeeping missions
have demonstrated remarkable commitment, high
competency and aptitude for innovation.
The move by the Chair of the African Union
Commission to establish an Office of the African Union
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security is highly
commendable. Since its establishment, it has been
busy contacting women in conflict areas in Africa and
helping them to decide how best they can contribute to
achieving peace in their respective countries.
This year’s fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) is an important and historic
event that should unite us in working to take concrete
action and rally a concerted international effort to
promote international peace in ways that involve
women at every level. On the eve of the launch of the
global study of the resolution’s implementation, we
have an opportunity to evaluate what has worked and
what remains to be strengthened. At the core, while we
can acknowledge that improvements have been made,
we still see a critical shortage of female players in
peace processes around the world. That is especially
true in post-conflict resolution. Namibia therefore
stresses the need for the United Nations to appoint
more women in the areas of high-level decision-making
and peace processes, including special envoys,
special representatives, peacekeepers, mediators and
negotiators. And we urge women to work to achieve
leadership positions throughout the Organization.
It is our belief that ensuring a significant presence
of women peacekeepers in conflict and post-conflict
situations has the added advantage of creating safer
spaces for girls and women who have suffered from
sexual violence. Studies conducted by the United
Nations in support of resolution 1325 (2000), based
on experiences in operations in Cambodia, Kosovo,
Timor-Leste, Afghanistan, Liberia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have also demonstrated that
in dealing with women and children, female soldiers
do not face the same cultural constraints as their male
counterparts and are thus better able to gain information
from them. That ability to gain the trust of local
populations should be considered a vital component of
any peacekeeping operation. Furthermore, the evidence
shows that the presence of women can transform
male-dominated institutional cultures and promote
women’s rights within security organs. And since it

34/96

13/10/2015

brings different skills and competencies to bear, the
increased participation of women can help create a
more trusted and legitimate security apparatus.
Those charged with leading and supporting peace
processes, especially the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and regional bodies, should be committed
to bringing talented women into peace negotiations and
the signing and implementing of peace agreements. We
need the Security Council to move the agenda forward
from general exhortations to concrete directives on
how those entities involved in peacekeeping should
promote women’s participation as special envoys,
special representatives, peacekeepers, mediators and
negotiators. I believe that resolution 2242 (2015),
adopted today, can lead us in that direction.
Finally, Namibia welcomes the forthcoming 2015
high-level review and the Secretary-General’s report on
the global study (S/2015/716), reviewing the progress
that has been made at the national, regional and global
levels in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The
global study, to be launched tomorrow, will help to
formulate the global vision and strategies we need to
make resolution 1325 (2000) a powerful tool for peace
and security. It should lay out concrete, action-oriented
programmes with measurable targets and indicators to
guide the resolution’s implementation in the future. It
will improve the prospects for world peace if Member
States can use the study as a blueprint for serious
examination of their national policies and learn how
they can benefit from it.
While establishing the role of women in peace
operations, we must also tackle the root causes of
conflicts. Conflict must not become a norm in this
century. We must silence the guns. As human beings,
we have to realize that manufacturing products such
as arms and ammunition seems to motivate us to act
against our self-interest. Why not stop producing arms
and start developing more people-friendly industries
that can help us create the necessary jobs and wealth
we need for sustainable development? Our individual
interests should not cost us international peace, stability
and security. Namibia will continue to be committed
to achieving that, and we believe that the participation
of women will unquestionably enable us to succeed in
creating the world we want — a world of peace, in which
conflict can be resolved by peaceful means rather than
armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt.
15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

Mr. Selim (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Kingdom of Spain and the President of the
Government of Spain for taking the initiative to convene
today’s meeting on women and peace and security on
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), and for inviting us to participate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his efforts to highlight this important issue, including in
his most recent report on the resolution’s implementation
(S/2015/716), which particularly emphasizes the
problem of resolving the crises facing us of the lack
of financing and inequitable selectivity in allocating
financial resources, as well as the direct links that the
report highlights among development issues, including
the importance of supporting countries’ efforts to help
their peoples achieve their aspirations and of protecting
women in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.
Egypt supports the Secretary-General’s call to promote
the role of women in its peacekeeping operations and its
mediation and conflict-resolution efforts.
Our discussion of the issues related to resolution
1325 (2000) has touched on the lack of adequate
attention to some of the chief problems it is aimed at,
in particular the degree to which women suffer under
foreign occupation, as well as the effects that can result
from an overemphasis on the connection between
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, which can weaken the systems
available for providing protection in both peace and
war through the politicization of positions on the
various issues linked to the two types of law. Another
is insufficient attention to the priorities of national
sovereignty and respect for national legislation, along
with a reliance on unofficial studies that may not be as
precise in evaluating the progress made in achieving
goals for women and peace and security.
Terrorism is a threat to peace and security, along
with the armed conflicts that afflict many States and
regions around the world. In most cases, in fact, it forms
an integral part of every conflict. That is a threat our
communities face, and the threat level has increased of
late. It has affected States’ abilities to carry out their
aspirations in terms of development and prosperity.
Although terrorism threatens the whole of society,
women are the most vulnerable. That is a cause to
which we will accord great interest as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council.
Egypt accords great interest to issues of women
and their role as a pivotal element in building and

S/PV.7533

maintaining peace. That interest is based on Egypt’s
efforts in promoting the position of women in different
areas. It goes hand in hand with Egypt’s broader vision
of the empowerment of women at all levels. Egypt has
supported the goals and rationale of resolution 1325
(2000) since its adoption, back in 2000, given the
importance of this and subsequent resolutions with
respect to the cause of women in conflict and postconflict situations. In that regard, Egypt’s support has
taken many forms at both the regional and international
levels.
The National Council for Women of Egypt
has worked out a national plan for follow-up and
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
framework of the active role played by women in the
area of international conflict resolution. Egypt has
become one of 17 African States to develop that kind of
national plan. Over the last 15 years, since the adoption
of the resolution, Egypt has held a number of activities
on that issue. Two regional workshops were organized,
jointly with the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. Egypt has accorded special attention to issues
of training and capacity-building. From 2013 to 2015,
the Cairo Regional Centre for Training on ConflictResolution and Peacekeeping in Africa has held seven
training courses, two courses for the training of trainers
and a workshop, all dedicated to habilitating staff and
to exchanging expertise on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), under the theme “Inclusion
of gender in peacekeeping and peace building”, to
be complemented by the holding of five additional
training courses in the same vein up to June 2016.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
appreciation for the call to convene this important
meeting, in which we have been eager to participate in
the framework of Egypt’s support for the efforts of the
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
to promote the role and status of women. Egypt will
also be sure to follow up on these issues regionally and
internationally in the context of its efforts to achieve
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of El Salvador.
Mr. Martínez Bonilla (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador is pleased to participate in this
important high-level debate on women and peace and
security as a country which experienced a lengthy
and bloody civil war that ended with the signing of
the peace agreements that laid a basis for a process

15-3098635/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

of democratization. That is why we acknowledge the
important role that is played by women in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as peacebuilding, as
highlighted in resolution 1325 (2000).
On the basis of that acknowledgement, as a country
we believe that it is a priority to work in order to
achieve greater participation by women in the various
peacekeeping operations. El Salvador is making efforts
to be able to enhance the participation of women
in the six peacekeeping missions in which we are
participating, in accordance with what is stipulated in
resolution 1325 (2000) and other subsequent Security
Council resolutions.
Given the importance that my country places in
compliance with this resolution, I am pleased to inform
Council members that El Salvador has made efforts at the
Government level, with the support of friendly countries
and international organizations, to set up our national
committee for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions. The members of the
committee were sworn in on 12 November 2014, and the
committee incorporates in its structure 17 Government
organizations, the public ministry, academia and civil
society. Its main objective is to propose policies and
standards that ensure compliance with the resolutions
and to ensure that we enhance the representation of
women at all levels of the decision-making processes
of national institutions and mechanisms, as well as
national, regional and international institutions for the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts.
In 2014, the mechanism to promote women as
members of the national committee presented a draft
document entitled “The Memory of the Fireflies”, which
was carried out with the support of women survivors
and family members of the victims of the massacres
that took place in December 1981. That project carried
out an anthropological investigation to compile the
testimonies of women and to provide psycho-social
assistance in safe spaces where they were able to talk
about their experiences.
That gave rise to the publication of a book and video
entitled “The Memory of the Fireflies”, with which we
aim to reshape the knowledge of what happened during
the massacres from the point of view of their actual
life experience and also to preserve oral memory. With
that, we aim to promote the reparation process, taking
on not only the civilian compensation aspect but also
making the experiences of those women more visible.

36/96

13/10/2015

Furthermore, in August 2015, El Salvador
organized the first regional workshop on training for
resolution 1325 (2000),with member countries of the
Central American Integration System. The aim was to
promote the development of national action plans for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in other
countries of the region. The workshop was inaugurated
and closed by President of Chile, Ms. Michelle Bachelet,
and the President of El Salvador, Mr. Salvador Sánchez
Cerén. Currently, our country is at the forefront of
formulating a road map that will make it possible to
ensure the follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions.
El Salvador expresses its support for all initiatives
that would ensure the participation of women in
the various peacekeeping contingents, in line with
resolution 1325 (2000) and other subsequent resolutions
of the Security Council.
In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the
important work done by Spain as President of the
Security Council. Similarly, I would like to thank
UN-Women for its support and its attendant technical,
political and financial support for our efforts in our
national committee. At the same time, I would like to
call for that support to continue.
We hope that as people become familiar with
our experience, other countries in the region will be
encouraged to work more thoroughly when it comes
to the area of peace and security, especially from the
inclusion perspective that is set out in resolution 1325
(2000).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Senegalese
Abroad of Senegal.
Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to commend the Spanish presidency
of the Security Council and to welcome the President of
the Spanish Government to this important open debate
on women and peace and security. I would also like to
commend the quality of the report (S/2015/716) of the
Secretary-General, as well as to welcome the briefings
by the Executive Director of UN-Women and the others
who spoke after her. As a historic milestone, resolution
1325 (2000) will contribute to bridging a gap when it
comes to the search for lasting peace, reconciliation
among people and ensuring justice.
As an integral component of crimes against
humanity, genocide and war crimes, sexual and gender15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

based violence breaches the social contract that binds
civilians to security forces, undermines the foundations
of peace and destroys development efforts. Moreover,
discrimination against women in peace efforts, in
addition to further aggravating such injustice, runs the
risk of sowing the future seeds of resurgent conflict.
The implementation of this programmatic
and operational framework, strengthened by other
resolutions, led the Council to take into account the issue
of women and peace and security in 7 of 13 agreements
concluded in 2013 and in 14 of 20 resolutions creating
or extending United Nations peacekeeping mandates.
I commend the participation of women in all United
Nations-led peace mediation efforts in 2013.
However, despite those highly encouraging efforts,
women and girls continue to be subject to the lawlessness
of warlords. That is why we believe it important, as we
pursue our efforts under resolution 1325 (2000) and
other substantive texts, to adopt an integrated, holistic
approach that prioritizes the political, development
and human rights perspectives in order to better keep
the peace, break the cycle of impunity and ensure
reconciliation and the social reintegration of victims
and their former executioners.
That brings me to the question of the
empowerment — particularly economic — of women
during and after conflict as they take part in the kind of
recovery efforts that are so valued by the Peacebuilding
Commission. In that respect, I underscore the
meaningful
contributions
that
regional
and
subregional organizations can and must provide to the
implementation of that important agenda. In that light,
I reaffirm that Senegal, as the seventh-largest troopcontributing country and candidate for non-permanent
membership of the Council for 2016-2017, maintains
a priority focus on the women and peace and security
agenda.
That priority is already manifested by the 60
Senegalese women participating in United Nations
missions and the Senegalese contribution towards
making the idea of a situation room a familiar
concept. Senegal’s faith in the leadership of women
was highlighted by President Macky Sall’s choice
to co-sponsor the launching of the United Nations
campaign against sexual violence.
In conclusion, I wish to highly commend the
adoption of resolution 2242 (2015), which Senegal
co-sponsored.

S/PV.7533

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Francophonie
and Regional Integration of Gabon.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
and expressing, on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Ali
Bongo Ondimba, President and Head of State of the
Gabonese Republic, our deep gratitude for having been
invited to take part in today’s debate on the crucial
topic of women and peace and security. I also commend
the presence here of a number of high-level dignitaries,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women.
The adoption by the Council on 31 October 2000
of resolution 1325 (2000) was a historical turning
point in the efforts of the international community
to ensure greater protection of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. Resolution 1325 (2000)
also helped us to recognize the vital role that women
must play in the different stages of the peace process,
namely: conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. Today’s debate is an opportunity to
take an objective look at the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the light of
the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the
Fourth World Conference on Women, held in Beijing.
Despite our efforts to combat sexual violence
against women and girls in armed conflict, it must
be acknowledged that the atrocities inflicted against
women and girls never have been as appalling as they
are today. Indeed, as rightly underscored in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/716), we are witnessing
an unprecedented increase in the number of displaced
women, crimes of sexual violence and other forms of
exploitation. That is compounded by the risk associated
with new threats such as climate change, natural
disasters, terrorism and new warfare technologies.
With regard in particular to sexual violence against
women and girls in armed conflict, it should be noted
that these victims may be traumatized when they lack
access to medical care or psychosocial support.
Resolution 1983 (2011), which was adopted by the
Security Council in June 2011 at the initiative of Gabon,
underscores that sexual violence against women and
girls in armed conflict can in some cases constitute a
risk factor in the infection and spread of HIV.
Gabon welcomes the inclusion of resolution 1325
(2000) among the Sustainable Development Goals of

15-3098637/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

the post-2015 development agenda, particularly Goal 5
regarding gender equality.
The full participation of women in peace
negotiations is all the more important in that it ensures
the inclusion of their concerns in peace agreements.
Similarly, their involvement in preventing violence,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is necessary for the
resolution of conflicts. With respect to the reform of
peacekeeping operations currently under way, more
women must be involved in the theatres of operations,
in mediation and preventive diplomacy efforts, and
in the counseling necessary for the rehabilitation and
reintegration of victims of violence in society.
The number of female staff deployed in
peacekeeping contingents must be increased so as to
ensure a holistic approach to situations on the ground.
Indeed, the presence of more women in these operations
could help to ease tensions, create a trustworthy
environment and expand the missions’ mandates in the
field. We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
to promote women to senior positions within the
United Nations system in general and in peacekeeping
operations in particular. The appointment of women to
head the United Nations Mission in South Sudan since
its establishment in 2011 is a perfect illustration thereof.
My country encourages him to continue working to that
end.
I reaffirm my country’s commitment to advancing
the issue of women and peace and security. Gabon has
always been a haven for refugees and displaced persons
from countries of the subregion that are experiencing
conflict situations. It is unfortunate that these refugees
and displaced persons consist mostly of women and
children, some of whom are victims of violence
and abuse. Gabon has always worked to provide
appropriate support to these women victims by setting
up specialized health-care infrastructure for displaced
or refugee women, including those living with HIV/
AIDS. Similarly, the integration and empowerment
programmes initiated by the Government of Gabon
have facilitated the availability of arable land.
Close follow-up of the efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) is useful. Gabon reiterates its
willingness to maintain that momentum. To conclude,
Gabon commends the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015) and is dedicated to ensuring its implementation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.

38/96

13/10/2015

Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Spanish presidency
of the Security Council for having convened this very
important debate, which allows us to reiterate and
renew our commitment to the full, timely and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security.
My colleague Foreign Minister García Margallo
of Spain, in his statement in the general debate of
the current session of the General Assembly (see
A/70/PV.21), said that the twenty-first century would
be the century of women, and I agree with him.
Furthermore, I believe that 2015 is a pivotal year for
gender equality and women’s empowerment. We have
agreed to the inclusion of a separate Goal on gender
among the Sustainable Development Goals and to the
mainstreaming of the gender perspective throughout
the entire programme. This year, we commemorate the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) and the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action.
(spoke in English)
This year marks 15 years since the adoption of the
landmark resolution establishing the basis for the women
and peace and security agenda and calling for the special
protection and the full and equal participation of women
in all conflict-prevention, conflict-resolution and postconflict peacebuilding efforts. Resolution 1325 (2000)
and a further six relevant resolutions adopted from
2008 to 2013 continue to provide main guidelines and a
real framework for Member States in the development
of policy and measures in the above-mentioned areas
as well as in the field of minimizing the impact of
conflicts on women and girls.
In this sense, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 2242 (2015), submitted by Spain, as an
important instrument to reflect all the changes that
have happened since 2000 and introduce a new and
important perspective into the women and peace and
security agenda. Indeed, women tend to suffer more
hardships as a direct result of economic consequences of
conflict, are at increased risk of human trafficking and
of being forced into sex work, and face the acute effects
of undermined health systems. Gender-based violence,
including the systematic use of rape and increased
domestic violence, has been widely recognized as a
pervasive occurrence in conflict.

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

Ukraine reaffirms its support for the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy on all forms of sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers, including all
civilian staff deployed to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The proper conduct by and discipline over
all personnel deployed in United Nations peacekeeping
operations are vital to their effectiveness. Ukraine,
as an important peacekeeping contributor, welcomes
the fact that the comprehensive reviews of the United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding architecture
are taking place at the same time as and in interaction
with the women and peace and security agenda review.
Of course, we strongly support international efforts
aimed at addressing the full range of human rights
violations and abuses faced by women in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations.
Ukraine knows at first hand how disproportionate
the impact of armed conflicts on women can be. Due
to the Russian aggression against Ukraine, the issues
covered by the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) are of
particular importance to our country. A vast majority
of internally displaced persons are women, many of
whom become the sole caretakers of children and older
relatives. As of today, around 1.5 million internally
displaced persons (IDPs) have been forced to leave
their homes as a result of Russia’s occupation of Crimea
and aggression in Donbas. About two-thirds of adult
internally displaced persons are women.
The Government of Ukraine is undertaking a
number of targeted steps to address the challenges
that the ongoing foreign aggression places on women
in Ukraine. Ukrainian authorities fully understand the
specific needs of IDP families, and women in particular.
The law of Ukraine on IDPs adopted in 2014 was
welcomed by the international community, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. The law is aimed at ensuring the rights
and freedoms of internally displaced persons, including
women, and at addressing key issues in this area,
inter alia, by facilitating humanitarian assistance.
On 5 March, our legislation on IDPs was amended in
order to strengthen their social protection, including by
addressing the issue of unemployment.
The full use of the knowledge, skills and experience
of Ukrainian women is vital to reaching a solution of
the current situation in and around Ukraine. We can cite
a number of other examples of women’s engagement.
They prepare, collect and distribute food, clothing and
a lot more in the course of providing humanitarian

S/PV.7533

assistance. Another example is our female Member
of Parliament, Ms. Iryna Gerashchenko, who was
appointed last year as Special Envoy of the President
of Ukraine on the peaceful settlement of the situation
in Donbas.
We would like especially to reiterate our
commitment to ensuring that global obligations on the
women and peace and security agenda are integrated
into our domestic policies and laws in order to
contribute to the empowerment of women and elevate
the importance of women’s participation and leadership
in all aspects of peace and security, as well as postconflict recovery and reconstruction.
Ukraine confirms its political will and readiness
to assume the following commitments and pledges in
line with the main objective of this open debate: first,
to strengthen the participation of women in political
life and public decision-making; secondly, to increase
women’s role in ensuring peace and security; and
thirdly, to elaborate and implement programmes on
the assistance to women from vulnerable groups and
women who have suffered from domestic violence.
The main document that will enable us to
implement these pledges is a national action plan
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The Government has already developed a draft
of this document, in close consultation and close
interaction with agencies of the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
as well as civil society. The action plan is aimed at
promoting women’s greater participation in military,
political, economic and social life, the peace process,
the recovery process, the prevention and combating of
gender-based violence, and the reintegration of persons
affected by the consequences of the ongoing aggression
against my country.
Another important document is the national human
rights strategy that was approved by the President of
Ukraine in August. According to the strategy, ensuring
equal rights for women and men; combating genderbased violence, human trafficking and slavery; and
combating domestic violence are defined as key
objectives of the human rights policy of Ukraine for thes
coming years. Among recent steps, I can also mention a
local elections law signed in August. The law stipulates
that in multiple-mandate constituencies at the local and
regional levels, not less than 30 per cent of each party
list should be represented by women or men.

15-3098639/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, I should like to draw special attention
to the case of Nadiya Savchenko who represents the
female face of what is going on in Ukraine. A political
prisoner and Member of the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe, Nadiya Savchenko is being
kept in custody by the Russian Federation with no
legal grounds and despite the fact that under the Minsk
arrangements all hostages and illegally detained
persons must be released. I should like to reiterate my
appeal to the international community to maintain
its political and diplomatic pressure on the Russian
Federation to cease the practice of suppressing human
rights and immediately release Nadiya Savchenko and
other Ukrainian political prisoners.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine for speaking in
Spanish at the beginning of his statement. Spanish is a
language shared by many Members of the Organization,
and yesterday we celebrated Spanish Day here at the
United Nations.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Social
Equality of Israel.
Ms. Gamliel (Israel): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address
the Chamber on this important topic. However, I
feel compelled to begin by speaking out against the
unrelenting campaign of terror being carried out against
my people. In recent weeks, Israel has been rocked by
a spate of violent attacks, stabbings, car bombs and fire
bombs. Men, women, children and even infants have
been targeted as they walk the streets or on their way
home from prayer.
We would expect to hear loud condemnation of such
violence, but when it comes to terror attacks on Israelis,
the international community and the Council seem to
lose their voice. Even this morning, I have heard fellow
leaders in this Chamber talking about terrorism while
not mentioning a word about terror in Israel, where
today we are burying its latest victims.
Unfortunately, Israel is facing a generation of
women, teens and even young children incited to hatred,
martyrdom and killing innocents, and not to peace and
coexistence. A 13-year old boy, instead of going to
play outside, comes to kill after being brainwashed. A
student who has her whole life in front of her comes
to murder. As a woman and as a mother, I believe that
education is the key to raising a generation of young
people committed to understanding and tolerance. In

40/96

13/10/2015

Israel, the very first words our children learn at school
are shalom and salam — peace.
I am here today as Israel’s Minister for Social
Equality — a ministry established for the first time
in Israel’s history to deal with minorities and gender
issues and to enhance Israel’s efforts to fight prejudice
and combat social inequality. Since its founding,
Israel has been committed to a vision of a society of
equal opportunities. Our Declaration of Independence
guarantees equal rights for all citizens, regardless of
gender, ethnicity or religion.
We believe that women should be free to choose
their own path in life, unhindered by barriers and bias.
This freedom paves the way for a better and more
stable society for all. In our efforts towards peace and
security, Israel believes that women are powerful agents
of moderation, particularly in the face of extremism. As
leaders and decision-makers, we can be a stabilizing
force. Especially in my region of the world, women are
an untapped potential for more peaceful societies.
As part of our commitment to gender equality,
Israel enacted legislation in 2005 that guarantees
women’s equal participation in public decision-making,
peacebuilding, reconciliation and representation of
women in all national policy issues. The inclusion of
women is the key to opening the door to a sustainable
peace. Mashav — Israel’s Agency for International
Development — has been actively training women from
throughout the world to equip them with the necessary
leadership skills so they can hold senior positions in
society. Israel’s commitment to full participation has
been recognized here at the United Nations. Israel is
proud to have recently joined the 48 States members of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Together, we will work to advance global progress
towards women’s empowerment.
The peace and prosperity of tomorrow depend
on the path we take today. Gender equality and equal
participation are the first steps on the road to conflictresolution, peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Israel is
proud to join its partners on the march towards a new
era in which women stand alongside men and lead the
way to the lofty goals of peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Women of the Dominican
Republic.
Ms. Germán (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Dominican Republic,
15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

I should like to thank the Council for organizing
today’s debate.. This high-level meeting is eloquent
testimony to the great interest shown by the Security
Council, and particularly the Kingdom of Spain, in
promoting women’s rights and their role in the field of
international peace and security. These topics are of
crucial importance in a world where it is important to
further develop a culture of protection and solidarity
with women, adolescents and girls.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on
31 October 2000, we have seen genuine progress
in protecting women in conflict situations and in
moving towards their full and total participation in
equal conditions in international peace and security
processes. We welcome the progress that has been
made in implementing resolution 1325 (2000), but
we understand that we need to coordinate action in
implementing the resolution in order to achieve a more
global approach.
The United Nations system has a crucial role
to play to that end. We must promote truly effective
actions that will allow women to become the main
actors in implementing the resolution and not depend
on the decisions of others. Focusing attention on the
situation of women is even more urgent when we note
that women and their families are those most affected
by civil wars. They are the targets of kidnappings, they
fill the makeshift boats that cross the waters of the
Mediterranean, and they remain in conflict zones while
their husbands flee persecution and repression.
It is important to recall that we have just adopted
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1). This year we celebrate the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations and the
twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, which laid the foundation for the
women and peace and security agenda. We are also
celebrating the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), which confirms the importance
of working for the participation of women in conflictprevention, conflict-management and rehabilitation
from conflict.
We have an historic opportunity to continue to
promote the development of a focused agenda that
prioritizes the value of women’s participation as an
invaluable driving force to achieve sustainable peace
and security. The main role played by women in social,
economic and political development in our societies

S/PV.7533

makes equal economic and political rights between men
and women logical and correct, especially with respect
to preventing and resolving international conflicts.
We believe that if women have opportunities, they can
contribute at every stage of a peace process, including
peacebuilding.
We support the formal designation by the
Secretary-General of UN-Women as the coordinating
entity within the Secretariat for the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. We believe
that the Standing Committee on Women, Peace and
Security must revitalize and revitalize United Nations
action against sexual violence in conflict, including the
prevention of sexual violence, accountability and the
provision of assistance to victims. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations should also have a strategic
plan to enhance women’s leadership and participation.
We understand that the women and peace and security
agenda must become a full part of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, given the role that women play as
victims, drivers and agents of change.
The Dominican Republic trusts that the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
will be a unique opportunity to formulate an agenda
of global policies on women, peace and security at the
political and operational levels so that we can work
together, focused on action that will make it possible
to redesign appropriately financed strategies to move
forward with this agenda.
In the Dominican Republic, fortunately, there are
no armed conflicts. However, the President is working
for gender equality and for the empowerment of women
in order to guarantee their economic, physical and
political independence. To that end, we decided that all
plans and projects being considered in the context of
the national development strategy to 2030 must include
gender equality. We have also adopted a programme
to ensure that as of 2016 the respective budgets of all
State institutions must include resources earmarked to
achieve gender equality and non-discrimination against
women. In this year, the Dominican Republic adopted a
new law creating a comprehensive system to guarantee
prevention, detection, comprehensive care, prosecution,
punishment and follow-up with respect to to all forms
of violence against women.
We therefore trust that today’s debate we will lead
to concrete commitments to ensure that women will
be respected comprehensively as a permanent priority

15-3098641/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

in maintaining and promoting international peace and
security, which the Dominican Republic supports fully.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Health, Social Affairs and
Labour of Andorra.
Ms. Ferrer (Andorra) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate Spain on the
excellent work it has done in the Security Council and in
leading the initiative to convene this high-level debate,
which will allow us to make progress in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). I take this opportunity to wish
you, Sir, every success in presiding over the Security
Council this month.
I also thank the Secretary-General, UN-Women
and the civil society representatives present here for
their contributions and leadership in this area.
This year marks 15 years since the historic,
unanimous adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the
Security Council. Since then, we have seen notable
progress in favour of women, such as the establishment
in 2010 of UN-Women and the international recognition
of sexual violence as a threat to international peace
and security. Andorra, as everyone knows, does not
have armed forces but has nonetheless continued to
support United Nations peacekeeping operations and a
various initiatives of the Organization. I cannot fail to
note our co-sponsorship of resolution 2225 (2015) of
18 June 2015, concerning children in armed conflict,
which has some bearing on today’s debate and which
reiterates concern over sexual violence against girls
and encourages States to continue to implement the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy concerning
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Resolution 1325 (2000) also urges Member States
to incorporate women in decision-making processes.
In that regard, I should like to highlight Andorra’s
experience, which has achieved a gender-balanced
Parliament without adopting legislative measures but
rather as a result of a society that was able to evolve
in terms of equality. Agenda-sensitive legislative power
has made it possible to undertake important activities
with respect to gender equality. For example, Andorra
was the tenth State to ratify the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and combating violence
against women and domestic violence, thereby allowing
the Convention to enter into force. On 15 January, we
also adopted a law criminalizing gender-based and
domestic violence. The law calls for the establishment

42/96

13/10/2015

of a national commission for the prevention of genderbased and domestic violence. Andorra has made a
commitment, as it did during the second cycle of the
universal periodic review, to endowing that body with
the resources necessary to effectively meet its goals.
Also on 15 January, all groups represented in
Parliament adopted an agreement to promote gender
equality in the General Council. The agreement calls
for the development of a white paper on equality and the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the Plan of Action plan for Gender-sensitive Parliaments
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Our experience of recent years has demonstrated
yet again the effectiveness of including women in
decision-making, and I can confirm that Andorra’s
commitment to gender equality remains steadfast. The
Government of Andorra recently set up focal point for
equality policies under the auspices of the Secretary of
State for Social Affairs, which is part of my Ministry
for Health, Social Affairs and Labour, a Government
body that is in charge of coordinating national equality
policies. Andorra is also committed to adopting as
soon as possible an omnibus gender-equality law to
strengthen the existing legislative framework. Also
with respect to this future act, the Government intends
to adopt a national plan for equality that will draw on
the participation of civil society.
Andorra reiterates its commitment to the role of
women in the maintenance of international peace and
security. There is no doubt that the implementation of
and follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the
inclusion of women in decision-making, will promote
progress in women’s rights and the strengthening of
peace and security in the world. In this conviction, it is
an honour for me to announce to this Chamber Andorra’s
decision to co-sponsor resolution 2242 (2015), which
was led by Spain and the United Kingdom and adopted
this morning.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for National Solidarity, Family
and the Status of Women of Algeria.
Mrs. Meslem Si Amer (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to extend to you, Mr. President,
our warmest congratulations on the Kingdom of Spain’s
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We thank you for organizing this very
important discussion.

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

I also thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women, and the representatives of civil
society for their briefings. I should also like to extend
the greetings of the President Abdelaziz Bouteflika of
Algeria, who asked me to deliver this statement on his
behalf.
Fifteen years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) to highlight the harmful effects
of armed conflict on women and girls. The resolution
was the outcome of effective campaigning by women’s
groups at the international level following the Fourth
World Conference on Women in Beijing in 1995, as
well as of the resolve demonstrated by political leaders
at that time.
Yet, despite the efforts of the international
community to establish a normative and legal
framework, including Security Council resolutions,
sexual violence in conflict is on the rise and becoming
more complex. Sexual violence is still used as a weapon
in war in order to subjugate and humiliate opponents
in conflict. With the appearance of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram, collective
public rape, sexual enslavement, the selling of women
and girls under 14 years of age, along with the ensuing
pregnancies and abortions have become signs of the
present age of terror and injustice.
This high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000)
gives us an important opportunity to implement the
women and peace and security agenda and to abide by
certain ambitious agreements. Within this framework,
I should like to emphasize the following three points.
First, we must reinforce the participation of women
and mainstream the gender perspective in conflictresolution and peacekeeping operations. We must
provide the necessary training for the mediators and
envoys who participate in mediation and ceasefires and
in achieving peace and preventive diplomacy. We must
ensure that peace agreements include provisions to
strengthen the role of women in conflict-resolution, such
as the Algiers Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali.
Secondly, we must break the silence and raise
awareness so as to prevent sexual violence, protect
victims and provide them with the opportunity to be
reintegrated into their societies. We must also work to
reinforce the legal arsenal to protect the victims and
punish the perpetrators of such violence. In addition,
we must encourage civil society to work to change

S/PV.7533

the mentality and improve the economic and social
conditions that lead to an increase in sexual violence.
Thirdly, we have to reinforce anti-terrorism
activities at all levels. Extremist terrorist groups
continue to commit terrible sexual violence that violates
human rights, especially those of weaker groups.
We also have to support dialogue and combat violent
extremism, as confirmed at the conference held in July.
In many countries, the victims of sexual violence
have limited recourse. Until we remedy that situation,
the perpetrators will continue to commit these crimes
and justice will be out of reach. We therefore emphasize
the importance of reporting, protection and prevention
by women’s groups, leaders of society, religious leaders,
and mass media working in human rights. We must
support the efforts of the Organization to reinforce the
capacities of these groups.
The fight against sexual violence is not limited to the
United Nations. At the regional level, the African Union
has adopted a its own solidarity initiative to promote
international consultations on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of
Women in Africa. At the national level, Algeria, under
the able leadership of President Abdelaziz Bouteflika
and in implementation of his programmes, has been
working hard to reinforce its legal system and to review
its laws on the protection and promotion of women at
all levels, based on our belief in the effective role of
women in achieving peace, promoting social equality
and combating all forms of violence and inequality.
Thanks to the Government’s belief in the effective
role of women, Algerian women have made great
strides within Algerian society. They participate in
decision-making and in the political process. Algerian
women currently represent 30 per cent of members of
the Algerian Parliament and over 40 per cent of our
judges. The chief justice of one of our most important
courts is a woman. Algerian women also fought
against colonialism and played a major role during the
1990s — the dark years — when they also contributed
to reconciliation. They have also participated in the
implementation of numerous development projects in
my country.
Algeria supports the need to take into account
incidents of sexual violence in conflict situations and
has incorporated such considerations in all of its special
political and peacekeeping missions, as well as in the
investigational framework and other mechanisms.

15-3098643/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

The issue of sexual violence must be taken into
account at every level, especially within those groups
and committees that are responsible for the follow-up
the implementation of Security Council resolutions.
We must work for peace and security in order to create
a better world. That will not be possible if we do not
eradicate all forms of violence and discrimination
directed against women. I am especially thinking of
sexual violence in conflict situations. As members of
the international community, let us recall that we cannot
ignore the fact that poverty and ignorance are often two
factors that spur on terrorism and extremism. We must
eliminate those scourges by using all available means,
in particular by empowering women and bettering their
condition.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
remind speakers to limit the duration of their statements
to four minutes, because, otherwise, we will stay all
night and perhaps go into the morning.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Philippines.
Ms. Quintos Deles (Philippines): History has not
failed to remind us about the scars and wounds of war,
deeply etched in humankind’s soul, with war’s trail of
blood that always leads to a bleeding woman’s doorstep
and a weeping child’s nightmare. The time has come
for all Governments to ensure that women are given a
greater role in preventing armed conflict or, once it has
broken out, in resolving it and ensuring its enduring
and inclusive peace dividends.
In the Philippines, we are now striving to
accomplish both. Our current endeavours draw their
context from long decades of an internal armed conflict
involving various armed fronts, and our current peace
agenda involves five peace tables. The signing by
the Philippine Government of the comprehensive
agreement on the Bangsamoro with the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front on 27 March 2014 was historic, not
only because it signalled the end of a long-standing
war in the Southern Philippines, but also because it is
the first agreement of its kind in the world to bear the
signature of a total of three women, who accounted for
one half of the negotiating panel of the Government and
about one fourth of the total number of its signatories.
It is the first such agreement to bear the signature of a
woman as chief negotiator, Ms. Miriam Coronel-Ferrer.
Moreover, 69 per cent of the secretariat of the
Government panel, including its head, and 60 per cent of

44/96

13/10/2015

the legal team, including its head, are women. The heads
of those bodies are under the ages of 35 and 30 years,
respectively. The Government panel has committed to
enforce the right of women to “meaningful political
participation and protection from all forms of violence”
in its source document, the framework agreement,
which yielded concrete, gender-sensitive provisions in
the agreement’s four annexes, as well as in the draft
Bangsamoro basic law, now pending approval in our
Congress. Today, women representatives in Congress
are among the staunchest champions of the proposed
law, while, on the side of the executive branch, a
woman co-chairs the joint normalization committee,
which oversees multiple security, transitional justice
and socioeconomic interventions aimed at ensuring
that peace will endure — not only in the law, but on
the ground.
In 2010, the Philippine Government adopted our
national action plan on women and peace and security,
becoming the first country in Asia to do so. Initiated by
civil society and peace and women’s rights organizations,
the Philippine national action plan rests on four pillars.
There are two targeted outputs, briefly identified as
protection and prevention, and empowerment and
participation; and two cross-cutting support processes,
namely, promotion and mainstreaming, and monitoring
and evaluation.
The story of the Philippine national action plan may
be best told through the metaphor of weaving, more
specifically, mat-weaving, which is common to most
Asian countries. Just as weaving is not learned overnight,
but goes back generations, the Philippine national
action plan benefits from decades of consciousnessraising and organizing on the part of women, peace
and human rights advocates. The Philippine national
action plan condenses time. But, like a good mat, in
which all the fibre strands are pulled tightly together,
it also condenses space. Building on civil society’s
energies, wisdom and experience, it wagers on the
Government and its instrumentalities — in a word, the
bureaucracy — to be the bearers of gender equality and
women’s empowerment.
Today, the Philippine national action plan has been
anchored and provided a legal basis by Philippine law,
led by the Magna Carta of women and recent legislation
that has adopted human rights and international
humanitarian standards. We also have an earlier
law that requires all Government agencies and local
Government units to allocate at least 5 per cent of their

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

budgets to a dedicated gender and development fund,
thereby ensuring the availability of funds for immediate
start-up and mobilization needs.
It has not been left to one agency to implement
the national action plan, but rather strands of the
Government bureaucracy are woven in with the
establishment of a national steering committee, initially
composed of the heads of nine Government agencies, to
which eight additional agencies were added. They are
involved in implementing the Government’s PAMANA
programme, which provides development and good
governance interventions in conflict-affected areas.
Altogether, PAMANA operates in over half of our
provinces.
From the beginning, we did not want the national
action plan to end up as just another document that
might be good to read and display on the bookshelf, but
is neither implemented nor practiced. In the same way
that mats have a history of long, hard and sometimes
rough use in Philippine households, we intend for the
national action plan to be a felt presence, making a
difference in women’s lives.
The implementation of the Philippine national
action plan is a painstaking process, because we want
to cover all of the bases, including policy, planning,
implementation and monitoring mechanisms, as well
as budget considerations. Modest initial results are
being reported. Among the outcomes already being
gleaned are the increased presence of women in peace
negotiations and the implementation of peace accords,
the establishment of women-friendly spaces that
provide the necessary measure of private and safe space
for internally displaced women and girls in evacuation
centres, the adoption of explicit gender-equality policies
and mechanisms as an integral part of the governance
of the armed forces of the Philippines, culture-sensitive
trauma-healing programmes for Muslim women, the
inclusion of women and peace and security issues in
the training programmes for foreign-service officers,
and the plan to establish a dedicated team of public
prosecutors for cases of sexual- and gender-based
violence in conflict-affected areas. Additionally, local
Government units in those areas have been given the
means to issue their local versions of the national
action plan, which complements major funding support
from their own resources. And, just two weeks ago,
we launched the first Government executive course on
women and peace and security, in partnership with a
leading national university.

S/PV.7533

The past five years have enabled us to
weave a meticulous overlay of legal frameworks,
implementation structures, institutional mandates and,
of course, as always, personal passions and inclusive
and intergenerational intentions. We must ensure
that the national action plan that we have begun to
weave will endure the forthcoming transition to a
new Administration in 2016. Its strands, emanating
from strategic programmes of national and local
implementing agencies, must be strengthened and
enhanced in both protecting and empowering women,
with the aim of bringing all Philippine internal armed
conflicts to a peaceful, just and lasting end. The national
action plan should be useful. It should be durable. It
should make a difference one can feel on one’s skin.
We join the urgent call for all United Nations States
Members to adopt a national action plan and weave it
tightly and strongly to truly make a felt difference in
the lives of women and children caught in the middle of
today’s most violent conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Ms. Cruz-Sánchez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of President Enrique Peña Nieto, I thank
President Mariano Rajoy Brey and the Government
of Spain for convening this important debate in the
context of the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000). I would also like to extend my warm greetings
to Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women.
The full participation of women in all spheres of
public life is fundamental for achieving peace and
inclusive development. Mexico has actively promoted
the agenda on women and peace and security. As a
non-permament member in 2009 and 2010, during
the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we
contributed to strengthening the legal framework of
the Security Council in this area by supporting the
adoption of resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009).
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015).
Today, 15 years later, we have at our disposal more
robust institutional frameworks to guarantee the role
of women as key actors for stability and peace, as well
as mechanisms to prevent sexual violence in armed
conflict. The Security Council should not limit itself by
tackling this issue in an isolated or ad hoc manner. We
believe that a gender perspective should be integrated
in a cross-cutting and consistent way in all its decisions.

15-3098645/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

Peacekeeping operations and prevention and
mediation efforts are two concrete examples. In the past,
we might have thought that applying a gender focus to
peacekeeping operations simply meant deploying a
greater number of women on the ground or increasing
the number of women in the armed forces. While that
is still a priority, a broader concept of gender equality
now allows us to realize that all the activities of a
given operation — including patrols and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, security
sector reform, the promotion of the rule of law and the
effective enjoyment of human rights — should take
into account the specific needs of women and should
recognize the importance of their participation in
interaction with local communities.
It is vital to maintain the momentum for women’s
participation in mediation processes and in the
negotiation of peace agreements and agreements to cease
hostilities in order to promote national reconciliation
based on respect for, and the application of, the human,
social and civil rights of the most vulnerable sectors of
the population, with support from civil society.
We should keep in mind that every conflict situation
requires a different analysis of its effect on women
and children, and that all peacekeeping personnel
should include a gender perspective in the various
aspects of their operations from the moment planning
begins. This year, when we are discussing a revision
of resolution 1325 (2000) and recommendations for
reforming peacekeeping operations, we should seek
and encourage synergies and clear road maps in order
to set in motion the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral.

13/10/2015

in particular members of the Mexican armed forces,
based on the criteria established by resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent related resolutions. To that end,
we have already established cooperation mechanisms
with a number of countries that will enable us to
strengthen our specific activities in the area of capacitybuilding. Just last week, for example, the Government
of Mexico held one such specialized training session at
the Centre for Advanced Naval Studies of Mexico, in
collaboration with the Governments of Spain and the
Netherlands.
Within that framework, we pledge to make the
women and peace and security agenda a fundamental
component of our gradual return to peacekeeping
operations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Skogen (Norway): Let me start by thanking
the representatives of women and civil society who
spoke to us this morning.
When resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, 15 years
ago, we believed it would result in more sustainable
peace and greater security. Today we know we were
right. Recent research shows that peace processes that
genuinely include women are more likely to lead to
an agreement and more likely to last. Therefore, why
then are women still often absent from the negotiating
table? Why are their voices not heard even when they
are present? Although there has been a steady increase
in the number of women mediators and gender experts,
we still have a way to go.

Another relevant aspect of this discussion concerns
the need to allocate sufficient human and financial
resources to programmes of proven success. For that
reason, my delegation considers it essential to guarantee
the deployment of specialized gender advisers in
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
Such a strategy will require that we strengthen all our
activities through appropriate coordination with the
other organs of the United Nations system so as to avoid
duplication and to respect the competencies of each
separate organ.

We have learned that political will and budget
lines can put gender on the agenda, even in times of
war. That is why Norway has earmarked funds to
implement the women and peace and security agenda
on the ground. For several years, we have allocated
approximately $4 million to the work of civil society
organizations. Ten percent of the resources spent on
peace and reconciliation efforts in focus countries
are to be allocated to efforts pertaining to women and
peace and security. Approximately $3.6 million is
earmarked specifically for the integration of the gender
perspective in our humanitarian assistance in 2015.

Mexico has reported to the General Assembly on the
specific steps it has taken towards its gradual return to
peacekeeping operations. As part of our commitments,
I would like to recall that we will increase capacitybuilding and specialized training for Mexican officers,

We are celebrating progress today, and rightly
so. But this is also a day of impatience. Two weeks
ago, we all committed to promoting peaceful and
inclusive societies for sustainable development. We
also committed to achieving gender equality and to

46/96

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

empowering all women and girls. Clearly, we should
know by now that we cannot achieve one without the
other.
I am proud to say that in all peace and security
efforts where Norway is engaged, women’s and
men’s needs, priorities and rights are to be taken into
account. Sexual violence in conflict will be fought.
The Norwegian national joint headquarters requires
knowledge of resolution 1325 (2000) as a generic demand
for all Norwegian personnel who are to be deployed to
international operations. The gender perspective is an
integral part of all Norwegian predeployment training.
We are proud of the role we have played as
facilitator in the Colombia process, where women are
at the table and are making their voices heard. Norway
aims to increase the participation of women in peace
processes. Inspired by the African women mediators’
network, we are now establishing a Nordic women
mediators’ network.
Norway is also providing funding to the Global
Alliance of Women Countering Extremism and
Promoting Peace, Rights and Pluralism because we
recognize the need to get women on board if we are to
succeed in fighting violent extremism.
Regional organizations have a key role to play.
NATO is now working to integrate the women and
peace and security agenda into all its activities and
operations. We will continue to work with NATO.
Norway also recently signed an agreement on providing
support to the office of the African Union Special
Envoy for Women, Peace and Security.
Fifteen years ago, the Security Council and the
United Nations started something big. We depend on
their continued leadership. Norway will continue to
raise the 1325 agenda whenever there are discussions
about peace and security, because we want peace, and
we want a peace that lasts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the
Swiss Confederation.
Mr. Rossier (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for having
organized this debate. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and the representatives of civil
society for their statements. Switzerland welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015), which we
co-sponsored.

S/PV.7533

Fifteen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), Switzerland remains strongly committed
to advancing its objectives. For this reason, I am
pleased to announce that we have made the following
commitments.
Last month, the Swiss Government decided to
provide support to UN-Women in the amount of
approximately $50 million over the next three years.
Despite the current tight budgetary situation, the
Government has nonetheless increased its contribution
by 25 per cent, which highlights the importance that
Switzerland attaches to this issue.
The substantive participation of women is a
prerequisite for the quality and sustainability of peace
agreements. Whether it is at the negotiating table or
through other channels, women bring new proposals to
peace processes that are essential to ensuring lasting
peace. This must be a priority, as our track record so
far is not good enough. In that respect, Switzerland
supports women’s networks at all levels, particularly in
peace processes in the Middle East, North Africa and
Myanmar, and we will continue this support.
Switzerland currently spends approximately
$15 million a year on programmes to combat all forms
of sexual violence. Most are implemented in emergency
situations, especially in post-conflict contexts such as
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Afghanistan,
Syria, Lebanon, Nepal, Tajikistan, the western Balkans
and Bolivia.
For Switzerland, the fight against all forms of
sexual violence will remain a priority in coming years.
We will continue to increase our commitment through
our humanitarian and development activities as well
as through the promotion of programmes to promote
peace and address the past. We support, inter alia,
UN-Women’s Justice Rapid Response, based in Geneva,
which is aimed at enabling the quick and thorough
investigation of accusations of sexual violence.
Urgent action is further required to prevent and
punish sexual abuse by United Nations personnel
serving in peacekeeping operations. Switzerland shares
the Secretary-General’s outrage at such crimes. We call
for zero tolerance and welcome the measures that he
announced.
The Security Council has repeatedly recognized the
need to empower women and increase their participation
as mitigating factors to the spread of violent extremism.

15-3098647/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

13/10/2015

Switzerland has been a strong supporter of the Global
Community Engagement and Resilience Fund, the
first global effort to support local initiatives aimed at
strengthening resilience against violent extremism.

is of particular importance. I wish also to express
our gratitude to the representatives of women’s
organizations who are with us today for their briefings
and their contributions.

Strengthening the role of women will be among
the major issues to be addressed by the Fund, to which
Switzerland is providing $4 million over the next four
years. Moreover, we welcome the inclusion of the women
and peace and security agenda in the United Nations
plan of action on the prevention of violent extremism to
be presented in early 2016. We will actively support its
implementation.

Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, was a milestone in the recognition of the role
of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes
and reaffirmed the importance of their participation
therein. The six subsequent resolutions adopted by the
Council on this issue have only enriched this agenda.

Over the past 15 years we have made very good
progress on establishing a normative framework for the
women and peace and security agenda. Now we need
to ensure that we have an effective implementation,
monitoring and accountability mechanism. Switzerland
will support the strengthening of the role of human
rights mechanisms, in particular treaty bodies, in
order to enhance accountability in the implementation
of obligations relating to the women and peace and
security agenda. In this regard, we see the Committee
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, given its value added, as the right
avenue for so doing.
In conclusion, Switzerland’s position is very
straightforward. It is high time that resolution 1325
(2000) be finally and comprehensively implemented.
To paraphrase the words spoken by Angelina Jolie in
this Chamber, we all set the bar.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia.
Mr. Echeverri Lara (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Government of Colombia,
I would like to thank the Spanish Government for its
leadership in convening this debate on the fifteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, as well as welcome the presence of
Spanish Prime Minister Rajoy Brey here today. I wish
also to thank all delegations that spoke before me for
their expressions of support for the peace process in
Colombia, on which we hope an agreement will soon
be signed.
I wish also to thank the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict for
their work and their commitment to this issue, which
48/96

However, as pointed out in the concept note
(S/2015/749, annex) and as can be seen from the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
even though we have made major strides in terms of
this agenda, further implementation is still required in
order to expand the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution and in peacebuilding, and to ensure their
equitable participation in peacekeeping efforts as well
as in the promotion of peace and security.
The global study is in agreement with the report of
the Secretary-General on the future of peace operations
and the report of the Advisory Group of Experts on
the 2015 Review of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Architecture. These three reports call for strengthening
the role of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
not only as a party affected by war, but also as a
fundamental actor in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts and in achieving lasting peace.
The participation of women at the various post-conflict
stages also takes on particular importance in this
context.
Today I wish to reiterate our country’s commitment
to the issue of women and peace and security. I wish to
highlight several aspects that we believe may be useful.
Colombia is close to achieving peace, as affirmed by
President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón in the General
Assembly Hall a few weeks ago (see A/70/PV.4). We
hope that the lessons that we have learned during our
many years of internal conflict and the progress that
we are achieving on the path to peace can serve as
examples in the context of addressing armed conflicts
in other parts of the world.
In the dialogue process that is moving forward
today with the guerrillas of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia, the Government has
succeeded in ensuring that women are effectively
represented and have a voice at the negotiating table.
Currently, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

Human Rights Director of the Ministry of Interior,
both women, are part of the Group of Plenipotentiary
Negotiators, an advisory body in which women
members make up the a significant majority.
In addition, forums have been held in different
regions of the country, and several delegations of victims
have been given an opportunity to travel to address
members of the negotiating team. Women made up over
60 per cent of those delegations. A subcommittee on
gender was set up precisely for the purpose of ensuring
that the rights of women were reflected in the final
agreements.
Including in the past century, Colombia has
participated in various missions with military or police
personnel, in particular by sending observers and
experts. For many years, we have received support
from the international community. Now we are ready to
reaffirm our willingness to cooperate on security. In that
regard, we will continue to advise on capacity-building
for female police personnel, as we have been doing in
several countries, including Haiti. I would also like to
inform the Council that, in January, as an expression
of our willingness to support the strengthening of
international peace and security, Colombia signed
a framework agreement with the United Nations on
contributing to standby peacekeeping arrangements.
A joint effort by States is the best way of achieving
the principles of resolution 1325 (2000). Such is the
spirit of today’s debate. The Council can count on
Colombia in this endeavour to address and overcome
the persistent challenges around the world that are
hampering progress on the agenda set forth in resolution
1325 (2000).
Since the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, States have made significant progress towards
greater gender equality and the empowerment of
women, who now have real opportunities for leadership
at all levels. In that regard, my country is promoting
the initiative in support of women candidates for the
post of Secretary-General of the United Nations. The
Organization, faithful to its duty to uphold human
rights in an even-handed manner, now has a great
opportunity to lead by example by electing a woman to
head decision-making at the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Secretary General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.

S/PV.7533

Mr. Vershbow: It is more dangerous to be a woman
in a conflict zone than it is to be a soldier. That brutal
fact led the United Nations to adopt resolution 1325
(2000), 15 years ago. What was the resolution’s aim?
To inspire a new approach to international security,
where the views and actions of women are every bit as
important as those of men and where their inclusion is
guaranteed.
For too long, the needs and interests of women
have been ignored, both during times of conflict and
when making and keeping the peace. If peace is to be
sustainable, then it must include the voices of women.
We cannot ignore half of the world’s population.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is proud of
its record in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). Via
our operations in Afghanistan and in the Balkans, we
have made a tangible difference to the lives of women
in conflict and post-conflict countries.
The root of our success to date comes from
embedding a gender perspective deep within our
organization and from keeping things as practical as
possible. NATO is incorporating gender perspectives
into the analysis, planning, execution and evaluation of
all its operations and missions. Our strategic commands
are implementing new guidelines on the prevention and
response to conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence. We have a wide network of gender advisers.
We are placing gender perspectives at the centre of
defence planning and reporting by our member nations.
Gender is a key principle of our Defence Capacity
Building Initiative with our partners around the world.
With Jordan, we are implementing the first trust fund
on gender training for the Jordanian armed forces.
And in May 2015, we appointed our first ever female
NATO Commander, Brigadier General Giselle Wilz of
the United States Army, at the NATO headquarters in
Sarajevo.
NATO is therefore doing a great deal. But we need
to do more, especially when it comes to promoting equal
participation within NATO itself. We need to increase
the active and meaningful participation of women. To
that end, we pledge to share best practices and valuable
lessons learned with our allies and partners on increasing
female participation at decision-making levels in our
own structures; to accelerate the advancement of women
in our own headquarters by establishing a women’s
professional network and mentoring programme; to
actively encourage allies to submit female candidates

15-3098649/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

for our most senior decision-making positions; to
strengthen our partnership for gender equality with
other international organizations, including the United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the European Union and the African
Union; to finance gender-sensitive research aimed
at identifying drivers of radicalization and violent
extremism; and to develop targeted and evidence-based
responses, including empowering women to safeguard
communities.
We also welcome the broad participation of civil
society in the development, execution and monitoring
of our NATO-Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council Action
Plan on Women, Peace and Security. As a next step,
we pledge to establish a civil society advisory panel to
institutionalize that positive engagement.
The world is changing rapidly. We face a rising
tide of violent extremism and terrorism. And it will be
women, once again, who are most at risk. It is therefore
essential that women be involved at every stage and
every level of our operations and missions. Improving
gender equality within NATO not only improves our
credibility, it is essential to our ability to do our job
right. Gender equality enhances our ability to respond
and to deal with crises. Diversity gives us strength.
Being inclusive will allow us to achieve our common
goal: lasting peace and security.
I thank the Council for the opportunity to speak
here today, and I extend special thanks to the President
of the Government of Spain for his leadership in
presiding over this very important meeting.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I would like to
begin by sincerely thanking Spain for organizing
today’s Security Council meeting. My thanks also go
to the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of
UN-Women, particularly for the global study, which is
an excellent overview of the challenges of making the
women and peace and security agenda a reality and the
achievements won.
Slovenia supports the statements to be made later
today by the observer of the European Union (EU)
and by the representative Thailand, who will speak on
behalf of the Human Security Network. Slovenia also
joined in sponsoring resolution 2242 (2015), which I am

50/96

13/10/2015

certain will further mainstream gender in the peace and
security agenda.
The anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
presents us with a unique opportunity to reflect upon
our activities over the past 15 years and to renew our
commitments. Slovenia has been active in promoting
the women and peace and security agenda in various
forums. We are a member of the informal group of
friends of resolution 1325 (2000) within NATO and of
the EU informal task force for its implementation. In
2014, Slovenia hosted the third seminar of the Initiative
on Mediation in the Mediterranean, which addressed
the role of women in mediation. In September, the Bled
Strategic Forum discussed ending sexual violence in
conflict. Most of Slovenia’s activities on the women
and peace and security agenda have been carried out
as part of the implementation of the 2010-2015 national
action plan for the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008).
The political representation of women in Slovenia
is very good — 47 per cent of the Government and
34 per cent of the Parliament. Significant improvement
was made in women’s equal participation in the armed
forces. The percentage of female members of Slovene
armed forces is now approximately 15 per cent, which
ranks Slovenia among the top countries in the world.
I would like to highlight the following with regard to
Slovenia’s future commitments.
We will continue to promote the women and peace
and security agenda in our activities in international
and regional organizations and to strengthen cohesion
among them. Slovenia will continue to raise this agenda
item in the Human Rights Council, in particular when
addressing country situations and within the scope of
the Universal Periodic Review mechanism. We will
promote the role of women in the international peace
and security agenda and will strengthen efforts for
their protection in conflict situations. That is also
one of the goals of our new national programme on
equal opportunities for women and men for the period
2015-2020.
Slovenia will continue to pay particular attention
to training and education on women and peace and
security in the military, police and judiciary. In 2016,
we plan to develop a strategy on gender equality in
international development cooperation, which will also
take into consideration women and peace and security
issues. We will also continue to give financial support

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

to relevant projects carried out by the Slovenian
non-governmental sector.
In conclusion, I concur with previous speakers
that the women and peace and security agenda must be
addressed comprehensively. I call upon all stakeholders
to harmonize their activities in the implementation of
this agenda of universal importance.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the Deputy Minister for Community
Development, Gender and Children of the United
Republic of Tanzania.
Ms. Chana (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania welcomes Spain’s leadership
on the importance of the role of women in peace and
security. We also commend Spain’s Security Council
presidency for its focus on the invaluable contribution
women can bring to the effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, the Executive Director of UN-Women,
the President of the Executive Board of Solidarité
féminine pour la paix et le développement intégral and
the President of the Organization of Women’s Freedom
in Iraq for their briefings.
Fifteen years ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), which provided a foundation
on which the international community could establish
greater engagement by women in the area of peace
and security. Tanzania is pleased to note that progress
has been made. The establishment of a normative
framework on women and peace, the creation of
UN-Women and the establishment of the Offices of
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and for Children and
Armed Conflict are positive developments and have
truly made a difference.
Obviously, there is much to be done in enabling
the participation of women in peace processes and
post-conflict political transition and in protecting,
and countering the violation of, children. These gaps
are largely attributed to the failure to collect sufficient
resources, lagging political commitment and the
absence of a strong accountability regime.
In advancing the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), the Security Council, the United Nations
system, regional organizations, Member States and civil
society have important roles to play. In addition, various
United Nations bodies and entities should tirelessly

S/PV.7533

strive to discharge their respective mandates with a
clear division of labour and in coordination. Likewise,
Member States have the primary responsibility
for protecting women’s rights. In efforts to protect
women’s rights and strengthen their role in peace and
security, the ownership of national Governments must
be valued. The international community should also
provide assistance to countries in need, while focusing
on capacity-building.
Achieving women’s development is the true
foundation for realizing women’s empowerment.
At present, international development support and
technical assistance is inadequate to meet the needs
of women, especially in developing countries. It is
in that regard that we call upon the international
community to improve its support for issues of women
and development. Capacity-building support to the
countries concerned, as well as supporting women’s
and civil society organizations that play roles in conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and national reconciliation,
is crucial.
Advancing the participation of women in peace
processes and in public life needs to be supported by
strategic partnerships with national parliamentarians
and with community and religious leaders. Such a
partnership has worked for Tanzania, and we are
committed to ensuring that women are represented
at all decision-making levels and that their rights are
protected and their security genuinely guaranteed.
We believe that where women are fully represented,
societies become more peaceful and stable. We also
believe that where gender-based violence is eliminated
and women are involved in conflict resolution, peace is
more entrenched and sustainable.
Today Tanzania reaffirms its commitment to do the
following. It will fully domesticate all women’s rights
treaties. It will develop a stand-alone act on violence
against women. It will promote and support financing
for the sustainable implementation of national and local
authority plans to end violence against women and
children and ensure harmonized protection at all levels.
It will ensure that the principle of 50-50 representation
of women and men — gender equality — in all key
decision-making positions is achieved. It will continue
its dedication to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.

15-3098651/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

Ms. Jones-Bos (Netherlands): I would first like to
congratulate the Security Council on its adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), 15 years ago, and of resolution
2242 (2015), of which we are proud to be a sponsor,
today. I would like to thank Prime Minister Rajoy
Brey and the Spanish presidency of the Council for
this chance to reaffirm the commitments we made 15
years ago to women and peace and security. I would
also like to express our appreciation for the work of
Radhika Coomaraswamy and her colleagues. They have
produced an outstanding report (S/2015/716) that shows
how right the Security Council was to adopt resolution
1325 (2000) in the first place. Wherever it has been
implemented, the thinking behind it has proved correct.
The great value of the report I have just mentioned
lies in the evidence gathered on the ground from men
and women who face the bitter reality of conflict on a
daily basis. And I salute the women who are here today
and whom we heard this morning, some from countries
such as Iraq, Libya, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Syria, Afghanistan, Yemen, the Sudan, South
Sudan, Burundi and other conflict-affected countries.
They are the true experts, and we look to them to
shape our agenda. Like the partners who came to the
Netherlands for our February conference, they shared
their stories, best practices and contributions, often
made at the risk of their own lives.
There is clear evidence that increasing political
participation by women results in better negotiations,
better and more sustainable agreements, better
governance, more wealth, distributed more equitably,
more and better conflict prevention and ultimately,
therefore, more peace and security. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands works with women’s organizations
on peace, justice and development, and empowering
women and girls is crucial in all those areas. But
huge challenges remain. Conflict is still rife, and we
are confronted with ever more extreme violence. In
such situations, women do badly. And when women
do badly, the world suffers. Guns take over, and the
result is violence, impunity and spiral of more poverty
and conflict. One appalling example of that was the
assassination of one of our partners, the Libyan lawyer
Salwa Bugaighis, on 25 June 2014.
It is urgent that we break that spiral, and resolution
1325 (2000), we believe, contains the key to addressing
these challenges. The thinking behind the resolution
lies at the very heart of current Dutch policies on aid,
trade, security and human rights, and it is paramount

52/96

13/10/2015

for our partnerships for peace, justice and development.
Before the end of this year, we will issue our third
national action plan, the product of a unique platform
on which the Government has worked with more
than 50 civil society organizations. We are providing
€4 million a year to carry out the plan, supporting
organizations on the ground that work to protect and
politically empower women in conflict situations.
We provide both diplomatic and financial support to
Syrian women’s efforts to present their views on their
country’s future in international forums. Women take
centre stage in our vision of the future.
But over the next 15 years, the world’s fate will be
largely determined by whether or not women succeed
in taking their rightful place in history. Do we want
to achieve our global goals? Fight inequality? Create
lasting peace? We need the women of the world to do that.
Let us therefore all step up our support to organizations
like Karama, a regional non-governmental organization
based in Cairo that works throughout the Middle East
in coalition with hundreds of partners to end violence
against women.
Fifteen years ago, the Netherlands, as a member of
the Security Council at the time, was one of the main
advocates of resolution 1325 (2000). I was personally
involved then and feel very strongly about it. Now we
are aspiring to become a Security Council member
again, partly in order to support increasing the pace of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
successor, resolution 2242 (2015). We think we have
something to offer — the desire and the capacity to
stand up and invest in women who are the drivers of
change. It is time, as Elvis Presley put it in one of his
many classic songs, for “A little less conversation, [and]
a little more action”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Ms. Pérez Colman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Kingdom of Spain for its
invitation to participate in this important open debate
on women and peace and security on the occasion of
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000).
Argentina makes it a priority to incorporate a gender
perspective into the design and implementation of its
public policies. The implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security, as well as the prevention and response

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

to sexual violence in armed conflict, is embodied
in Argentina’s firm commitment to international
instruments aimed at protecting women’s human rights
and to which it has accorded constitutional status, such
as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.
Argentina’s incorporation of women into
peacekeeping processes and its process for
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) is its response to
a political decision to mainstream a gender perspective
into public policies and to defend and promote women’s
human rights in every area. In that regard, in 2008 we
established a national plan for implementing resolution
1325 (2000) in the area of defence, and in 2012 we
did the same vis-à-vis security. More recently, on
15 September, the President of Argentina, Cristina
Fernández de Kirchner, approved a national plan of
action for Argentina’s implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent related resolutions that
consolidates our various policies on the promotion and
defence of women’s human rights. The plan is aimed
at increasing women’s presence in peacekeeping and
humanitarian assistance missions and their participation
in decision-making bodies. We intend to increase
women’s political participation in peace negotiations
and conflict management and in the decision-making
processes for those areas. We will incorporate a
gender perspective in all activities of peacebuilding
and humanitarian missions, notably activities for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We
will also protect the human rights of women and girls
in countries in conflict and emerging from conflict,
including those in refugee camps and those who are
displaced, particularly in dealing with gender-based
and sexual violence, and promoting their safety and
welfare.
Women in Argentina make up 16 per cent of the
military component, and therefore one important recent
milestone was the promotion of the first woman in our
military to the rank of general. We have also promoted
the presence of women in the army’s infantry and
cavalry, which were closed to women until 2012. The
armed forces have created gender desks that work with
the various military units and have strengthened gender
focal points in order to conduct predeployment training
of participants in peacekeeping operations.
Women are victims of various forms of violence in
conflicts. Their impact on women and girls is varied,
disproportionate, multidimensional and complex,

S/PV.7533

with devastating effects both physically and on their
fundamental rights. Argentina was a sponsor of General
Assembly resolution 69/293, which declared 19 June the
International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence
in Conflict, with the intention of raising awareness in
order to tackle the use of this scourge as a weapon of
war and to help promote a culture of peace that can
ensure that we can put an end to this type of cruelty,
which is a threat to the dignity of persons and to respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.
We agree with the assessment in the concept
note (S/2015/749, annex) prepared by the Kingdom of
Spain on the need to ensure that United Nations senior
management, both at Headquarters and in the field,
acts with greater determination in effectively meeting
its responsibilities in the area of women and peace and
security, and we believe that we Member States should
renew our commitment to integrate them into our
national policies and laws.
Argentina has supported all of the resolutions aimed
at combating sexual violence in conflict since resolution
1325 (2000) and its specific subsequent resolutions. My
country’s commitment to access to justice for women
and the fight against impunity can be seen through its
participation in the Justice Rapid Response mechanism
since February 2009. Argentina is now one of the 10
members of the Executive Board of this mechanism
and regularly participates in its meetings, providing its
experience in investigating human rights violations.
Argentina believes in and supports the work of
the international community to achieve zero tolerance
for acts of sexual violence in conflicts. Impunity with
regard to such acts produces a harmful effect because it
exacerbates cycles of conflict. We must make the switch
from a culture of impunity to a culture of prevention
that promotes justice, responsibility and the rule of law.
The role of the United Nations is crucial to support
States in that process.
Argentina is committed specifically for 2016 to
develop a proposal to establish a quota of 33 per cent
for women at all grades and executive functions within
the armed forces; to work jointly with the Auditor
General of the Armed Forces to establish the post of
Gender Auditor to take forward the process of handling
disciplinary matters with a full gender perspective; and
to go forward with the implementation of the Single
Registry of Cases of Violence against Women in the
proceedings of cases carried out by the armed forces.

15-3098653/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

The merit of resolution 1325 (2000) was to
acknowledge the important role of women as protagonists
in peace processes and in preventive diplomacy and
their participation at the peace negotiating table and
in the post-conflict reconstruction phase. We reaffirm
Argentina’s commitment to join efforts to ensure that
this proactive approach is possible. We are convinced
that we can achieve sustainable and lasting peace only
with women participating at all levels of the peace
process.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the
African Union.
Ms. Diop: The Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, could
not be with us today, but she congratulates Spain for
its leadership on the women and peace and security
agenda. She wishes the Council a successful high-level
debate.
When resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, the
African Union (AU) took this historic resolution as its
own. Indeed, the Maputo Protocol stipulates in article
2 that all
“State Parties shall combat all forms of
discrimination against women through appropriate
legislative, institutional and other measures.”
The Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa
requested the Heads of State and Government of Africa
to meet to “ensure the full and effective participation
and representation of women in peace process”, as
stipulated in resolution 1325 (2000). It also calls for the
appointment of women as special envoys and special
representatives of the African Union.
Africa has indeed taken action with respect to the
requirements of resolution 1325 (2000). Starting with
the leadership of the institution, the African Union
Commission, out of the 10 members of the Executive
of the Commission, five are women. The Chairperson,
Ms. Zuma, has continued to strengthen the participation
of women by recently appointing women as SecretaryGeneral of the Commission, Chief of Staff and
Deputy Chief of Staff. Three more women have been
appointed as Head and Deputy Head of Commission
representation.
The African Union Peace and Security Department
has put in place a gender, peace and security programme
to assist member States and the regional economic

54/96

13/10/2015

communities in their women and peace and security
agenda. We thank the partners — the United Kingdom,
Sweden, Austria and Norway — that are supporting
that programme. The African Union has embarked
upon capacity-building by increasing the numbers
through the training of women peace mediators, women
election observers and gender advisers to be deployed
in mediation processes and election observation.
The African Union has taken a strong stand on the
issue of sexual abuse and exploitation. The Chairperson
has clearly stated a zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. In Somalia, the AU responded
with the deployment of an investigation and assessment
team following allegations against the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the development of strong
policy. The AU has deployed female peacekeepers and
female police officers in peace support operations.
Right now, African women in the military are fighting
to defeat Al-Shabaab. In South Sudan, a commission
of inquiry was mandated by member States, and
gender-based violence was one of the focus areas to
be investigated. Parties to the conflict have officially
received the report, and now it has been agreed to
establish a hybrid court to bring justice to the South
Sudanese.
The African Union Commission — and here I
would like to congratulate and applaud the efforts by
UN-Women and its Executive Director, Ms. MlamboNgcuka, my sister — hosted a regional consultation
so that African women could contribute to the global
study. The global study has revealed that Africa has the
highest number of women in political decision-making
bodies and was the first region to appoint a Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security. Indeed, countries
such as Rwanda, Seychelles, Namibia, South Africa and
Senegal are among the world champions when it comes
to women’s representation in Parliaments.
It remains clear that the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is slow, even though when we
look at the regional economic communities we see that
many of them have adopted a regional action plan. To
date, 16 countries in Africa have developed a national
action plan. Moreover, there is no systematic reporting
on what the countries have achieved. We salute the
effort of the global study, which has helped to review
the achievements made by Africa’s member States.
It is in that regard, as the Special Envoy, that I was
given a mandate to ensure that the voices of women

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

and the vulnerable were heard much more clearly in
peacebuilding and conflict resolution. In my capacity
as Special Envoy, I visited various countries with the
Executive Director of UN-Women. We both went to
the Central African Republic. With the support of our
partners, we went to South Sudan, Somalia and Nigeria.
I can say that women from different religious and
ethnic groups and political parties are making peace
in their communities. They need more of our support.
In northern Nigeria, the Chibok girls who escaped
have said that they want to continue their studies. They
want to continue receiving support to complete their
schooling.
Africa has decided to place women at the centre
of Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want. The 53 member
States have declared 2015 the Year of Women’s
Empowerment, and 2016 the Year of Women’s Human
Rights. There is no doubt that the women’s agenda is
absolutely necessary to achieving peace and prosperity.
We want to see more action in Africa. We need to see
more accountability. We will achieve that through
partnership with civil society organizations and
women’s groups.
In December 2014, we held a hearing with the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union with
women from Somalia, South Sudan and the Great
Lakes region. At the end of the meeting, the Peace and
Security Council mandated the Office of the Special
Envoy to work on the continental framework to monitor
the implementation by AU member States and other
relevant stakeholders of the various instruments and
other commitments. Again I thank UN-Women for
supporting this process and my Office in the AU, and
for ensuring that we have such a framework. I also
express my appreciation to the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa for its support of the women and
peace and security agenda in Africa.
I would like to echo the voices of the African women
in the field — the women who cannot wait, and to whom
we need to listen. They say: no more declarations; only
solemn action and solemn deliverables.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this open
debate and to commend the presidency’s continued
commitment to an issue of such importance to the
international community.

S/PV.7533

It is my honour to be present here representing
the President of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay,
Mr. Tabaré Vázquez, and to offer Uruguay’s vision on
the challenges and the commitments ahead of us in this
area.
We recognize the contribution of the international
community, and especially of the United Nations system,
but we must acknowledge that the full implementation
of the objectives set out under resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions has not yet been achieved.
Those resolutions show clearly that the prevention and
resolution of conflicts requires the inclusion of women
playing an active role in all efforts to achieve lasting
peace.
There is clear evidence that women are the
most reliable spokespersons for the needs of local
communities. They are the ones most trusted in the
gathering of evidence and the reporting of information
on sexual violence. They are key to the development
of local economies through small and medium-sized
enterprises, and there are many other examples of their
importance in the rebuilding of conflict zones. Despite
that, UN-Women notes that of all the peace agreements
signed between 1990 and 2010, a mere 15 per cent
contained references to women.
It has been 15 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), and women head 19 per cent of United
Nations field missions; they constitute 3 per cent of
military personnel and 10 per cent of police personnel
in peacekeeping operations. Our major concern in citing
those numbers is to underline the opportunities and
capabilities that have been squandered through the lack
of an intensive focus on the inclusion of women in the
conflict-resolution process. In that respect, we would
like to highlight in particular the Secretary-General’s
commitment to allocating at least 15 per cent of the cost
of peacekeeping operations to women’s empowerment
and gender equality programmes.
Uruguay is seriously committed to the women and
peace and security agenda. It will continue contributing
to the implementation of the agenda and will step up
its efforts. First, we will maintain an above-average
percentage of women deployed in peacekeeping
missions. Currently, 9 per cent of the Uruguayan
troops deployed in peacekeeping missions are female
staff. Secondly, we will continue the mandatory
predeployment training of troops who will be engaged
in preventing and responding to violence, exploitation

15-3098655/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

and sexual abuse. Thirdly, we will continue to rigorously
apply the zero-tolerance policy in cases of misconduct,
particularly with regard to cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse.
We believe that specific commitments such as
those I have just mentioned, along with measures
such as expressly including the gender dimension in
the mandates of peacekeeping operations, providing
normative, substantive and technical support for
UN-Women in the effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and focusing on the relevant
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, are prerequisites for making
substantive advances in implementing the agenda being
discussed today.
Finally, I would like to state that, if elected as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council,
Uruguay will continue the work of promoting the women
and peace and security agenda, based on the conviction
that resolution 1325 (2000) continues to be extremely
relevant and remains a substantive reference point on
the path towards the achievement of international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Ms. Marinaki: I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. We would like to congratulate Spain on
placing such strong emphasis on women and peace and
security and the agenda in resolution 1325 (2000), and
placing them centre stage in Security Council priorities.
We also very much welcome the personal commitment
of His Excellency Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy Brey
by way of his presence here today.
In the same vein, we would like to commend
the able stewardship of the presidency, together with
the delegation of the United Kingdom, in steering
resolution 2242 (2015) to its ultimate adoption, which
was unanimous. All of us are very much committed to
its implementation.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his personal commitment to the cause of women and
peace and security, and we also pay special tribute to
the exceptional work carried out by UN-Women and
its Executive Director Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
and her excellent team, with whom we have enjoyed a
long and successful cooperation.

56/96

13/10/2015

Lastly, we welcome the three women representatives
of non-governmental organizations, who, by their
candid and sobering recollections of the facts that they
face on the ground, have put the problem into its proper
perspective.
The European Union and its member States have
a long-standing commitment to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), in both internal and external
actions. As a security, development and political actor,
the EU is heavily involved in supporting conflict
prevention and peace processes and in dealing with
the consequences of conflict. Women and peace and
security issues are a vital element of our external
policies, which range from the 17 civilian and military
missions we currently deploy worldwide to our role
as a foremost global provider of development aid and
humanitarian assistance.
From terrorism to intensified refugee and migrant
flows, it is vital that the symptoms and the root causes
of all global challenges be tackled with firmness and
fairness. With that in mind, it is all the more important
that we understand and embrace the role of women
in conflict resolution and prevention. Women need to
be heard, as every step for women’s rights and every
victory on the status quo has been hard-won and, as
Malala Yousafzai pointed out, we realize the importance
of our voice only when we are silenced.
The European Union and the international
community can undoubtedly do more to ensure that
women’s voices are heard and acted upon. The high-level
review provides the opportunity to assess progress and
enhance the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. For that reason, the European Union
has contributed actively to preparations for the global
study. We welcome the work of Ms. Coomaraswamy
and her team, as well as all the efforts reflected in
Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/716).
Therefore, the European Union will continue to
ensure that it focuses on the promotion and protection
of the human rights of women and their participation as
positive agents of change, peace and development. We
will make conflict-resolution and peacebuilding more
effective through their protection, while also protecting
women in situations of conflict and preventing them
from becoming victims or perpetrators.
On top of its long-standing, active and continuous
commitment, the European Union intends to do even
more. We pledge to assume substantial financial

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

commitments, to thoroughly mainstream gender and
to include gender-specific actions in all European
Union financial instruments, and to allocate more
than €100 million over the next seven years to gender
equality and women and girls’ empowerment projects.
In the context of our humanitarian assistance, we will
tailor our targeted tools to assess how effectively all
of the European Union’s humanitarian actions integrate
gender and age. Of course, we also will continue to
prioritize our cooperation, first with UN-Women
in the framework of our strategic partnership and
under our memorandum of understanding. Secondly,
we will continue to support the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, and all of
the relevant work aimed at formulating an integrated
approach to preventing and punishing acts of sexual
violence, as well as to bringing justice, services and
reparations to the victims.
The European Union will also encourage the
enhancement of the gender dimension through better
ongoing synergies in the United Nations peace and
security architecture, among the various ongoing
United Nations reviews. We will continue to engage
in close dialogue and actively support all forms of
cooperation with civil society on issues concerning
women in conflict and post-conflict situations, and
to empower women’s participation and leadership
in peacebuilding initiatives. We will pay particular
attention to the protection of women human rights
defenders, especially in situations of conflict.
We remain strongly convinced that coordination
among all United Nations Member States with
international and regional organizations is key to the
effective implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. We also believe in holding
ourselves to the highest possible standards. Therefore,
the European Union pledges to improve the way it
measures the impact of all of its actions in order to
enhance its accountability. In that context, we will
update our indicators for a comprehensive approach to
the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) to measure more effectively the impact of our
action. Moreover, we are in the process of completing
a baseline study to measure how we have integrated
gender into the European Union’s crisis management
missions and operations.
We must address issues related to women, peace
and security in emerging challenges. The European

S/PV.7533

Union will actively coordinate its policies on women,
peace and security and on preventing and countering
violent extremism in all of its forms. We condemn all
forms of violence and abuses that women and girls — as
well as men and boys — have been suffering at the
hands of terrorist groups and regimes in conflict zones,
especially when terrorist groups fight their battles on
the bodies of women and girls. We need to promote
the positive role that women can play in countering
terrorism and violent extremism in their families,
communities and societies.
Promoting gender equality is also a priority for
the European Union internally, and we are committed
to leading by example to improve the gender balance
in decision-making positions in our own institutions,
including through a better representation of qualified
female candidates in middle- and senior-management
positions and as heads of European Union delegations
abroad.
At the same time, last month the European Union
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy created the post of Principal Adviser on gender
and the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security to mark the European
Union’s engagement with international, regional and
national actors on policies and actions relating to
gender and the women and peace and security agenda.
I have the honour to have been appointed to that post,
and my commitment is to enhancing the visibility and
effective prioritization of gender, as well as women,
peace and security, in all of the European Union’s
external actions, and to assisting the work of the United
Nations, in close consultation with all United Nations
services and agencies.
Lastly, I would like to conclude by expressing the
European Union’s expectation of an ambitious outcome
of the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) and
an even faster and more ambitious implementation of
resolution 2242 (2015), which we adopted today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States.
Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
would like to extend my thanks to our friend, Spain,
for presiding over the Security Council for the month
of October. I thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this open debate to review and assess the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women

15-3098657/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

and peace and security. It comes at a time when Arab
countries are undergoing major transformations in
which women have been victimized, which represents
a threat to the progress that they had achieved in the
Arab region.
I take this opportunity to congratulate Tunisia on
the occasion of the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to
the Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet. I commend
the women of Tunisia, who have offered us a shining
example of resistance and played an active role in
the evolution and democratic transformation of their
country.
Having witnessed the exceptional circumstances in
the region and based on our concern over the situation
and our belief in the importance of eradicating all
forms of violence and discrimination against women,
the League of Arab States has taken steps to diversify
our actions. We have undertaken regional strategies
to reinforce community action to eliminate violence
directed against women, while conforming to all
international resolutions, in particular resolution 1325
(2000), advocating the protection and empowerment of
women in peace and war.
In 2011, the League of Arab States launched an
Arab strategy for combating violence against women,
aimed at enhancing the participation of Arab women at
all political levels and their participation in education,
public-awareness training and building a culture of
peace. The League of Arab States has always sought to
enhance the participation of civil society organizations
that address the development of women in general in
order to promote and support efforts made within the
framework of the collective actions of the League of
Arab States to raise awareness of issues concerning
women.
The League’s 144th ministerial meeting, held in
September, adopted a regional strategy and executive
plan of action to protect Arab women and peace
and security. That represents an important step to
strengthen the awareness of officials and all other
stakeholders with respect to all international and
regional resolutions related to the issue of women and
peace and security. The strategy and the executive plan
of action are based on the participation, protection and
empowerment of women. The executive plan of action
on the protection of Arab women’s security and peace
is the fruit of open dialogue between the League’s
Department of Women, Family and Childhood and the

58/96

13/10/2015

United Nations Development Fund for Women, which
met yesterday. We believe that it is very important to
shed light on the repercussions on women and girls in
the Arab countries of war and armed conflict, which
also lead to emigration. We therefore need to improve
the mechanisms for the exchange of dialogue and
experiences in that regard.
The League of Arab States intends to hold a regional
conference in December regarding the executive plan of
action. I would like, in that context, to refer to the Cairo
Declaration concerning the post-2015 Arab women’s
agenda. On 23 February 2014, the Arab countries
reiterated their commitment to participating in the
march towards the increased participation of women in
political parties, trade unions and all elected councils, as
well as in civil society organizations, with opportunities
equal to those of men. We also have taken all necessary
measures to protect women from violence and to use
the media to raise awareness of women’s human rights
and society’s duty to protect them. To that end, the
Department of Information and Communications of
the League of Arab States cooperated with the regional
office of the United Nations Development Programme
in holding a high-level meeting at United Nations
headquarters on 14 October on the issue of gender and
conflict hot spots.
We believe that we must overcome all obstacles
facing people living under foreign occupation, in
particular marginalized groups. In that regard,
I stress the rights of the Palestinian people, who
require immediate protection. Arab women in the
occupied territories endure many different kinds of
suffering — psychological, social, economic, legal and
political — as a result of the practices of the Israeli
occupation, the violation of their human rights, the
deteriorating economic situation, the blockade, the
restrictions to their movement and, of course, poverty.
Last Sunday, Rahaf Hassan, who was only 4-years old,
and her mother were killed by an Israeli aeroplane and
their house was destroyed. On Wednesday, a Palestinian
girl on her way to prayer was shot in the head by an
Israeli soldier.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of the Organization of
American States.
Mr. Laínez: Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, on behalf of the Organization of
American States (OAS) and its Inter-American

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7533

Commission of Women, for the opportunity to address
this historic celebration of the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) — a watershed
moment for the women of the world in terms of how
they are affected by, and participate in, all types of
conflict and crisis.

Women provides a strong legal framework to support
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
and the Follow-Up Mechanism to the Convention has
placed particular emphasis on violence against women
perpetrated by the State or people acting on behalf of
the State.

The Americas are passing through an age of
democratic consolidation that has been marked, on the
one hand, by moments of progress, broader levels of
participation in politics and decision-making, relatively
stable levels of economic growth and unprecedented
levels of connectivity and access to information. On the
other hand, those changes have also been accompanied
by growing levels of income inequality, persistent
corruption, growing dissatisfaction with the quality of
representative democracy and, above all, rising levels
of crime and violence.

Failure to consider the security situation of women,
on the one hand, and their absence from structures
where decisions are made and action taken in the area
of security, on the other, is tantamount to the security
policy in most of the region’s countries ignoring more
than 50 per cent of the population. Incorporating
differentiating criteria for analysing existing threats
strengthens the ability of the security sector to provide
appropriate responses according to the rights and
priorities of each population group.

Security has a central role to play in the success
of our new democracies. While the Americas do not
have any countries that are formally defined as being in
conflict, our region is plagued by high levels of citizen
insecurity, a reality that is regularly cited in public
opinion surveys as one of the main concerns of our
citizens. We face many of the issues that also confront
countries in conflict, including weak rule of law,
security institutions that are incapable of or unwilling
to respect human rights, the proliferation of small
arms and high levels of all types of violence, including
violence against women, particularly the gender-based
killing of women, known in our region as femicide.
Although the lack of citizen security is a problem
affecting the entire population, women experience
violence, robbery, trafficking and other security issues
differently from men as a result of their differential
relationship to public spaces. In addition, as a number
of authors have pointed out, public debates on security
issues and public policies and programmes that attempt
to address those issues are often based on indicators
that reduce violence to criminal activities, which
usually excludes the violence against women, which is
most often exercised within the home.
In this forum, the OAS commits to undertaking
advocacy efforts to promote the relevance of resolution
1325 (2000), in addition to the other resolutions on
women and peace and security, particularly those that
address sexual violence in times of conflict and crisis.
Our own Inter-American Convention on the Prevention,
Punishment and Eradication of Violence against

To that end, the OAS offers its full cooperation to
help incorporate women’s rights and gender equality
into regional and international security policies and
programmes, in particular with regard to strengthening
civilian oversight of the security sector and effectively
addressing and preventing violence against women.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Ms. Beham: I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
allowing the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) to participate once again in this
important debate and to share our experiences in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is my
special pleasure to be here today on behalf of the
OSCE Secretary General. Let me also express my
appreciation and congratulate you, Sir, and the Security
Council on the adoption of another seminal resolution
on women and peace and security. I wish also to thank
previous speakers and in particular the briefers for their
interesting and inspiring presentations.
The fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
is a very appropriate occasion for us all to reflect on
how we can make our world more peaceful and just by
creating security that is fully inclusive.
The OSCE is the largest regional security
organization in the world dealing with early warning,
conflict prevention, crisis management and postconflict rehabilitation. We have a holistic approach
to security that includes politico-military issues and
economic and environmental security, as well as

15-3098659/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

human rights and the rule of law. Gender equality as
a cross-cutting issue is one of the cornerstones of our
comprehensive and cooperative security concept, and
therefore the women and peace and security agenda
plays a central role in our work.
There are a number of key OSCE policy documents
that explicitly refer to resolution 1325 (2000). Looking
back at the 15 years of implementation of the resolution,
we can clearly see that progress has been made. For
example, 27 of the 54 existing national action plans
on resolution 1325 (2000) are from the OSCE region,
and several more are in the making. A number of
OSCE participating States apply the provisions of the
resolution without having a national action plan.
In practical terms, our network of 59 gender
focal points throughout OSCE executive structures
assists staff in gender-mainstreaming their work,
involving women in all of our projects and actions, and
incorporating gender analysis in our work on the conflict
cycle. We also have developed tools and instruments
for this purpose, and we undertook a study on the 27
national action plans to get a deeper understanding of
where we stand with the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda in the OSCE region.
The results of the study were largely consistent
with the conclusions of the regional consultations we
held with UN-Women and the Lithuanian Government
in Vilnius in April this year to feed into the global
study on resolution 1325 (2000). Drawing from these
findings, we will focus our priority attention on, inter
alia, the following issues.
First, we deliver training to our staff, senior
management and special representatives on genderinclusive mediation and other conflict-prevention
measures. Early warning, confidence-building, dialogue
facilitation, preventive diplomacy and mediation are
still predominantly male-dominated areas.
Second, we assist participating States in improving
existing national action plans and other strategies
or developing new ones, with a focus on creating
coherence between domestic and outward-looking
implementation activities.
Third, as we believe that preventing sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict starts with combating
violence against women and domestic violence in
peacetime, we have strengthened our activities in this
area and, inter alia, promote the ratification of the

60/96

13/10/2015

Istanbul Convention as a key international document
and tool.
Fourth, we need more quality information and data
to inform policies and systematic responses and to learn
more about the impact of the work we are doing on
women and peace and security. We need more research
and intend to cooperate more closely with academia.
Fifth, we are working on strengthening the
interchange between international organizations, States
and civil society. We must not forget the important role
that civil society has played from the very beginning in
pushing for the women and peace and security agenda
as well as its vital role in the implementation of national
action plans and providing much-needed monitoring
and oversight.
Sixth, over the past years the OSCE has sought
to highlight the role of women and gender issues in
the context of countering terrorist radicalization. The
Global Counterterrorism Forum, at its Ministerial
Conference on 27 September 2015, adopted a document
on good practices on women and countering violent
extremism, which was drafted and developed by the
OSCE in cooperation with the Forum.
Seventh, we empower women through establishing
mentoring networks and have started to partner with
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs to
boost women’s empowerment in the area of peace and
security in order to create a critical mass of trained
women in the OSCE region to address disarmament and
non-proliferation issues.
The OSCE remains fully committed to
comprehensive and inclusive peace and security. It
is for this reason that Secretary General Lamberto
Zannier is organizing an OSCE Security Day on
13 November 2015 to discuss ways to further advance
the women and peace and security agenda. This will
be a good opportunity to identify how the conclusions
of this high-level review and the global study can be
operationalized in the framework of the OSCE.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the Executive Director of UN-Women to
respond to questions raised.
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: I wish once again to
express our great appreciation to Spain for having
convened this very rich and informative dialogue. I
also wish to express my gratitude for the contribution
of the United Kingdom, which also made it possible for

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

resolution 2242 (2015) to be adopted unanimously. We
thank members profusely for that achievement. We also
thank the individual Member States that have presented
their efforts and initiatives to us here and who were
not shy about highlighting many of the problems they
face, while emphasizing the fact that a paradigm shift is
needed and that, as the representative of the Netherlands
said, there should be more action and less talk.
We want to emphasize, with respect to regional
organizations, whose presence is highly appreciated,
that in resolution 2242 (2015) the role of regional
organizations is mentioned at least seven times, further
pointing out the important role of such organizations.
Mass displacements caused by conflict frequently
spill across borders and have prompted an increase
in the need for regional approaches to the prevention
of conflict and to peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. We therefore welcome the collaboration
within the United Nations that we have experienced
with regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union (AU), the European Union (EU),
NATO and the Pacific Island Forum and such
subregional organizations as the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
I hope that this greater collaboration will strengthen
our joint efforts in relation to the women and peace and
security agenda and the recommendations that have
come out of the global study.
The adoption of regional policies and action plans
on women and peace and security by ECOWAS, the
EU, IGAD, NATO and the Pacific Islands Forum
have a knock-on effect in encouraging an even greater
number of national action plans, which improves the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We also
see that the knock-on effect means that countries can
depend on each other for support.
We have seen that regional plans are effectively
implemented when there is widespread consultation
with civil society, when there is political will, when
there are adequate financial, human and technical
resources and when there is a strong framework for
monitoring and evaluation. We are also encouraged
by the appointment of high-level envoys, some of
whom were mentioned today by speakers from
various countries and regions, and we welcome the
appointment of women envoys within NATO and the
AU, whose collaboration we are already fully enjoying.

S/PV.7533

We also welcome the appointment of senior agenda
advisers by the EU and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and others, and we
encourage that trend.
The global study tells us that it can have a positive
impact when we appoint envoys who are able to assist
in driving the implementation of regional plans. Both
the NATO Special Representative for Women, Peace
and Security and the AU Special Envoy played a key
role in facilitating regional consultations for the global
study. We thank NATO, the EU, the AU and OSCE for
their support in organizing such regional consultations.
We look forward to our ongoing work in partnership
with the EU. And we look forward to our discussion
as we pursue our three-year review and as we work to
ensure that our way forward on the women and peace
and security agenda will assist us in taking collective
actions that will have an impact in all areas that we all
feel strongly about.
I also want to highlight the importance of
appointing mediators. Many countries are already
doing that, appointing and supporting networks of core
women mediators, whose numbers are increasing, and
the participation of women in tackling conflicts and in
peacemaking is increasing.
I would like to conclude by highlighting the fact
that today, as we continue this discussion, has to be seen
as a day of a paradigm shift. There was a time before
the 15-year study and there will be a time after the 15year study. That means that we are changing gears in
the manner in which we are doing our work, and we
support the work of the women and peace and security
agenda. We need strong, decisive, united action in order
to make sure that 16 years after the adoption of the
resolution, 17 years after the adoption of the resolution,
but long before we have reached 30 years after the
adoption of the resolution, we will be able to talk about
having achieved a great impact in the implementation of
the resolution and the active participation of both men
and women in peacemaking and in conflict prevention.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give to the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Ms. Martelli (Italy) (spoke in Italian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): First of all, on behalf of
Italy, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
the Security Council’s adoption today of resolution
2242 (2015), on women and peace and security, whose

15-3098661/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

13/10/2015

contents we fully support. We thank Spain and the
United Kingdom for the work carried out to that end.

which is becoming more blended and smaller owing to
lower birth rates.

In that regard, I cannot help but point out that
even in the political crises that precede armed conflict
and where there are violations of fundamental human
rights, there is a difference between the impacts on men
and on women. Studies of the phases directly preceding
the outbreak of armed conflict show a consistent
stereotyping of the roles of men and women, with a
consequential increase in violence against women.

The great migrations from the global South call
for cross-cutting public policies, that is, a transnational
approach, because only by considering the elimination
of vulnerabilities and poverty from a global perspective,
including in developing countries, that we can activate
our capabilities for promoting human rights on a global
scale.

In the acute phase of a conflict, sexual violence
against women and girls becomes a weapon of war used
on a large scale, and even within the home domestic
violence increases. The phenomenon of sexual violence
tends to increase even in post-conflict situations. It is
therefore fundamental that women should participate
in peace negotiations so as to ensure appropriate
involvement in the stages following the signing of
the peace agreements. Even more important is the
consideration of gender issues in the negotiations so
that the presence of women is not completely irrelevant.
Maintaining a gender perspective is crucial while
negotiating guarantees during the rebuilding phase, and
a new definition of security as the human and social
condition based on the exercise of one’s fundamental
human rights, which are the main instruments for
maintaining peace, is emerging.
Heeding the call of Prime Minister Rajoy Brey of
Spain on the need to further encourage cooperation in
that field, and building upon the remarks by Chilean
Vice-Minister Gloria Maira, I wish to underscore the
key importance of dialogue with civil society. In that
regard, Italy, within its national action plan for fighting
violence against women, will be establishing, this
Friday, a space for structured partnerships devoted
to fighting violence against women. The peace that
we were referring to previously is clearly achieved
by valuing people and through the development of
informed capital as the first step in a process leading to
the gaining of substantial freedoms.
Not just for Italy but for all mature democracies, the
real challenge is investing in a new way of managing
our knowledge, driven by innovation. In that regard, a
true inversion of the trends means relaunching services
to people and providing health care that is capable of
responding to today’s needs. I am referring to an ageing
population and the changing structure of the family,

62/96

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), which re-launches
cooperation as an instrument for creating partnerships
for development, must serve as a constant reference
in the peacebuilding process. Its objectives seek to
eliminate extreme poverty globally by 2030, halve the
percentage of women and men and children who go
hungry, create political assets at the national, regional
and international levels so as to maintain greater
investments in the fight against poverty, eliminate
all forms of malnutrition, double the agricultural
productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers,
in particular women and family farmers, through
secure access to land and agricultural resources,
reduce the global maternal mortality rate to fewer than
70 cases per 1,000 live births, drastically reduce infant
mortality, and eliminate endemic diseases such as
AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria. Other objectives of the
Agenda are to acknowledge the need for inclusive and
equal education for all, full gender equality, universal
access to sustainable energy, support for infrastructure,
the promotion of sustainable consumption and
production models and the adoption of urgent measures
to fight climate change and desertification.
The global South is the true key to maintaining
balance in the world. Our investment in women for
the comprehensive consolidation of security is the true
measure of our ability to unite history and innovation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate Spain on this successful
meeting on the fifteenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). We welcome the new global study on
women and peace and security, which was drafted
by Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy and her team. We
also thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, for her efforts.

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7533

Properly implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
requires unwavering political will on the part of
all relevant Government agencies. That will is
demonstrated by clearly defined budgetary allocations
both in our national budgets and in the contributions
made by the international community. Governments
and civil society must work together and complement
each other’s efforts.

We reiterate that the review of the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding processes should include the
commitments relating to the women and peace and
security agenda. We need to improve the existing
cooperation and establish synergies between
peacekeeping operations and country teams. That is
the only way we can exploit the mutual comparative
advantages of both.

Women play a crucial role in conflict prevention
and resolution, the promotion of justice, the promotion
of reconciliation and the rebuilding of national
institutions — all essential pillars for the consolidation
of lasting peace. The involvement of women in
decision-making processes at all levels is important.

We must improve access to justice and strengthen
the participation of women in the drafting of national
legislation. Through joint and coordinated efforts,
we can achieve peaceful and inclusive societies for
all. In that regard, we would like to emphasize the
complementarity of the women and peace and security
agenda with the mandate of the Committee on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and its review of the national reports submitted
by States parties.

Broad-based
sustainable
development
can
contribute to addressing the underlying causes of
conflict. By definition, such development requires that
women be included. We therefore welcome the inclusion
of Goal 5, on the empowerment of women and girls, in
the sustainable development agenda.
We reiterate that the prevention of, and protection
against, gender-based violence and sexual abuse
requires the involvement of men and boys. It concerns
everybody.
We strongly condemn the reported cases of sexual
violence, which continues to be used as a strategy for
intimidation and terror. Furthermore, we condemn the
incidents of violence and sexual abuse in peacekeeping
operations. We demand the implementation of the zerotolerance policy.
Security forces must recognize that women play a
vital role in the national reconciliation dialogue. Those
forces must ensure their safety and integrity as an
important aspect of the peace and security equation.
We will not rest until we see that the special needs of
women and girls in the field are receiving the attention
they deserve. That will be achieved with the active
involvement of all the various agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system and Member
States, and with the support of regional organizations
and civil society, in particular women’s organizations.
We recognize the important work undertaken
by UN-Women in advancing the gender perspective
in all activities of United Nations field missions. We
urge that office to continue to provide their valuable
contributions to our efforts to meet the challenges now
facing us.

The Rome Statute constitutes the most progressive
international legal framework on gender-based crimes
to date. It should be incorporated into the national
context so that States have a comprehensive framework
for investigating international crimes of sexual violence
and gender-based crimes, with specific procedures to
support victims and witnesses, and with programmes to
teach women the laws concerning them. Each of those
components has a significant effect on women’s access
to justice.
In conclusion, we support resolution 2242 (2015),
which was adopted today and which we sponsored.
We urge all the members present to take advantage of
this important opportunity to move forward towards a
stronger and more substantial commitment to gender
equality and to ensure that the empowerment of women
and girls is one of the cornerstones of peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I wish to thank Spain and
commend your vision and leadership, Mr. President, in
organizing today’s high-level debate on the review of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Hungary strongly supported the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and the subsequent resolutions on that
topic. We know that numerous initiatives and actions
have been launched during the past 15 years aimed
at enhancing the effective participation of women

15-3098663/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

in peace processes, as well as their empowerment in
peacemaking and post-conflict situations.
Hungary fully allies itself with the common
pledges on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
In addition, at the national level, Hungary pledges
to identify and deploy female military experts, officers
and police officers to United Nations peacekeeping and
European Union Common Security and Defence Policy
missions.
We also commit ourselves to stepping up all efforts
aimed at strengthening justice and accountability. In
that context, we support the inclusion of the perpetrators
of gross violations of women’s human rights and other
forms of gender-based crimes in United Nations and
bilateral sanctions.
We are ready to contribute to international
initiatives aimed at combating sexual violence in
conflicts, particularly against women and girls.
Hungary financed, on a bilateral basis, a genderbased training workshop in Kenya aimed at developing
the security sector within the framework of our
international development cooperation strategy. We
have also supported UN-Women programmes, one in
the Western Balkans on advancing the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and one in Kenya for improving security and
enhancing leadership for crisis-affected women and
girls. Hungary also contributed to the construction of a
secondary school for girls in Afghanistan.
However, despite the remarkable progress we have
made in the past 15 years, there still remain significant
challenges hindering our efforts to achieve peace and
security for all. Hungary is greatly looking forward
to working with UN-Women and Member States on
the various United Nations programmes, because we
believe that responsibility for dealing with those issues
lies with all of us, without exception.
Hungary declared its commitment to the cause
of preventing sexual violence at the Global Summit
to End Sexual Violence in Conflict held in London
last year, where Hungary joined others in endorsing
the communiqué on the Call to Action to End
Violence against Women and Girls in Emergencies.
Finally, I would like to add that, in cooperation with
Hungarian Baptist Aid, a renowned organization

64/96

13/10/2015

that has accumulated vast experience in cooperating
with military peacekeeping forces in fighting sexual
violence and dealing with the consequences of such
vicious acts, Hungary also continues to contribute to a
project aimed at educating women and girls in Baghlan
province in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s open
debate on this important and pertinent issue and for
the informative concept note (S/2015/749, annex). In
order to give other colleagues a chance to speak today,
I will make only a few points and request that my full
statement be circulated.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2015/716)
is being considered at a historic moment, when we
have just adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1)
and commemorated both the fortieth anniversary of
the historic first World Conference on Women of the
United Nations, held in Mexico City, and the twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
of Action. If we are to sustain solutions to conflict
situations, we must synergize the agenda relating
to women and peace and security with the relevant
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda.
If the Security Council cannot reflect that
perspective in its deliberations while drawing up
mandates for peace operations, we will not succeed in
achieving the desired synergy. Developing countries
must have a greater presence in the permanent
membership of the Council, which is why the Council’s
existing structure is in urgent need of reform, as was
agreed on by all our leaders at the 2005 World Summit.
The United Nations must encourage women’s full
and meaningful participation and leadership in the
decision-making processes of conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction. In
that context, our pioneering role in Liberia, where India
became the first United Nations State Member to send
an all-female peacekeeping unit, illustrates what we are
calling for.
National Governments must be encouraged and
assisted in developing and implementing national
strategies in the context of resolution 1325 (2000). The
key to national capacity-building is not the temporary
deployment of external humanitarian experts, but the
15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

actual process of transferring experiences in humanresource development and building national institutions
by Member States that are willing and able to share
their experiences. The recent commitment we made at
the leaders’ summit on United Nations peacekeeping
to ramping up our contribution of enablers and skilled
personnel from our armed forces, especially our police,
is an illustration of how India proposes to address the
issue. It goes without saying that such assistance must
be consented to by the host Government, so that the
United Nations can actually contribute to the objectives
of peacebuilding. It is logical for us to point out here
that such an approach, based on our experience as a
troop-contributing country, requires the Council
to implement, in letter and spirit, the provisions of
Article 44 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
allow troop-contributing countries, like us, that are
not represented on the Council to sit face to face with
Council members when it is drawing up mandates for
United Nations peace operations.
In conclusion, we believe that any diversion from
that objective towards other thematic issues, including
human rights, violent extremism and countering
terrorism, will endanger and dilute the work being done
separately in the General Assembly and the Council,
and will put undue strain on the already stretched
resources of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your efforts on this issue, and the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of UNWomen for their briefings this morning. I would also
particularly like to thank Ms. Lusenge, Ms. Mohammed
and Ms. Murabit for their participation here today. The
bravery and commitment of women’s organizations
in preventing conflict, building peace and promoting
human rights, often in very dangerous situations, is
admirable and deserves our full support.
We are here today not only to celebrate the fifteenth
anniversary of the ground-breaking resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, but also
to support and promote women as actors for peace. It
is high time that we accelerated our common efforts
and moved from normative commitments to full
implementation.
Enhancing gender equality and women’s
contributions to peace and security are top priorities for

S/PV.7533

the Swedish Government. Promoting gender equality
means promoting not only the economic, political and
social empowerment of women but also development
and conflict prevention. I would like to highlight three
areas that are particularly important to us and to which
Sweden wants to pledge its continued support.
First, indisputable evidence, as the global study
highlights, has shown that women’s participation leads
to more sustainable peace. Yet women’s experience,
knowledge and expertise are too often excluded from
peace processes. Change therefore needs to start, and it
needs to start at home. My Government has committed
to strengthening women’s human rights, improving their
access to resources and increasing their representation,
in times of war and in times of peace.
Our revised national action plan will make women’s
participation in peace and security a top priority. In
order to make sure that the new plan duly reflects the
needs and experiences of women and girls in conflictaffected societies, we have held consultations in five
countries dealing with or emerging from conflict. All
of the women, ranging from those in Afghanistan to
those in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
conveyed the same, very clear message, which is that
no sustainable peace can be achieved without them.
We must hear their plea and commit to continuing to
support and fund women’s organizations in conflict and
post-conflict countries. We have increased that support
threefold over the past five years, but we will strive to
do even more. Sweden is also developing a network of
women peace mediators, and we have also participated
in the creation of a Nordic women’s mediation network
with a capacity to assist peace efforts wherever they
may be needed in the world.
Secondly, we should acknowledge that sexual
violence in conflict is a core security challenge that
must remain on the Security Council’s agenda and
particularly now, when the use of sexual violence has
been taken to new and horrific levels in which sexual
violence is not only condoned but openly prescribed as
a method of warfare. There must be accountability for
such crimes and an end to impunity. As a major donor to
the United Nations Action Against Sexual Violence in
Conflict, we will seek further ways to increase support
to the victims and survivors of sexual violence. We
will continue to cooperate with relevant stakeholders,
such as the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, in order to create stronger national

15-3098665/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

capacities for investigating and prosecuting sexual and
gender-based crimes.
In 2016, we will assume the leadership of the Call
to Action on Protection from Gender-Based Violence
in Emergencies initiative, which aims to foster
accountability and mitigate gender-based violence
in humanitarian crises. Our main objective for next
year will be to take the initiative from policy to action
and from words to deeds. We want to work with all
our partners in the initiative, and with everyone here
in the Council, to make a real and positive impact on
how we address gender-based violence in humanitarian
crises. Sweden will also support organizations working
to engage men and boys in pursuing gender equality.
Recent good practices from conflict-affected countries
have shown the importance of engaging men and boys
in the prevention of gender-based violence.
Thirdly, a lack of resources, or their uneven
distribution, is often at the core of inequality. We need
a thorough analysis of how resources are allocated, and
to whom. If we are to achieve real change, political
commitment must be accompanied by sustainable
financing. We are committed to allocating 1 per
cent of our gross domestic income to development
cooperation. Gender equality and women’s rights
and empowerment will remain top priorities in our
development cooperation and humanitarian assistance.
Gender equality was the primary focus of 16 per cent of
our development support to conflict-affected countries
in 2014. We challenge the United Nations to reach its
set target of 15 per cent gender funding within all aid
flows to conflict-affected countries.
We welcome resolution 2242 (2015), adopted today
by the Council, and its call on the United Nations
to redouble efforts to integrate women’s needs and
the gender perspective. By strengthening gender
competence and accountability at strategic, tactical and
operational levels, the United Nations will be better fit
to cater to the needs of women and men, boys and girls.
We are committed to supporting those efforts
and will continue to offer predeployment training on
resolution 1325 (2000) and gender to peacekeeping
mission staff, as well as seconding gender advisers
to international institutions and missions. We also
remain committed to a strong and adequately resourced
UN-Women. We were the programme’s top donor in
2014, with a total support of $35 million.

66/96

13/10/2015

In conclusion, in order to take our common
commitment seriously, we need to ensure that women’s
voices are being heard and that the needs and realities
of women living in conflict and post-conflict countries
influence our decisions. It is time for a paradigm shift.
Sustainable development and peace and security can
never be achieved if half the population is excluded.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Prime Minister Rajoy Brey and
the delegation of Spain for convening today’s debate
and for their commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda.
(spoke in English)
I also thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Women and Ms. Julienne
Lusenge, Ms. Yanar Mohammed and Ms. Alaa Murabit
for their briefings.
I congratulate the authors of global study on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That
ambitious and comprehensive document will provide
a sound and updated basis for the discussions
among policymakers, activists and scholars during
the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations.
Along with the recommendations of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations and those
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture, we now have a solid
triad of reports to underpin our deliberations on the
review of the policies and practices of the Organization
concerning international peace and security.
Fifteen years have passed since the Security Council
first recognized that women and girls experienced armed
conflict in particularly dramatic ways, and therefore
had specific needs, concerns and perspectives. That
led to the essential acknowledgement that sustainable
peace could only be achieved if both female and male
perspectives were fully taken into account. Over the past
few years, the women and peace and security agenda
has been integrated into the political mainstream of the
United Nations. A comprehensive legal framework has
been created through eight specific Council resolutions,
including resolution 2242 (2015), adopted today, and a
number of presidential statements.

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

Other United Nations entities, including UN-Women,
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women and the Commission on the Status
of Women — which I currently have the honour to
chair — have also contributed in that regard. At the
next session of the Commission, the priority theme will
be “Women’s empowerment and its link to sustainable
development”, whereas the review theme will be “The
elimination of all forms of violence against women
and girls”. Likewise, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
several rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council have
diligently worked to strengthen this vital agenda. The
International Criminal Court and other domestic and
international tribunals have produced a substantial body
of jurisprudence regarding violations against women
and girls. It would now be unthinkable to create a major
new peacekeeping operation without deploying gender
advisers, without including the protection of women
in the mandate and without training peacekeepers to
prevent sexual abuse.
Much has changed since the days before resolution
1325 (2000), yet much continues unchanged. Women
and girls are still subject to unacceptable violations
of their rights in war zones around the world.
Impunity for gender-based crimes remains a major
challenge. Peacekeeping, as well as peacebuilding and
reconstruction efforts, could still benefit from greater
female participation and leadership. Today’s debate is
therefore a timely opportunity to take stock and think
ahead.
Brazil fully agrees with the global study’s
assessment that the most effective way to avoid
violence against women in conflict is to prevent war
from erupting in the first place. This high-level review
should encourage us to renew our commitment to
diplomatic instruments for the peaceful resolution of
disputes, including good offices, mediation and the
involvement of regional organizations. It is therefore of
fundamental importance to increase the participation of
women in peace processes and post-conflict transitions,
as emphasized by the concept note prepared by the
delegation of Spain (S/2015/749, annex). Our initiatives
to prevent and resolve conflict should also tackle the
root causes and structural drivers of violence, including
social, economic and political exclusion and inequality,
which affect women and girls disproportionately.

S/PV.7533

The complex humanitarian crises arising from
conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa should
serve to highlight the plight of women and girls who
have been subject to many forms of sexual violence,
including rape, sexual slavery and forced marriage,
and who are also forced to abandon their homes and
communities, becoming refugees and internally
displaced persons. In that context, we should ensure
particular attention to women and girls who belong to
vulnerable groups, including indigenous women and
older women, those with disabilities and members of
ethnic or religious minorities, among others.
Brazil has long stated that supporting and hosting
refugees is a moral imperative and a common duty of
humankind. We have lately renewed our guidelines
aimed at facilitating visas on a humanitarian basis
for individuals affected by the conflict in Syria.
Nearly 8,000 asylum-seekers, including thousands of
vulnerable women and girls, have been issued such
visas in the past four years.
During the recent global leaders meeting on gender
equality, President Dilma Rousseff underscored that
women were not only beneficiaries of public policies
and initiatives, but also agents of their own future.
Brazil sees protection and empowerment as inseparable
aspects of the women and peace and security agenda.
Women and girls are not just entitled to safety, but also to
an active and influential voice. No decision concerning
women should be adopted without consultation and
consideration of their unique perspective.
At the international level that includes formulating
and implementing the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, conducting
peace negotiations and addressing peacebuilding,
recovery and humanitarian activities. At the domestic
level, Governments should be ready to design and
improve their gender-sensitive policies.
Brazil has made considerable progress in the past
decade. We enacted the Maria da Penha law, which
recognizes domestic violence as a violation of human
rights, and more recently created the House of Brazilian
Women, a multidisciplinary space aimed at facilitating
women’s access to specialized services, protection
and empowerment and ensuring their economic
autonomy. Those initiatives were recently crowned by
the establishment of the Ministry for Women, Racial
Equality and Human Rights. We are confident that

15-3098667/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

our national efforts will positively influence all our
activities in the international arena.
In that vein, I am pleased to announce today that
the Government of Brazil has launched the drafting
process of a national action plan on women and peace
and security. Our plan will include measures in areas
such as fostering the participation of women in peace
missions, further enhancing the relationship between
troops and civilians, particularly women and girls
in peace operations, and providing humanitarian
assistance and technical cooperation to post-conflict
countries concerning gender issues. The initiative will
complement the provisions of our national policy plan on
women, which already embraces the recommendations
set out in resolution 1325 (2000), including strict
legislation against sexual and gender-based violence.
Seventy years ago, Mr. Bertha Lutz, a distinguished
member of the Brazilian delegation to the San
Francisco Conference, was one of the few women to
sign the Charter of the United Nations. At that time,
a significant achievement was the recognition of the
equality between men and women and the right of
women to participate in all the activities of the United
Nations.
To conclude, let me reiterate that Brazil will remain
strongly engaged in the advancement of gender equality
and women empowerment issues at all levels and areas
of work at the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
presidency of Spain and previous speakers for focusing
attention on ways to strengthen the landmark resolution
1325 (2000), following its 15-year review and as
we work towards the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. While many noteworthy strides have
been achieved since 2000, it is necessary to bridge the
gap between intent and implementation. My delegation
would therefore like to propose some key measures.
First, the women and peace and security agenda
requires still closer coordination among the appropriate
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General who
deal with violence and the United Nations system and
agencies, notably the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
its operations on the ground, and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, with UN-Women
serving as the lead agency. Member States and troop68/96

13/10/2015

contributing countries should provide predeployment
gender-sensitivity training, and regional organizations,
civil society and other stakeholders should also be
integral to the collective effort.
Secondly, all comprehensive, multidimensional
and hybrid peacekeeping operations should have a
strong women and peace and security mandate, with
gender specialists to provide capacity-building in the
military, police and civilian sectors, as well as in units
that focus on the rule of law, transitional justice and
human rights. Peacekeeping operations must strive
for gender mainstreaming, just as at Headquarters.
My delegation fully endorses the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy, which must be strictly enforced
without any impunity. Member States should support
that initiative with expertise and funding, so that the
impact of resolution 1325 (2000) can be durable and
wide-reaching, especially in fragile and insecure
societies.
In that regard, Kazakh peacekeepers receive
intensive training on the issue of women and peace and
security. My country currently chairs the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Gender
Unit and is in the process of developing a national action
plan based on resolution 1325 (2000). As Chair of the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia and of the OSCE, and as former Chair
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation from 2011 to
2012 and of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
from 2010 to 2012, we supported Governments in the
region and beyond in the areas of conflict prevention
and resolution, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, recovery processes, and humanitarian
assistance, in which women were fully engaged as
equal partners, not victims.
Resolution 1325 (2000) can serve as a compass for
Member States in peacetime, too. My country sees a
close nexus between peace and development. As the
President of Kazakhstan, Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev,
emphasized in his address in the general debate at
the General Assembly at its seventieth session (see
A/70/PV.13):
“Humankind needs to move from a focus
on routine conflict prevention and post-conflict
rehabilitation to a new development strategy that
would make such conflicts senseless.” (A/70/PV.13)
He proposed that the United Nations formulate a
global development strategy 2045 as a vision for the

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

United Nations centenary. He also proposed that the
global focus on international law and on joint counterterrorism activities be strengthened to ensure better
protection for civilians, including women and girls.
Another initiative would involve the earmarking of
1 per cent of the military or defence budgets of Member
States for the purposes of achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals, including the very theme that we
are discussing this morning.
Our national Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy, announced
in December 2012, provides for the full participation of
women in every aspect of national life. In our national
legislation, key instruments support women and peace
and security with the aim of maintaining gender equality
and ensuring freedom from gender-based violence.
Kazakhstan believes it is vitally important for
the Security Council to remain committed to making
the protection of women and girls a high priority. My
country pledges to be a strong voice on their behalf.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Ms. Kanchanalak (Thailand): It is an honour for
Thailand to speak, as the current Chair of the Human
Security Network, on behalf of Austria, Chile, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama,
Switzerland, Slovenia, South Africa as an observer, and
my own country, Thailand. I would like to thank Spain
for organizing this important debate and all speakers
for their valuable input into today’s deliberations.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
world has experienced a rapid increase in conflicts,
violent extremism and humanitarian crises whose
effects have fallen heavily on women and children.
The involvement of women continues all too often to
lag behind that of men in peace and security issues,
particularly in political and decision-making processes,
and women are also the target of sexual and genderbased violence. Women have a great stake in peace
processes and conflict prevention, since they still suffer
the most painful wounds in any given conflict, whether
or not they were participants in the conflict itself. The
positive role of women in the processes of conflict
prevention and resolution is often ignored rather than
utilized.
As a group of countries promoting human security,
the Human Security Network would like to emphasize
that women’s security is essential for human security.

S/PV.7533

The Network welcomes the Secretary-General’s request
for a global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and will carefully study its findings and
recommendations. The Network calls upon Member
States, United Nations entities and regional and
subregional organizations to support Member States in
their efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000). The
Network also calls for greater efforts to promote, protect
and respect the human rights of women and girls and
to strengthen efforts to address gender-based violence
through a people-centred approach. Specifically, that
can be done by ensuring and implementing strategies
that protect women’s integrity, by promoting women’s
representation at all decision-making levels and
through mechanisms for the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts.
Effective measures and immediate actions
should be taken to end impunity and to prosecute and
punish those responsible for the violation of human
rights, especially for crimes against women and girls
in conflict. We find it crucial to include a genderresponsive approach and to strengthen efforts aimed at
providing life-saving and non-discriminatory response
services. Civil society, including grass-roots women’s
organizations and networks, play an important role in
providing assistance to the victims and survivors of
sexual violence.
The empowerment and participation of women
is essential to any conflict prevention and protection
response. As such, strategies for the effective integration
of a gender perspective should be pursued, so as to
promote women’s empowerment and participation. The
importance of women’s participation in peace processes
as well as in peacekeeping operations was underlined in
resolution 1325 (2000). We call for greater recognition
and support for their participation during all stages
of conflict resolution and post-conflict reconciliation
processes, so that peace agreements can be reached and
will be more likely to last.
In my national capacity, allow me briefly to impress
upon the Council a few important points.
Much too often, we focus on the view of women
and girls as victims of violence. In fact, however, they
are also effective agents of change who contribute to
peace processes at all stages, including to rebuilding
their societies after conflict. That is already evident,
but imagine if they were supported to do more.
Imagine if they were given more opportunities to

15-3098669/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

participate in processes that have a direct impact upon
them. As Member States, we can help to give them
that opportunity. Member States can do more to help
women and girls make a real difference by promoting
women’s participation in peace processes in concrete
terms. That also means investing in women’s capacity
to lead, mediate and play a pivotal role in peace and
security.
In the past few months, Thai Government agencies
have undertaken the rigorous process of drafting a
national action plan on women and peace and security.
A draft of that plan is currently undergoing a publichearing process. We have conducted one large public
hearing in the capital, and a few more will be conducted
in the provinces, so as to ensure that our national action
plan is relevant and beneficial and gains local support
and awareness, and that it will be effective. We hope
that, in just a few months’ time, this draft will be able
to undergo the final approval process and will be duly
launched.
Another area that we feel requires immediate
attention is data collection and building a body of
evidence to keep the international community abreast
and thereby strengthen their good efforts in promoting
the role of women in peace and security globally.
Lastly, I would also like to associate Thailand’s
statement with the statement of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations to be delivered by Viet Nam.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mrs. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Spanish presidency for having organized this timely
debate to mark the fifteenth anniversary of and the
global review on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on women, peace and security.
My delegation aligns itself with the declaration
made by the observer of the the European Union. I take
this the opportunity to make some observations from
our national perspective.
(spoke in English)
Fifteen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we now have sufficient momentum to
confirm our determination to implement our national
commitments with regard to the women and peace
and security agenda. We would therefore like to thank
Spain and the United Kingdom for preparing resolution
70/96

13/10/2015

2242 (2015), which was just adopted and which Poland
proudly co-sponsored.
We fully understand that there can be no durable
and sustainable post-conflict recovery without
meaningful reconciliation and without the restoration
of true confidence in justice. In particular, there
can be no peace and security without addressing the
consequences of violence against women, and no longterm stability and prosperity without providing justice
and ensuring that such crimes are not repeated. Poland
is committed to ending impunity. We will continue to
support the work of the International Criminal Court,
both by sharing our expertise and by contributing
financially to the Court’s Trust Fund for Victims.
Poland attaches the utmost importance to the
practical involvement of women in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping. One of the ways to engage them in
decision-making is by strengthening their participation
in the legal system. Accordingly, we support the
candidature of Ms. Agnieszka Klonowiecka-Milart
to a judgeship position on the United Nations Dispute
Tribunal based in Nairobi. With her 17 years of
experience within the United Nations as an international
judge for the United Nations on the Supreme Court of
Kosovo and the Supreme Court Chamber in Cambodia
for the Khmer Rouge trials, as well as an expert in legal
reform in Bosnia, Afghanistan and Kosovo, she will, we
believe, set a good example for other women aspiring to
make a difference in conflict and post-conflict areas.
(spoke in French)
Poland supports the candidature of a woman for the
office of the next Secretary-General. We are convinced
that that would contribute to bolstering the participation
of women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping, as
well as the advancement of women at all levels of
decision-making.
(spoke in English)
From 2011 to 2013, Poland trained professional
experts in the field of gender equality to advise the
commanders of Polish contingents abroad. Since
then, they have supported the Polish commanders
in Afghanistan and Kosovo. Poland will also take
measures to combat the under-representation of women
within national civilian contingents for peacekeeping
operations, with a view to increasing their number and
to ensuring that higher positions as well are filled by
women candidates.

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

Last but not least, we recognize the indispensable
role of women’s participation and empowerment as
a key component of lasting peace and sustainable
development. As the lessons from Sierra Leone,
Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea Bissau have taught
us, sustainable peace and security can be achieved only
through the full participation of all sectors of society, in
which the contribution of women is fundamental.
We would also like to stress that combating sexual
violence against women in armed conflicts remains
an important issue for the Polish Government. We
welcomed the anti-sexual-violence initiative of the
British Government as a timely and necessary initiative
aimed at addressing the culture of impunity. As a
member of the UN-Women Executive Board, Poland
stands ready to cooperate further in that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Poland has
decided to earmark a minimum of 15 per cent of all our
future funding for the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund to be dedicated to women’s specific needs, and
in particular to advancing gender equality in postconflict situations. Already this year, in partnership
with UN-Women, we have initiated a project involving
the innovative employment of Ukrainian internally
displaced women with children. That pilot project will
continue to grow in the coming years.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting and to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his statement. I also appreciate the briefings by
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, and the non-governmental organization
representatives.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the first and historic
resolution to recognize the role of gender equality and
women’s leadership in international peace and security.
Japan, as a peace-loving nation, has consistently
supported conflict resolution and peacebuilding and
maintains the perspective of gender equality in its basic
principles of official development assistance.
Two years ago, the Prime Minister of Japan,
Mr, Shinzo Abe, showed our country’s firm determination
to realize “a society in which women shine” (A/68/PV.12,
p. 34) by announcing the contribution of over $3 billion

S/PV.7533

to developing countries over the following three years.
The women and peace and security agenda is one of the
pillars for realizing that commitment. Japan has been
steadily implementing that pledge and will achieve the
goal announced by Prime Minister Abe before the end
of this year.
Japan finalized its national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000) last month. It has ambitiously set itself 150
goals, which will be regularly monitored. One of the
unique features of the plan is its inclusion and emphasis
on gender mainstreaming during all phases of natural
disaster risk-reduction and response. Today, Japan has
the honour to promise to fulfil those commitments.
The world has changed since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). The nature of conflicts has
changed accordingly. Today, I would like to point out
three challenges surrounding the women and peace and
security agenda and demonstrate Japan’s commitment
to addressing those issues.
First, violent extremism has emerged as a new
challenge. Women are its primary victims. At the same
time, they can, by succumbing to the influence of
extremism, become perpetrators. Addressing the root
causes of violent extremism is critical. But how do we
do that?
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/716) and
the global study point out, the economic empowerment
and participation of women play a key role in resolving
conflicts effectively, sustaining peace, and preventing
violent extremism from happening in the first place. Let
me offer an example. In cooperation with UN-Women,
Japan has been supporting the refugees and internally
displaced persons in Syria, Iraq, Jordan, Egypt and
Lebanon through vocational training and cash-for-work
programmes. We believe that women’s engagement in
peace and security, along with their empowerment and
protection, will serve as a bulwark against the spread
of extremist ideologies. From that standpoint, Japan
continues to respond to the current refugee crisis and
will furnish approximately $810 million in assistance
this year to refugees and internally displaced persons
from Syria and Iraq.
Securing project implementation is our second key
challenge. In order to sustain project implementation,
it is essential to broaden the donor base, including
non-governmental organizations, the private sector and
individuals. In that context, Japan supports the aims of

15-3098671/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

the Global Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace
and Security and Humanitarian Action.
Thirdly, we must not tolerate impunity for securityrelated personnel who perpetrate acts of violence
against women. In countries experiencing conflict
situations, it is urgent to engage the national military
forces, police and judiciary sectors with the women
and peace and security agenda. Capacity enhancement
for those sectors is key. The international community
should mobilize every possible means for supporting
that objective. Japan will increase its assistance to the
office of Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which is making tremendous efforts in that regard.
Japan welcomes the increasing momentum of the
women and peace and security agenda. Today’s adoption
of resolution 2242 (2015) under the strong leadership
of the Spanish presidency marks a historical step.
We also welcome the completion of the global study.
Continued effort is needed, however, on the part of all
actors of the international community to implement
its recommendations. Japan is one of the co-chairs of
the group of friends of the global study. Japan will
take over the role of chair of the Group of Seven next
year. Through those roles, Japan will vigorously push
forward the women and peace and security agenda
during the coming year and beyond. Now is the time
for us all to move forward.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the Spanish
presidency of the Council for convening today’s
important debate on women and peace and security.
The briefings of the Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of UN-Women and representatives
of civil society have all been instructive and very
valuable.
Resolution 1325 (2000) changed the approach to
dealing with women in situations of armed conflict.
The Security Council’s engagement with women and
peace and security over the past 15 years has led to
the creation of a robust normative framework for the
protection and empowerment of women in conflict
situations. Subsequent Council resolutions have
provided additional safeguards to protect women from
sexual violence, guarantee their participation in peace
processes and protect their rights.

72/96

13/10/2015

Despite those commendable achievements, the
situation on the ground remains troubling, if not
alarming. Raging conflicts in the Middle East and
North Africa and violent acts by extremist groups
continue to place women and girls in great peril and
underline their intense vulnerability in those conflict
situations. At a time when the refugee crisis has
acquired disturbing dimensions, a large proportion
of those fleeing conflict zones happen to be women.
Torn from their communities and homes, those refugee
women are not only deeply traumatized, but also face
serious threats to their physical health and indeed to
their personal safety and security.
Pakistan believes that it is the collective
responsibility of the United Nations and the entire
international community to provide much-needed
humanitarian assistance to those refugee women and to
ensure their safety and security in camp settings and in
transit to safer destinations. Here, I must underline the
crucial importance of conflict prevention and conflict
resolution to the women and peace and security agenda.
The hardships faced by displaced women and girls and
the grave crimes committed against them are mostly a
direct consequence of conflict situations. The Council,
we feel, should adopt a hands-on, strategic approach to
conflict prevention and conflict resolution.
Multidimensional peacekeeping missions, such
as those provided for in resolution 2086 (2013), play
a key role in combating violence against women in
conflict and post-conflict situations. As a leading
troop contributor, Pakistan will continue to ensure that
our troops respond to the special needs of women and
girls. We plan to further streamline training on gender
sensitization. Pakistani women have served on the front
lines as police officers, doctors and nurses in various
missions in Asia, Africa and the Balkans. We are proud
of the fact that a Pakistani police officer, Shahzadi
Gulfam, was the recipient of the International Female
Police Peacekeeper Award.
Pakistan’s adherence to the ideals of empowering
women and protecting their rights stems from our faith,
our Constitution and the vision of our founding fathers,
Muhammad Ali Jinnah, who famously said: “No nation
can rise to the height of glory unless women are side
by side with men”. It was my country that earned the
distinction of electing the first female Prime Minister in
the entire Muslim world. We therefore support Security
Council efforts to pursue its women and peace and

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7533

security agenda in accordance with its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security.

of men that persist in many parts of the world, and
education is the only way to change that.

However, the Council’s focus should be on the
prevention of sexual violence in armed conflict and
strengthening women’s participation in peace processes.
The inclusion of peripheral issues that fall under the
purview of other United Nations organs will only serve
to weaken the wide consensus around the role of the
Council in the women and peace and security domain.

Our fifth point is that we also need to tackle the
culture of impunity. We believe that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) has an important role to play in
this regard, especially since sexual violence plays a role
in nearly every case before the ICC. We would also like
to emphasize that collecting evidence in a professional
manner at the earliest possible stage is crucial for
successful prosecutions, and we support the Justice
Rapid Response initiative in that regard.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on the successful adoption today
of resolution 2242 (2015). Given this unprecedented
debate, I will not read out our whole statement, but will
simply highlight the six most important points. If I get
anything wrong, I would ask listeners not quote me but
refer to the written statement, which is available.
Our first point is that the main challenge
to the women and peace and security agenda is
implementation. We need to move away from a silo
approach and to more strongly tackle the root causes
of the lack of implementation of the agenda, which
concerns gender-based discrimination more broadly,
irrespective of conflict. A study suggests that rising
levels of violence against women are in fact indicators
of impending conflict, before the conflict starts. We
therefore need a broader approach in tackling the root
causes.
Secondly, we believe that the 2030 Sustainable
Development Agenda (General Assembly resolution
70/1), will be an important tool to improve
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Sustainable Development Goal 5, on gender
equality, and Goal 16, on peaceful societies, establish a
long-overdue link between the work of the Council and
our development efforts.
Thirdly, we would like to emphasize that the World
Humanitarian Summit next year will also provide
an important opportunity to promote this agenda,
especially since we know that including women also
enhances humanitarian work.
Fourthly, participation is an important pillar of this
agenda. But we believe that to achieve the meaningful
participation of women, we need to really change
attitudes, harmful stereotypes and the violent ideas

Our sixth and final point is that sufficient funding
is required. For Liechtenstein, women’s human rights
and empowerment are high priorities in our budget
for international cooperation, and we hope that other
countries, especially major donors, will continue to
take the same approach.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President,
allow me at the outset to congratulate the Kingdom of
Spain on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month and to wish it every success in
carrying out its duties. I should like also to thank the
Russian Federation for its outstanding presidency of the
Council last month.
I wish to express my gratitude for the opportunity
provided us to deliver a statement on this important
issue, especially given the difficulties facing women
in general and Iraqi women in particular in the face
of the escalating waves of terrorism that our country
sweeping through our country.
I congratulate Spain on the work it did in
connection with the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015) this morning. The constitutional and legal
empowerment of women will not lead to any fruitful
results unless we condemn all fatwas that permit the
enslavement and forced marriage of women and girls,
the terrorist attacks that we have been witnessing, and
the acts of aggression committed in Iraq by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). There have been
innumerable attacks against civilians of all factions,
all of which has undermined the peaceful coexistence,
sustainability and stability that have characterized
Iraqi society for decades.
The strengthening of the rule of law is essential
to the economic empowerment of women and their

15-3098673/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

participation in decision-making processes. Iraq has
established four courts on domestic violence and
family affairs. Concerning the legal framework for
women’s empowerment, the Iraqi Constitution has
given Iraqi women married to non-Iraqis the right
to Iraqi citizenship for their children, on the basis of
article 18 bis of the Constitution. Women also have the
right to participate in decision-making mechanisms and
in fact constitute one fourth of the members of the Iraqi
Parliament.
I take this opportunity to urge the international
community to liberate the women captured by ISIL,
who are daily subjected to systematic sexual violence.
I also call on States and the relevant international
organizations to provide medical and psychological
treatment for sexually abused women, to rehabilitate
them psychologically and socially, and to provide them
with the education necessary to ensure their integration
into society, so that they can reassume their important
role in society and contribute to its rebuilding.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Reindel (Germany): Owing to time constraints,
I will deliver only a condensed version of my statement.
The full text will be available online.
Let me congratulate Spain on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We express our gratitude
to you, Sir, for having convened this debate and for
putting the women and peace and security agenda at the
centre of your presidency. I would also like to commend
the Executive Director of UN-Women for her excellent
briefing and the two civil-society briefers for their
insightful testimonies.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the European Union.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) one and a
half decades ago was a milestone, and we have made
great strides since then. Today, it would be inconceivable
for a major Security Council-mandated mission not to
include a gender component. More than 50 countries,
including Germany, have adopted national action plans
for the implementation of the resolution.
Yet we still witness gross human rights violations,
including, and particularly, against women, in crisisridden regions across the Middle East and elsewhere.
And we are faced with millions of refugees fleeing their

74/96

13/10/2015

homes; an estimated 800,000 will have sought refuge in
Germany by the end of 2015.
Against that backdrop, one finding of the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716) is
especially significant: the prevention of conflicts and
the women and peace and security agenda are directly
linked. That is why Germany will continue to push
for the political empowerment of women and provide
adequate capacity-building and incentives. A case
in point is our long-standing effort to facilitate the
inclusion of women in the peace dialogues in Colombia
and in the Philippines.
We all know that international peace and observation
missions are expected to be standard-setters. Germany
will thus continue to deploy female police and military
experts, including specialized teams for gender-based
violence. During our chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
2016, we will appoint a Special Representative of the
OSCE Chair-in-Office on Gender Issues.
Germany is fully committed to ensuring that the
women and peace and security agenda has the necessary
financial underpinning. To that end, we will this year
once again contribute €1 million to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for use in preventing
sexual violence in armed conflict and in assisting its
victims.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura has been tireless in drawing our attention to
the horrific sexual crimes being carried out in conflicts
around the world. We encourage the members of the
Council to resort to her expertise more frequently.
It is deplorable that the survivors of sexual violence
frequently face stigmatization upon returning to their
families and communities. We commend the Yazidi
spiritual leadership in Iraq for defying this paradigm.
The positive message of acceptance and integration is a
model to be followed the world over.
In the spirit of our national action plan, we are
weaving the women and peace and security agenda into
our response to the higher number of refugees arriving
in Germany. We are investing in services that take into
account the specific needs of refugee women and girls,
in particular those who have lived through the horrors
of sexual violence.
In the 15 years since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we have together achieved significant progress

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

in expanding and promoting the women and peace and
security agenda. Now that the normative framework is
largely in place, we need to make further rapid strides
towards its implementation. Germany will remain a
strong partner in this endeavour.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Today
we celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of a resolution
whose legacy has been of incredible richness.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was the response of the Security
Council to a decade of unprecedented violations and
violence against women. But resolution 1325 (2000)
was also the starting point of many developments both
normative and operational. This dual orientation is at
the heart of resolution 1325 (2000): it aims not only
at protecting women in times of conflict, but also at
enabling them to fulfil their role as agents of change.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015) and
the presentation to be made tomorrow on the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
which Luxembourg financially supported.
Luxembourg fully supports the statement of
the European Union and will contribute to the
implementation of the European commitments made at
this meeting.
During its recent term on the Security Council,
Luxembourg made the women and peace and security
agenda one of its priorities. I would like to reiterate
our commitment to the cause of women in times of
conflict and in times of peace. The importance of
role of women in the development of their countries
is no longer in doubt. Luxembourg is also pursuing a
strategy of taking into account the conditions, priorities
and needs of women as part of our official development
assistance, which amounts to 1 per cent of our gross
national income.
We are convinced of the value of the contribution
of women in peacebuilding efforts. Since 2010,
Luxembourg has supported a project of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations designed to strengthen the
role of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, in
close consultation with national authorities and civil
society organizations. In this regard, I would like
to thank the women’s organizations of civil society
for their commitment, without which it would not be
possible to make progress on the women and peace and
security agenda.

S/PV.7533

We support the partnership between Justice Rapid
Response, UN-Women and the Institute for International
Criminal Investigations, which allows experts to be
deployed to investigate and provide assistance to
victims. We also support the team of experts on the rule
of law and issues related to sexual violence in times
of conflict with a view to strengthening the capacity
of national stakeholders in the rule of law and justice.
Indeed, the fight against impunity is essential: there
can be no peace without the restoration of justice. In
this regard, I would like to reiterate the full support
of my country for the International Criminal Court,
which, since its creation, has strengthened the fight
against impunity.
Luxembourg is and will remain a strong and
reliable partner of UN-Women, to which it is one of
the top 20 contributors. In addition, we will maintain
our high level of financial contribution in the area of​​
gender mainstreaming in the budgets of United Nations
agencies.
Each State and each international or regional
organization has a role to play in advancing the role
of women in the interest of peace and security. But
the Security Council must also fulfil the role it has
taken on in adopting this historic resolution 15 years
ago. It must show political will and courage. We hope
that the new resolution, of which Luxembourg is one
of the sponsors, can contribute to that outcome, in
particular through the creation of the informal group
of experts that will assist the Council to integrate more
systematically the questions of women and peace and
security in its work. The call to action we are launching
today can succeed only if we are all willing to hear the
appeal and if everyone is ready to act.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I welcome the adoption
of resolution 2242 (2015), of which Estonia was a
sponsor. I align myself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was a game-changer for
women and peace and security. I want to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Secretary-General for organizing
today’s debate to underline the importance of the issue.
The year 2015 has given the international
community an unparalleled opportunity to reiterate
the importance of the implementation of women’s and

15-3098675/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

girls’ rights. We are celebrating today 15 years since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and, recently,
20 years since the adoption of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform of Action. In addition newly adopted
Sustainable Development Goals (resolution 70/1)
encourage us to take a look at how women are affected
by each of the 17 Goals.
The parallel review of resolution 1325 (2000)
and United Nations peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding efforts has led to an invaluable
opportunity to create a more holistic approach to
conflict prevention. Paired with more focused attention
on the role of women in society as well as in peace and
security, the international community has a unique
opportunity to effectively address the challenges the
agenda faces.
Much has changed in the world during past 15 years.
The number of conflicts has increased significantly,
and we face new threats. One of the key challenges we
face is the implementation gap. The Security Council
should strengthen its own commitment to the effective
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. However, it is the primary responsibility of each
Member State to make sure that women are included
from the very beginning in conflict prevention, peace
operations planning and conflict resolution.
Estonia is committed to implementing resolution
1325 (2000) and is currently in the process of adopting
its second national action plan. Changes do not happen
overnight. We therefore have to focus on raising
awareness on the women and peace and security agenda
from the grass-roots level to that of international
cooperation. We strongly support the inclusion of the
gender perspective in the mandates of the operations
and missions, and their implementation and evaluation,
in the international organizations of which we are
members. In parallel, we must continue to fight
against impunity, especially against sexual violence in
conflicts.
Estonia continues to support the rights of women and
girls within the framework of development cooperation,
with special attention being paid to women’s access to
education and health care. Empowered educated women
are more likely to be active in local communities and
participate in peace processes and conflict prevention.
This year provides us with a unique opportunity to give
an additional impetus to realizing our previously set
goals — let us not lose the momentum.

76/96

13/10/2015

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this high-level open
debate of the Security Council, celebrating the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of the landmark resolution
1325 (2000). I would like to commend the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2015/716) and the members
of the high-level advisory group for their work on the
comprehensive global study on preventing conflict,
transforming justice and securing peace, to which
Romania contributed. We also greatly appreciate the
briefers’ insightful presentations earlier today.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I would
now like to make a few comments from our national
perspective.
Resolution 1325 (2000) put a greatly needed
emphasis on the importance of the role of women
in peace processes. Today we have heard about the
progress that has been made in the past 15 years and
about the remaining challenges and priorities for
action. Romania believes that all actors — Member
States, regional organizations, civil society and the
media — should continue to work to implement the
agenda on women and peace and security. The active
participation of women in peace processes has proved
vital to making conflict resolution and peacebuilding
more effective.
The first female officer in Romania’s armed
forces was Lieutenant Ecaterina Teodoroiu, who died
heroically in the First World War. In 1973, Romanian
women began entering the military as a profession. More
recently, our Ministry of Defence adopted an action plan
aimed at implementing the Security Council’s seven
resolutions on women, peace and security. Based on our
Constitution’s provisions, it promotes fair and balanced
access for men and women, military and civilians, to
senior-level and executive positions. As a result, we
have women who have reached the rank of general and,
beginning in 2009, we have seen an increasing number
of female military staff participating in international
missions. Furthermore, women from our Ministry of
Internal Affairs have been deployed in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions of the United Nations, the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

Today I am privileged to be able to acknowledge the
contribution to our support for peace and stabilization
in Haiti of a Romanian officer, Chief Superintendent
Raluca Domuta, currently Commander for the southern
region of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, who was proclaimed International Female Police
Peacekeeper for 2015. Throughout her deployment in
Haiti, she has used her national expertise to combat
trafficking in human beings and organized crime, and
she is an excellent example of the value added by the
gender component in United Nations peacekeeping and
special political missions.
The issues of gender equality, tolerance,
non-discrimination and the prohibition of sexual
harassment and gender-based violence are reflected in
all of Romania’s military educational programmes. We
have deployed mixed-gender teams, especially within
the civil and military cooperation units that have been
mainly responsible for engaging with the population
in Afghanistan, while female engagement teams have
been assigned to engage with Afghan women and girls
in order to help empower them in their own societies,
for example in Zabul province. There, through a
multitude of projects and programmes, Romania’s
military staff have acted to support disadvantaged
women and vulnerable groups within their area of
operations. The activities were performed in full
cooperation with representatives of the host country
and the local population, and with regional and civil
society organizations.
Today, military operations are conducted in
a complex security environment that requires the
complementary skills and expertise of both women and
men, since war and conflict have different impacts on
both of them. However, whether in peace or war, we
cannot change perspectives on women’s issues without
the proactive participation of men. The UN-Women
“He For She” campaign encourages men to actively
support women and girls. President Klaus Iohannis of
Romania has participated personally in this movement,
and his concrete commitments show how men in power
can also empower the women of their countries.
Romania is a sponsor of resolution 2242 (2015) on
women and peace and security, adopted by consensus
this morning, and we therefore join the call for more
determined action on the part of all stakeholders in
advancing the agenda on women and peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.

S/PV.7533

Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on this open debate and on the
interest you have generated by bringing the subject to
the Council. I would like to welcome today’s adoption
of resolution 2242 (2000) on women and peace and
security, of which Slovakia is a proud sponsor. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-NMgcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Yanar Mohammed, President of the Organization of
Women’s Freedom in Iraq, Ms. Julienne Lusenge, Head
of Solidarité Féminine pour la Paix et le Développement
Intégral, and Ms. Alaa Murabit, of Voice of Libyan
Women, for their briefings. I would particularly like
to highlight the personal involvement of the SecretaryGeneral and UN-Women, represented here by Assistant
Secretary-General Lakshmi Puri, in promoting this
very important topic on the United Nations agenda.
I align my remarks with the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union, and would
also like to share some of my thoughts in my national
capacity.
Fifteen years ago, through its resolution 1325
(2000), the Security Council acknowledged the fact
that women were not playing a large enough role in
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes. It is
indeed symbolic that the fifteenth anniversary of the
resolution’s adoption coincides with the twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action. Goal 5 of our recently launched new
development agenda, “Transforming our world: The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development” (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), explicitly addresses the need
to achieve gender equality and to engage and empower
all women and girls in our efforts to make our life
and our planet sustainable for future generations. The
targets under Goal 5 provide an appropriate balance of
protection and support for women, with three aimed at
protecting women and girls by ending harmful practices
and the rest aimed at encouraging women’s ability to
enter the public sphere in meaningful ways.
I would like to emphasize three words here: role,
ability and power. The role of women in peace and
security is indispensable. The ability of women to
influence negotiations increases the likelihood that
peace agreements will be reached. The power of
women has a positive effect on the durability of peace
and influences other actors, including young people.
Resolution 1325 (2000) has been followed by six others
addressing the importance of women’s participation

15-3098677/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

and leadership. Yet we must admit that women are still
underrepresented in the area of security. The current
share of female negotiators is 9 per cent. Only 4 per cent
of the military components in United Nations missions
are women, and only 54 countries have formulated
national action plans on women and peace and security.
Since 2000, we have made significant progress in
many areas. But we still have much work to do. I would
like to mention just a few areas that we should give
more attention to. They include supporting women’s
participation in all peace and security processes
including, among other things, all justice and mediation
components; strengthening our efforts to increase
women’s engagement and advancement throughout the
security sector, particularly in the areas of security
sector reform and emphasizing conflict prevention;
engaging women in key political and decision-making
processes, upholding the rule of law and implementing
non-discriminatory laws, policies and practices. We
should also support new regional and national action
plans on women and peace and security and review
existing ones by, among other things, establishing
inter-agency coordination systems. And we should
make a dedicated effort to advance the inclusion of
women in endeavours to counter violent extremism,
including engagement in preventive and educational
activities for youth.
The global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2010) recommends that the women and peace and
security agenda ought to be included in every aspect
of the United Nations work and that overall women’s
participation ought to be strengthened. Therefore, we
must encourage women to move into the public sphere.
The goal — our mission — will be accomplished only
when resolution 1325 (2000) represents the past, and
the equal participation of women and men in all public
spheres of life will encompass the present and future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): My
delegation would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate and for the opportunity
afforded to Belgium to take part. My delegation awould
also like to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women and the representatives of civil
society for their briefings.

78/96

13/10/2015

Belgium welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2242 (2015), which it was pleased
to have sponsored.
I fully align myself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, and would like to
make the following comments in my national capacity.
From its inception, Belgium has strongly supported
the women and peace and security agenda. Currently,
all the relevant Belgian stakeholders are focusing their
efforts on implementing the second national action
plan on women and peace and security. That detailed
plan, which spans 2013-2016, focuses on six priority
goals, including the protection of women and girls
against all forms of violence, including sexual violence,
and the participation of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding processes. The plan includes areas of
action and follow-up instruments for each of those six
goals.
Given that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is one of the three target countries of Belgium’s
national action plan, my delegation would like to
thank Ms. Julienne Lusenge for her briefing on the
situation in that country. Belgium actively supports the
participation of women in that country and contributes
to the implementation of the €2 million UN-Women
project there that supports the rights and participation
of Congolese women in the framework of resolution
1325 (2000).
A global study demonstrates that genuine
participation by women increases the effectiveness
of humanitarian aid, the credibility and quality of
peacekeeping operations, the speediness of economic
recovery in post-conflict situations and the sustainability
of peace agreements. It is therefore disappointing to
note that the same study reveals that, 15 years later,
the participation of women in peace processes and in
post-conflict political transitions remains a significant
challenge.
The peace and security situation is different today
as compared to 15 years ago, as the testimony of
Ms. Mohammed this morning illustrated. The persistent
cycles of conflicts and of fragile situations, among
other things, have been exacerbated by new weapons
technologies and new threats, such as the rise in violent
extremism, which has spread easily thanks to the new
information technologies. Women and girls have a key
role to play because they can constitute one of the most

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

effective voices in combating violent extremism — as
mothers, sisters and wives, but also in the many other
roles they have in the society that they live in. We must
support them and provide them with the requisite tools
to help them defend the values ​​of tolerance and respect
for others.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize the fact that
Belgium is committed to continue to implement its
national plan and to give political and operational
priority to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Medan (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Spanish presidency of the Security Council
for convening this high-level debate on women and
peace and security. We also welcome the adoption of
the new resolution 2242 (2015), on women and peace
and security, earlier this morning, which we were also
glad to sponsor.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union earlier, and I would
like to make some additional remarks in my national
capacity.
We welcome the high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) as an
invaluable occasion to reflect on the current status
of the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, and to make concrete commitments
to its full realization. Croatia can attest from its own
experience to the devastating effects of war on women
and girls, and attaches particular importance to their
protection and empowerment. Although we know that
women are more likely to suffer in times of conflict, by
no means does that imply that they should be reduced to
being victims only. Indeed, women are powerful agents
of peace and security, and their political participation
is a path towards development, as well as for good
governance and democracy. That is why we need more
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
as well as in the maintenance of a sustainable and
inclusive peace.
Despite the development of policies, action plans,
guidelines, programmes and training in the 15 years
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), women
continue to face significant barriers to successfully
participating and playing roles in those processes. The
number of women participating in decision-making

S/PV.7533

in the peace and security spheres worldwide remains
unacceptably low, while grave abuses and violence
against women, including sexual violence and rape,
continue to be devastating. The rise of radicalization,
violent extremism and terrorism only further aggravates
the atrocities and human rights violations women and
girls are subjected to. Therefore, the protection of
women in armed conflict, parallel to the enhancement of
their contribution to peace processes and in rebuilding
their communities, still remains a crucial challenge.
Our focus must now be directed at bridging the
gaps between the global, regional and national policies
related to the women and peace and security agenda
and the realities of the situation on the ground. First and
foremost, more needs to be done at the national level.
The implementation of the resolution has to be countrydriven, and Member States need to take responsibility
for its success by ensuring that it is integrated into
national policies.
I am pleased to say that Croatia has taken steps
to integrate the gender perspective into its national
foreign and security policy, into its national policy for
the promotion of gender equality and its first national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Croatia is currently developing its second
national plan, which is expected to be adopted by
2016. The new plan will cover both our domestic and
international activities by setting out and strengthening
specific measures in the prevention and protection
spheres, and with regard to female representation in
decision-making activities and processes related to
security and peacebuilding.
In that context, with a view to further advancing
the women and peace and security agenda, Croatia
commits to further promote gender equality and gender
mainstreaming in the context of its foreign, security
and defence policies at all levels. We also commit to
nominate women for top-level positions in international
and regional peace and security organizations.
Similarly, we intend to focus specifically on the gender
dimension of Croatia’s involvement in peacekeeping
missions and operations abroad and to actively promote
the participation of female officers and military
experts. We will also attach specific importance on
gender-related elements in predeployment training for
civilian and military personnel, including prevention
and response to sexual violence and on a zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.

15-3098679/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

We will take measures to tackle the
underrepresentation
of
women
in
political
decision-making in order to achieve more balanced
participation by women and men in Croatian political
bodies and institutions at all levels. We commit to
increase the number of female heads of Croatia’s
diplomatic representations. We will accord high
priority to the visibility of gender and women and
peace and security-related policy and action at national
and local levels, as well as ensure coordination among
the relevant national actors.
We will also support the broad participation of
civil society and women’s organizations in all activities
related to the women and peace and security agenda. We
will promote the women and peace and security agenda
within other international organizations and initiatives,
in particular within the Equal Futures Partnership
during Croatia’s chairmanship in 2016. And we commit
to providing development and humanitarian assistance
with an integrated gender perspective.
Let me conclude by underlining that what we
have heard today is a common understanding that
the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
should be viewed as much more than just a stocktaking
opportunity; it is first and foremost a vision-making
one. We have to work tirelessly so that our joint vision
expressed today translates into a reality that unleashes
the potential of each and every woman to achieve a
world free of conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank the Prime Minister of Spain,
Mr. Mariano Rajoy Brey, for presiding over our meeting
this morning. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Executive Director of UN-Women for
their briefings. We warmly welcome the adoption this
morning of resolution 2242 (2015), of which we were a
sponsor.
Over the past two years, there has been an increase
in violence against women in the context of conflicts.
Such massive violations of human rights are carried out
by terrorist organizations and authoritarian regimes.
There have been cases of forced marriage and sexual
slavery, which deprive women of their right to a life of
dignity. When addressing this issue, we must first and
foremost put in place mechanisms to protect women
and ensure that the existing international instruments

80/96

13/10/2015

to protect women in times of conflict are in fact
implemented.
It is of great concern that the parties responsible
for such violations of human rights are not prosecuted
and brought to justice. It is therefore important that the
Security Council use all the means available to ensure
that they face international criminal justice. Such
crimes must not go unpunished. In that connection, we
would like to commend the efforts being made by Justice
Rapid Response with regard to sexual and gender-based
violence. That organization provides important support
to the international community. We have contributed to
its efforts by deploying experts in criminal law and by
hosting meetings of the group.
We have undertaken various initiatives to allow
women to play their full role in all areas of life. That
includes efforts to ensure that we prevent conflicts,
extremism, violence and terrorism. Along with Italy,
Thailand and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, we have also addressed this issue in the
context of the post-2015 development agenda, whose
adoption included the participation of many countries,
organizations and experts. We have also organized
a high-level group to take up the issue of combating
extremism, in cooperation with the Permanent
Missions of Saudi Arabia and Jordan and including
the participation of the United Nations and Columbia
University. Those are significant contributions
to ongoing discussions with regard to combating
extremism and radical thinking.
Finally, we reiterate our commitment to ensuring
gender equality and protecting human rights. We will
continue to support any initiative to that end, as well as
all initiatives that take into account the humanitarian
aspect and the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, on organizing this open debate. I shall read out a
shortened version of our statement and submit the full
text for the record.
Cyprus aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union and would like to add the
following comments in its national capacity.
Resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up
resolutions have beeen instrumental in promoting
the women and peace and security agenda in Cyprus.

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

They have served as leverage for reform through the
increased involvement of women in the peace process
and by increasing the number of women working in the
foreign service and serving in senior decision-making
positions in the public and private sectors.
Cypriot women’s civil-society organizations
have been increasingly active in efforts to achieve
justice, reconciliation, peace and the reunification of
Cyprus. Our recent historical experience has given
Cypriot women an unfortunate but real example of
the importance of the women and peace and security
agenda. They have experienced the disproportionate
effects of war. They have realized how crucial it is
to make their voices heard, as well as the importance
of being included in the peace process. Their own
experience has made them active in international
peace and humanitarian organizations such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
Cyprus has consistently supported the activities
of women’s organizations in promoting peace and
reconciliation. Among other things, in 2008, we helped
establish a women’s multicultural centre, with the aim
of bringing together women from both communities in
Cyprus and promoting gender equality, reconciliation
and peace. Last April, we established a technical
committee on gender equality in the context of the
ongoing negotiations for a resolution to the Cyprus
problem. That bi-communal committee will work
towards making women’s voices heard and promote
gender equality at all stages of the peacemaking
process. The work of the committee draws from the
experience with, and the recommendations on, the
women and peace and security agenda.
Fully conscious that sustainable peace cannot
be achieved when we leave out half of the world’s
population, and of the fact that we, as well as the
international community, have a long way to go in order
to fully implement the women and peace and security
agenda, we commit to continue, through our national
action plan on gender equality for the period 2014-2017,
to strive to eliminate deeply rooted stereotypes, among
the main obstacles to gender equality, and to ensure
women’s active participation in peacemaking efforts,
as well as to work to increase women’s participation
in public and political life, to redouble our efforts in
support of women’s increased participation in the peace
process and to continue our consultation with civilsociety organizations in order to ensure that women’s

S/PV.7533

voices are heard louder and with the attention that they
deserve.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our commitment
to the women and peace and security agenda and the
efforts to update it following the global study on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I also express
our full support for resolution 2242 (2015), adopted this
morning, of which Cyprus was a sponsor.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Honduras.
Ms. Flores (Honduras): My delegation expresses
its appreciation to the presidency of the Security
Council and to the Government of Spain for organizing
this open debate devoted to women and peace and
security. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
work on the annual reports on landmark resolution
1325 (2000) as the normative framework on which,
after 15 years, there is now a glimmer of progress and
achievement — which nevertheless still falls short of
many objectives to which we aspire.
Today, we must agree upon and make effective the
recommendations made by United Nations departments,
agencies, funds and programmes, as well as by national
Governments and civil society organizations, to
move forward steadily in outlining the course ahead.
Honduras believes that women are the critical missing
link in our global pact to attain sustainable development
through a culture of peace. More than half of the
world’s population cannot be relegated to the sidelines
or excluded from decisions and events that affect their
lives and those of the next generations entrusted to
them. Moral and human rights require that women
exercise their freedom, liberty and choice and become
equal participants and partners in issues related to
conflict prevention, resolution and recovery. The only
way to fully empower women is to ensure that women
empower themselves through the full exercise of their
economic and political rights, which are fundamental
to dignity, security and well-being for all.
Women must take action to secure their livelihoods
so that they can take care of their dependants, children
and elders, who are the most vulnerable of humankind.
In the twenty-first century, that is only possible by
bridging the gaps in gender equality through access
to education and technology. In that endeavour,
UN-Women plays an essential role. Funding for this
entity and for all agencies that have a direct impact
on women must be significantly increased, with an

15-3098681/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

emphasis on a renewed, effective and measurable
commitment.
We have witnessed the birth of a transformational
agenda. The key to global success in its implementation
lies in the synergy and the architecture and framework
of the Organization, with the full inclusion and
participation of women across the board. In our
responsibility as framers and drivers of this ambitious
agenda, first and foremost, we must commit to the
restructuring of this house, the United Nations, through
an inclusive and holistic reform, with women at the
forefront. We await a call from within the United Nations
and from the leaders of all Member States, particularly
the five permanent members of the Security Council,
to lead by example, to remain true to the Charter of
the United Nations, to elect a female Secretary-General
and to work towards an agreement to relinquish the
veto power in resolutions on matters in which women
must be protected, supported and empowered.
Member States must be encouraged to create
effective and achievable national action plans to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). Women must
be lead actors and participants in the drafting and
implementation of those plans, in which the local reality
in every household and community must be taken into
account. If empowered locally, women will impact
globally. Women must be active participants in critical
areas, such as the rule of law, justice, governance, peace
negotiations and agreements, and nation-building and
must contribute to the transformation of the security
sector.
Given the alarming escalation in the number of
cases of femicide, sexual and gender-based violence
and human trafficking, together with the emerging
threats of extremism and gender terrorism, action is
urgently needed to counter the devastating effects
on all humankind. A special task force that includes
women’s vision and leadership is required in framing
a targeted action plan that can achieve a cultural shift
towards more balanced and harmonious societies.
Last and most important, it is only through an
awareness and a recognition of the traditional role
played by women and their impact on culture and
heritage that we will bequeath a culture of peace to the
next generation. Women have strong connections to
traditions that can be traced back to ancient civilizations.
Indigenous women, who are often hampered by
sociocultural barriers, are wise and knowledgeable.
They share the aches and pains of mother Earth.
82/96

13/10/2015

In their inherited collective wisdom, women possess
innate abilities as healers, mediators, intermediators
and peacemakers. With that acknowledgment, let
us rediscover in and through women the enormous
contribution that women can make with respect to all
global issues, for they are the true heroines of peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to thank the delegation of Spain,
Sir, for convening this open Council debate on the topic
“Women and peace and security”.
I would like to reiterate the message of the President
of the Republic of Panama, His Excellency Mr. Juan
Carlos Varela Rodríguez, during the general debate:
“In today’s world, women are the ones
who suffer most from the effects of inequality,
poverty, war, forced displacement due to conflicts,
trafficking in human beings and inequality in terms
of opportunities. Consequently, the role that we,
Heads of State, and the United Nations are called
upon to play to defend and promote the rights and
freedoms of women is of paramount importance.”
(A/70/PV.19)
We reiterate the appeal made at the Global
Leaders’ Meeting on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment, held on 6 March 2015, for more
resources to be given to address femicide and all human
trafficking, especially violence against women.
Panama aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today by the representative of Thailand on behalf
of the Human Security Network. Panama is a sponsor
of resolution 2242 (2015), adopted by the Security
Council today, which reflects the complexity and scale
of the issue. The numerous armed conflicts we see at
the global level unfortunately have demonstrated that
women have available to them few resolutionesources
to protect themselves, yet, together with their sons and
daughters, they represent the majority of the displaced
and refugee population. Women have also claimed
space and, in some cases, led peace movements that
promoted the recovery of their communities following
conflicts. Yet, women have remained invisible, which
is a historical failure we must overcome. That exclusion
has limited women’s access to opportunities for
recovery, their ability to obtain justice for violations of
their human rights and their participation in legal and
institutional reforms.
15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

It is up to the States, therefore, to continue to
work to promote the greater participation of women at
all stages of peace and security processes. Similarly,
resolution 1325 (2000), which brings us together today,
on the occasion of its fifteenth anniversary, is the
first resolution to establish a connection between the
experiences of women in conflicts and the international
agenda for peace and security and to highlight the
fact that conflicts have a disproportionate impact on
women. This resolution becomes even more relevant
today, as we see the violence levelled against women by
extremist groups that violate their rights, their dignity,
their integrity and their very lives. Consequently,
it is essential that the Security Council call upon all
parties to armed conflict to take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence,
particularly rape and sexual abuse, and all other forms
of violence in situations of armed conflict.
Fifteen years have passed, and women’s
contributions are still undervalued and underutilized.
The claims and spaces created through women’s
participation in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts should be enhanced to guarantee them the
primary role they have been called on to play. The post2015 development agenda (General Assembly resolution
70/1), recently adopted by our Heads of State, follows
that path. It is an important step towards achieving the
goal of women’s broad and equal participation, without
discrimination. The world needs such a fundamental
transformation. We cannot continue to do what we have
been accustomed to doing; that is no longer an option.
The issues of peace and security are a commitment
that is intrinsically related to the promotion of human
development, seen as people-centred sustainable
development, in the context of governance, into which
women’s presence and actions must be interwoven.
From the home to public life, the State must ensure the
empowerment of women and men alike so as to build
better citizens, better fathers, better mothers, promoting
a platform of education that helps to raise children who
are peaceful and non-aggressive.
Today, the Administration of our country depends
on a significant number of women who work for the
Panamanian Government, including the Vice-President
and Foreign Minister of the Republic, other ministers,
deputy ministers, agency director and heads of
diplomatic missions. Similarly, the creation of a gender
unit in the police force under the law on prevention
of femicide is another example of the integration of
women into the security agenda of Panama.

S/PV.7533

A couple of days ago on 11 October, we celebrate
the International Day of the Girl Child, a generation
that must empower so as to effectively break the circle
of poverty, violence, inequality and exclusion. The girls
of today will inherit the world of tomorrow, and we
must deliver them a safe and peaceful environment. In
the same vein, Panama favours the election of a woman
as Secretary-General because we support and will
continue to support all efforts of that organ to ensure
that a woman occupies that position of world leadership
and guidance.
In conclusion, if we are to achieve the development
we desire, we need a more feminine vision of the world.
Yes, such a vision will come mainly from women, but
also from engaged and informed men. The participation
of 100 per cent of our people in every last phase of
the search for lasting peace and security will finally
release the human potential to resolve the most pressing
issues we face. Perhaps the most important reference
in the resolution adopted today is its last line — the
Security Council “decides to remain actively seized of
the matter”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Mažeiks (Latvia): I thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Yanar Mohammed, Ms. Julienne Lusenge and
Ms. Alaa Murabit for their statements. I also thank
Spain, in its capacity as presidency of the Security
Council, for organizing this important debate marking
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
observer of the European Union.
In 2000, resolution 1325 recognized that war
impacts women differently and stressed the need to
increase women’s participation in peace talks. No
other Security Council resolution is better known for
its number and name because it was truly a historic
milestone. Today, we can assess what has been achieved
in the past 15 years thanks to a very comprehensive
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as well as to Secretary-General’s latest report
on women and peace and security (S/2015/716).
Significant developments have taken place over the
past 15 years. The normative framework for women,
peace and security has been strengthened by seven

15-3098683/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

13/10/2015

follow-up resolutions to resolution 1325, with the latest
resolution 2242 (2015) adopted this morning, which
Latvia proudly co-sponsored. The empowerment of
women and girls and respect for their human rights, as
well as women’s full participation in decision-making
processes, including in conflict prevention and
resolution, have been recognized as crucial contributors
to peacemaking and peacebuilding. There has been
an important change in the way the international
community views and deals with conflict-related
sexual violence.

emerging challenges to achieving gender equality, and
to strengthen the legal framework in order to eliminate
violence against women and girls.

Despite these positive changes, the global
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has been far
from complete. The participation of women in peace
processes and post-conflict processes needs to be more
visible and effective. More efforts are necessary to
tackle impunity for conflict-related sexual violence.
Moreover, the current challenges to international peace
and security, such as the changing nature of conflicts,
the growing threat of non-state armed Actors, the use
of new technologies for warfare, and dire humanitarian
crises are too complex and often require comprehensive
solutions. The rights of women and girls have been
particularly violated by the spread of violent extremism.

Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, Sir, allow me to thank your
delegation for having brought such an important issue
for discussion before the Security Council.

These challenges affirm the need for the
strengthening of conflict-prevention, early-warning
and early-action mechanisms, especially by the
Security Council. Latvia believes that the findings of
the global study, together with the other two ongoing
United Nations reviews of peace operations and the
peacebuilding architecture, can contribute to the
strengthened United Nations response to conflicts and
the recognition of the special role of women in all areas
of peace and security decision-making. We support the
synergies among all three United Nations reviews.
Reducing the gaps in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda requires the
commitment of all actors, especially United Nations
Member States. Latvia has incorporated the principles
of the resolution 1325 (2000) in the regulatory
provisions of its national armed forces, as well as in
its predeployment training programmes. Women’s
representation among Latvian military personnel,
including among personnel deployed in international
operations, has increased. The implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) has been an important element
of Latvia’s development cooperation, for example in
Afghanistan and Iraq. Latvia will continue to develop
a national policy framework in order to address

84/96

While the guidelines and recommendations of the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) still need to be assessed, Latvia hopes they will
help boost the women and peace and security agenda in
the future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.

The most important Security Council resolution
on the role of women in peacebuilding and conflict
prevention is now 15 years old. The Republic of
Paraguay joins the commemoration of the adoption of
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). The resolution
is important not only because it is the first to point
out the inextricable link between gender equality and
the participation of women in international peace and
security, but also because it recognizes the particular
impact of armed conflict on women and the role they
play in peace processes and post-war rehabilitation.
The Republic of Paraguay, which has participated
actively in peacekeeping operations since 1993,
reaffirms its commitment to prevention, protection
and the participation of women before, during and,
where necessary, after conflicts. In this regard,
the Government of Paraguay, taking into account
its international commitments to contributing to
peacebuilding and the need to integrate the gender
perspective into conflict prevention, management and
resolution, recently finalized its national action plan,
which will allow it to implement the mandates set out in
resolution 1325 (2000). The national action plan, which
will be officially released later this month, is the fruit
of the efforts and coordination carried out by various
national institutions since 2012, including the Ministry
of Women, the Ministry of National Defence, the
Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, with the valuable support and continuing
assistance of UN-Women, of which we are a faithful
ally.
In 2015, our country has enjoyed the highest
percentage of female participation in awareness

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

programmes and training for peace operations. Some
27 per cent of participants are women, and we hope to
see this percentage increase through the efforts of the
relevant institutions to promote the greater participation
of women in the contingents of peacekeeping missions
in which Paraguay is a participant. The main obstacles
that prevent women’s full participation in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding can bee linked to gender-based
discrimination and women’s economic and social
exclusion, situations that entail the denial of women’s
rights. That is why it is so important to work to
strengthen women’s human rights from a perspective
that includes devoting attention to their economic,
social and cultural rights.
Numerous experiences in conflict and postconflict situations have proven that the exclusion of
women from peace processes not only undermines the
promotion and protection of their human rights but also
reduces the probabilities of lasting peace and future
development for all the citizens of a given country.
The inclusion of a gender perspective in every
aspect of peacebuilding, including conflict prevention,
management and resolution, requires, first and foremost,
the political will to include women in decision-making
processes. Without the participation of women there
can be neither a gender agenda nor political decisions
that reflect a gender perspective.
As we celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we call on Member States to
ensure that all resolutions and initiatives on women
and peace and security are implemented with specific
measures that ensure women’s effective participation in
peacebuilding activities under equitable conditions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first to commend the Spanish Presidency of
the Security Council for convening this open debate on
women and peace and security on the occasion of the
high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000). Despite the
advances and good practices that have been developed
with respect to that resolution, obstacles to its effective
implementation remain. In that regard and with a view
to preventing violence against women, Peru enacted
a law to equalize gender opportunities between men
and women and adopted a national gender-equity plan,
as well as a national plan to combat violence against
women.

S/PV.7533

Similarly, the Ministry of Women and Vulnerable
Populations has developed a registry of internally
displaced persons, which has made it possible to protect
the rights of women and girls in conflict and postconflict situations. Likewise, through a law enacted
in 2005, my country established a comprehensive
reparations plan for the victims of acts of violence that
occurred between 1980 and 2000. The national plan to
combat violence against women incorporated the topic
of sexual violence in the context of armed conflict,
calling for its inclusion in regional policies throughout
the country. The plan calls for the inclusion of all forms
of sexual violence within the ambit of the comprehensive
reparations plan, in particular that inflicted on women
victimized during the period of terrorist violence.
At the international level, Peru supports the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy, which
strongly condemns the participation of persons working
under the flag of the United Nations in any form of
inappropriate or immoral behaviour, especially in cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse against civilians, in
particular women and girls.
Moreover, my country welcomes the trend towards
the systematic incorporation of a gender perspective
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations, as well as
the integration of women as actors in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. For that reason, Peru
has increased the participation of women in each of
the eight missions in which we participate. Women
currently represent 10 per cent of our staff deployed
on the ground, a figure that we hope to increase in the
future.
Peru looks favourably on the inclusion in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) of a Goal designed to achieve
gender parity and the empowerment of women and
girls. In that regard, we believe that the challenge that
we most urgently need to address is the implementation
of measures to achieve full respect for women and girls
in line with resolution 1325 (2000), through which the
international community recognized the pressing need
to offer specialized training on the protection, special
needs and human rights of women and children in
situations of conflict around the world.
In that regard and in the light of the current highlevel review to assess progress in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) at the national, regional and
international levels, Peru commits to work with other

15-3098685/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

States to address the remaining problems in that area,
with the goal of achieving a peaceful environment in
which all women, without exception, are able to lead
full lives free of any form of abuse, in particular in
contexts of violence and conflict, where they are
most vulnerable. Similarly, by way of reaffirming my
country’s commitment to supporting this important
topic and agenda, Peru sponsored the resolution
adopted this morning (resolution 2242 (2015)), which
paves the way for the path to be followed in the coming
years with regard to the agenda of women and peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you on your country’s
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council
this month and to thank you, Sir, for convening this
debate of highest importance on women and pace
and security. I also thank you for affording us the
opportunity to meet today, not only to celebrate the
fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) but
also to take stock of the progress made to date, as well
as to define the gaps and challenges that remain to be
addressed and to renew our commitments.
The historic adoption 15 years ago of resolution
1325 (2000) recognized the role that women play in
matters of peace and security, not only as victims but
also as agents of change and indispensable actors in
the re-establishment, maintenance and consolidation of
peace. That resolution enabled us to make significant
progress towards women’s autonomy, particularly
in conflict situations, by developing national action
plans with quantifiable indicators and through the
implementation of follow-up mechanisms. Since
the adoption of that resolution, a number of new
commitments were undertaken, aimed at according
greater political recognition and stronger emphasis to
the question of women and peace and security in political
discourse. Six other Security Council resolutions have
contributed to developing that political framework and
to promoting positive norms. The adoption of all those
resolutions sends a strong message with respect to the
firm and continuing commitment of the international
community to advancing women’s independence and to
protecting their rights.

86/96

13/10/2015

Despite some signs of progress, the impact on
women’s lives and on their role in the world has been
sporadic. Conflicts have devastating consequences for
everyone, but women and girls are often the target of
gender-based violence and are those most excluded
from the political processes that are essential to
guaranteeing peace and security. Because women are
the most vulnerable and the most frequently targeted
members of populations in situations of conflict, they
have an undeniable and unique contribution to make
to peace negotiations. Members of the Council will
note that the experience of both Haiti and West Africa
has proven that, when women are involved in peace
processes, they have been able to bring their sensitivity
and creativity not only to the peace process itself but
also to national reconciliation efforts and the process of
socioeconomic reintegration.
Conflict prevention is an essential element of the
women and peace and security programme. Women’s
perspectives on the tensions in social relationships,
their awareness of threats to personal, social and
community safety, their knowledge of the flow of small
arms and light weapons in the heart of communities,
and their interpretation of extremism in local discourse
help shape the primary mechanism for rapid response
and early warning when conflict is imminent; yet they
are rarely heeded or taken into account by the local
authorities tasked with security.
Conflict prevention is a central pillar of the
programme for women and peace and security. Since
2000, however, prevention has unfortunately failed to
receive the same degree of sustained attention as postconflict problems such as the reconstruction of State
security services.
Resolution 2122 (2013) recognizes that lack of
attention and aims to promote the role of women at all
levels in conflict prevention, resolution and recovery.
The resolution has filled a gap in interpretation,
which was formerly focused only on the prevention
of gender-based violence during conflicts rather than
on preventing conflicts themselves. It is therefore
necessary to follow a more comprehensive and holistic
approach that tackles the root causes of conflicts, and
not just their impact on women, girls, men and boys.
The establishment of genuine peace in society
requires healthy and inclusive political, economic and
social structures. Local women’s organizations are

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

drivers in promoting women’s empowerment and their
effective participation in political, economic and social
life. My delegation endorses the recommendations
set out in the Secretary-General’s later report
(S/2015/716), in particular those that encourage equal
and timely access to basic services, putting an end to
discriminatory laws and practices, strengthening the
rule of law, ensuring equitable economic development
and maintaining a space for civil society.
Women and girl refugees and internally displaced
persons continue to be victims of violations of all
sorts. Regional dialogues with refugee women, which
are regularly organized by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, show that
undocumented women and girls continue to suffer
from the worst acts of gender-based discrimination, in
particular in terms of access to health-care services,
education and other social services. Women and girl
refugees and internally displaced persons who are
fleeing violence and fighting find themselves once
again at risk of sexual exploitation, rape, prostitution
and forced marriage, pregnancy and sterilization. Even
worse, they are now auctioned and sold in slave markets.
Member States must comply with their international
obligations and register the refugees who are present
on their territory. That will ensure the empowerment
of vulnerable women and their active participation
in national and regional institutions for conflict
prevention. In addition, it is important to allow broad
participation by all internally displaced and refugee
women in decision-making processes in order to not
leave them simply in the hands of political organizations
or criminal groups.
By way of conclusion, allow highlight the following
observations.
Strong political will and the full commitment of
Member States to the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) will enable the active participation of women
in national, regional and international institutions for
the prevention, protection and management of conflict
situations.
The participation of women in peace efforts is a
matter of gender equality and respect for universal
human rights. It is crucial to achieving lasting peace,
economic recovery, social cohesion and political
credibility. Women should be encouraged to become
further involved in issues of peace. Their contribution
is necessary to establish lasting peace. They must be

S/PV.7533

involved at every stage of the efforts undertaken to
restore the rule of law and rebuild societies through
transitional justice. Their voice must be heard and their
rights protected. We must eliminate stereotypes in order
to guarantee the effective participation of women at all
stages of the peace and decision-making processes.
Enhancing the empowerment of women allows
them to meet their basic needs and reduce their working
hours, and thus to have more time and space to become
involved in the process of managing local conflicts.
That will also contribute to strengthening social
stability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): A complete version of my
statement this evening has been submitted in writing.
Ireland also aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
It has been 15 years since our predecessors in the
Security Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000). Since
then, the nature and locations of conflict have changed.
What has not changed, unfortunately, is that women
and their voices continue to be underrepresented in
mechanisms for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict. Women’s rights continue to be
violated. If we want to save future generations from the
scourge of war, that has to stop.
Ireland welcomes the evidence base for action
outlined in the global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). It is a substantial body of work,
which must be afforded substantial consideration. We
must consider the specific and transformative steps that
must be taken by all of us to implement this agenda.
One of the key messages of the study is that
women’s participation is the central to sustainable
peace. We know that to be true from our own experience
of sustaining peace and reconciliation on the island of
Ireland. We will continue to share our own experience
and to learn from the experiences of others.
Grave crimes against women and gross violations
of women’s human rights continue to horrify us. Ireland
has supported the United Nations Trust Fund in Support
of Actions to Eliminate Violence against Women since
2006 and continues to do so. Furthermore, Ireland
intends to partner with the Justice Rapid Response and
UN-Women sexual and gender-based violence justice

15-3098687/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

experts roster to support investigations, prosecutions
and victim recovery in situations of conflict-related
gender-based crimes.
We are also shocked and outraged by incidents
of sexual abuse involving United Nations and other
peacekeepers. Perpetrators must be brought to justice,
and the dignity and rights of survivors protected.
The empowerment of women must be at the centre
of all of our engagements in this year’s reviews and
reflection. We welcome not just the review of resolution
1325 (2000), but also the related reviews of peace
operations and peacebuilding architecture. We look
forward to the World Humanitarian Summit next year
as an opportunity to align today’s agenda with that
important process.
Again, looking beyond the immediate, the
implementation
of
the
specific
Sustainable
Development Goals on gender equality and on peaceful
and inclusive societies, which we have all committed
to under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), will be crucial.
The challenge in 2015 is not a lack of a normative
framework, but a lacuna in implementation. Today’s
resolution 2242 (2015), which Ireland co-sponsored,
is another positive step. To assist in taking action,
I can announce today that Ireland will support the
Global Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action with a minimum of
€200,000. Tools like that must be supported so we miss
no opportunities to really effect change.
Despite many challenges, there is much to be
hopeful about in the women and peace and security
agenda. It is up to all of us now to act on what we have
heard and said today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica congratulates Spain on having organized this
debate and welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2242 (2015), which we co-sponsored. The
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was a landmark in
the history of the Organization. It marks a normative
shift in the way we talk about women in the context
of international peace and security. Resolution 1325
(2000) called upon Member States to prioritize women
in peace and security processes and to stop talking about
women as victims and, instead, to begin simultaneous

88/96

13/10/2015

conversations about the importance of promoting
women’s agency and participation. Resolution 1325
(2000) established a bold agenda in which gender
equality forms the basis of peaceful and inclusive
societies.
Despite the increased visibility of women in these
processes, much work remains to be done in terms of
impact. While a greater number of women participate in
peace negotiations, nearly half of all peace agreements
make no mention of women, and those that do, are often
insubstantial. There may be an increase in the number
of women’s groups in the field, but women still remain
especially vulnerable in conflict situations.
To remedy this disparity, the inclusion of women in
peace and security processes must go beyond checking
a box marked “women”. Costa Rica believes that the
full and effective participation of women means much
more than inserting women in the existing security
structures and concepts. The original intention of
resolution 1325 (2000) was never to promote women
soldiers, but rather to reap the rewards obtained when
women are granted space to participate as equals in the
search for solutions.
Costa Rica recognizes that the path towards
complete implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is
not an easy one. Just as there is not only one type of
woman in the world, there is also no single best practice
for operationalizing gender equality and women’s
security amid the myriad of distinct conditions on the
ground. It is for this reason that we must work towards
creating a women-inclusive system of operations on the
basis of the normative agenda established by resolution
1325 (2000). An analysis of the disconnect between
how the Security Council talks about women and how
the wider United Nations community implements the
women and peace and security agenda should be at the
forefront of our debates as we move forward from this
fifteenth anniversary of the resolution.
Costa Rica stands firmly in support of holistic
approaches that enable women to participate in
addressing the root causes of conflict, but it is
impossible to move forward without also ensuring
justice for those who have been victims of the systemic
violence that accompanies conflict and war. In 1998,
during her tenure on the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Costa Rican judge
Elizabeth Odio Benito worked successfully to have
rape and other forms of sexual assault be considered

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7533

forms of torture. Odio Benito’s interpretation, based on
the case of two Serbian women who were raped in the
Celebici detention camp, is now an accepted principle
of international law.

in the process, their perspectives and their
contribution to substantive talks will certainly
improve their chances of achieving a viable and
sustainable peace.

Costa Rica is outraged by the pervasiveness of
sexual violence as a weapon of war and condemns the
sexual misconduct and abuse committed by United
Nations peacekeepers. Odio Benito’s juridical legacy
continues to form part of our efforts to have sexual
violence as a weapon of war considered a crime against
humanity, and this belief is reflected in our zerotolerance position against impunity in cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel.

“Bearing in mind the fact that resolution 1325
(2000) emerged a decade after the end of the Cold
War, when new kinds of violence and warfare
were already evident, in particular it was also a
recognition of the complexity of post-conflict
peacebuilding in countries such as Bosnia, Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, when
social fabric and trust within communities had
been destroyed. However, although resolution
1325 (2000) and the six subsequent resolutions that
followed have given much-needed international
attention to the impact of conflict on women and
girls, women still face a fight for recognition in
both war and peace. A study conducted to mark
the tenth anniversary of the resolution found that
United Missions had achieved little success in
improving the participation of women in peace
negotiations and agreements. Women in rural areas
still felt excluded. The report went on to state that
while some progress had been made in passing
laws against sexual and gender-based violence
and improving women’s security, conflict-related
sexual violence as a deliberate strategy in areas
of conflict still occurred with impunity and had
proved a formidable challenge for peacekeeping
missions.

On this fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), we do not wish the United Nations to be
accused of being another institution with “binders full
of women”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Gambia.
Mr. Tangara (Gambia): I will read out this
statement on behalf of the President of the Republic of
the Gambia.
“Allow me first of all to seize this opportunity
to commend and congratulate the Prime Minister
of Spain for having convened such an important
debate on women and peace and security. It is
with great please that I join other participants here
in this very important forum at this high-level
debate on women, peace and security, which also
seeks to review the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), following the Security Council’s
due recognition of not only the particular effects
of conflict on women but the need to also include
them as active stakeholders in conflict prevention
and resolution.
“Fifteen years ago, the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the legal and political framework
within which national Governments, regional
organizations, the United Nations system and
non-State actors are obliged to address the situation
of women in crisis and war. It is worth noting that
the resolution was adopted on 31 October 2000
following decades of lobbying by women’s rights
activists, and that it was the first resolution that
specifically addressed the impact of war on women
and girls, thus underscoring the premise that
women’s inclusion, their presence and participation

“Fortunately, more and more women are taking
an appropriate stance, and more men are supporting
them in this venture. Resolution 1325 (2000)
provides a vehicle for bringing together economic,
political and security interests to address the link
between gender and conflict, and I am proud that
we in the Gambia have not abandoned, and will
strive to ensure, our constant presence in the global
arena.
“The Gambia promotes the participation of
women in peace processes by means of its policy
with regard to recruitment and secondment as
well as in its support for qualified candidates.
This is to ensure that experts seconded to civilian
peacebuilding operations as well as participants in
military peacekeeping operations receive a high
level of training in the specific area of gender in
preparation for their deployment on mission.

15-3098689/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

“The protection of women is a priority of the
Gambia’s peacebuilding efforts, since it is women
who tend to suffer the most from violence during
and after armed conflicts. Protection of the rights
of women and the girl child is also one of the main
aspects of the Gambia’s human rights policy. In the
international context, the Gambia makes women’s
rights and the violation thereof the subject of
discussions. The Gambia also points to violations
of women’s rights in the context of armed conflict
and multilateral negotiations as well as in bilateral
demarches and interventions.
“The Gambia is also committed, at the
international level, to combating trafficking in
women and girls and to protecting the victims
of trafficking. Other priorities include efforts to
improve the protection of internally displaced
persons, many of whom are women, and to oppose
immunity for those who perpetrate crimes against
women in the context of armed conflict.
“Furthermore, the Gambia supports projects
and actors that address the specific problem of
violence against women, rape, trafficking and the
exploitation of women in the context of armed
conflicts, either through prevention and protection
of the victim or by efforts to end impunity. We have
a policy of zero tolerance with regard to the sexual
exploitation of women in all cases involving civilian
and military personnel seconded to peacebuilding
operations. Training modules specifically address
the problems of trafficking in human beings and
women’s vulnerability to sexual abuse in conflicts,
including by those involved in peace missions.
“Resolution 1325 (2000) specifically calls for
gender perspectives to be taken into consideration
in the negotiation and implementation of peace
agreements, as well as for the participation of
women in all mechanisms for the implementation
of such agreements.
“Particular attention is paid to the gender aspect
of transitional justice, which is one of the priorities
of the Gambia’s policy in the area of human rights
and humanitarian activities. Central to these
efforts are the women’s amendment of 2012, the
national agenda on women’s empowerment policy
2010-2020, the children’s act, the trafficking act,
the refugee act and, most recently, the domestic
violence and sexual offence acts of 2013. All

90/96

13/10/2015

these procedures are indeed very innovative in
that they consistently take women’s rights into
consideration. This can be seen, for example, in the
definition of so-called gender crimes, the rights of
women in court procedures, in the representation
of the two sexes in the court’s various bodies and
in the organization of the court with regard to the
protection of victims and witnesses. Additional
forms are to be provided for projects that support
the inclusion of women in political and legal
transitional processes, with a view to ending
impunity in cases involving crimes against women.
This is intended to facilitate implementation of the
corresponding procedures and evidentiary rules
contained in the statutes.
“The Gambia has demonstrated effective
involvement in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), especially through the development
of its national action plan, the sine qua non for
the effective implementation of the resolution by
all Member States. However, to date, the record
shows that only 21 out of 192 States Members
of the United Nations have done so. We all have
our individual roles in ensuring the resolution’s
implementation so that women’s contribution to
peacebuilding and decision-making are recognized
and women’s rights are ably protected. I am
happy to report that these measures have led to a
considerable number of reported cases of sexual
and gender-based violence at the Edward Francis
Small teaching hospital thanks to a complaints
unit at the Women’s Bureau, a unit jointly set up
by the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Health,
the Child Protection Authority, the Ministry of
Interior, inter alia, strengthened by a multisectoral
national steering committee under the auspices of
the office of the Vice-President and the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs, with a mandate of coordinating,
monitoring and evaluating implementation.
“Indeed we cannot but agree with SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon when he said that
participation alone is not sufficient. Women must
not just sit at the peace table. They must be heard.
Not only should women serve in police forces
and peacekeeping missions, but they should also
influence decision-making.
“At this fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), I wish to emphasize
the importance of reflecting on what has been

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

achieved, the lessons learned and how to become
more effective in securing concrete changes not
only for the prevention of violence but also the
protection of human rights and for making progress
on all issues related to gender equality.
“In conclusion, I wish to put on record my
fervent hope that this meeting will inspire better
and more innovative initiatives on resolution 1325
(2000), gender-conscious responses to peace and
security and effective contributions to conflict
prevention and the protection and effective
participation of women.”
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor the representative of Finland.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): I wish to align myself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting to mark the fifteenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. I also welcome the newly adopted resolution
2242 (2015), which Finland is proud to co-sponsor.
We congratulate UN-Women for its leadership, and
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy and the high-level
advisory group for the comprehensive global study to
be officially launched tomorrow.
I would like to highlight some of our priorities and
how we will strengthen our commitment. Finland has
been a dedicated supporter of the women and peace and
security agenda. This is reflected in the new Government
programme setting out the implementation of 1325
(2000) as a priority. Finland is currently implementing
its second national action plan. Next year we start the
preparations for the third national action plan, taking
into account the recommendations of the global study
and the high-level review.
We welcome the fact that the United Nations
reviews — the global study and the reviews of peace
operations and the peacebuilding architecture — bring
conflict prevention and mediation to the fore and stress
the importance of the participation and leadership
of women. Finland continues to promote conflict
prevention and the role of mediation, and strives to
effectively and meaningfully involve women in peace
and mediation processes. Finland is committed to a
joint Nordic initiative called Nordic Women Mediator’s
Network, to be established this year.

S/PV.7533

It is undisputed that increasing the number of
women in peacekeeping operations enhances the
effectiveness and operational capacity of these
operations. Strengthening the gender architecture of
peace operations, both in the field and at headquarters,
is crucial. Finland will continue deploying women
to peacekeeping operations as military experts in
numbers at least equivalent to the proportion of women
in our national defence forces. We also aim to increase
the number of Finnish female police officers seconded
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. As a new
commitment, we stand ready to deploy a specialized
unit of 3-4 female police officers to the United Nations
by the end of 2016.
Gender training of peacekeeping staff, including
senior management, is crucial for the effective
mainstreaming of the gender perspective. Our training
institutes for military and civilian peace operations
personnel have adopted resolution 1325 (2000) as
part of their training curriculum. Finland commits to
continuing to provide gender training for all Finnish
personnel deployed to peace operations.
I would like to stress the importance of abiding by
the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse by mission personnel. We must
take more robust measures in tackling these cases in
order to make the zero-tolerance policy into a zero-case
reality. We have committed ourselves to investigating
and punishing all cases.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
is facing new challenges, such as violent extremism,
which has a dramatic impact on women and girls.
A coordinated and integrated approach, with the
leadership and empowerment of women, are needed for
countering extremism.
Sexual violence and abductions of women and girls
are used as a weapon of war and a tactic of terror. The
critical need to address sexual violence in conflict
and to step up efforts to eliminate impunity has been
forcefully recognized across the world. Finland has
been a staunch financial supporter in this area and
will continue to be one. We have provided multi-year
financial support to the International Criminal Court
Trust Fund for Victims. Finland has also contributed
financially to the Justice Rapid Response initiative, the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the Coalition for the
International Criminal Court.

15-3098691/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

Today’s meeting is important for keeping up
the momentum, strengthening our commitment and
pressing for more results. The support for UN-Women
needs to be increased in order for it to fulfil its
leadership role in the promotion and implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. As one of
UN-Women’s top donors, Finland remains committed
to supporting this goal.
We need to allocate more funds to the women and
peace and security agenda. Accordingly, I would like
to note that 52 per cent of funding by Finland to fragile
States is directed to activities with a gender focus.
Finland is continuing partnership cooperation on
national action plan processes. As an example of this
cooperation, Finland has supported Afghanistan in
the preparation of its recently launched national action
plan, and we stand ready to support the implementation
process as well.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is our
collective responsibility. Only effective implementation
at the international, regional and national levels will
lead to sustainable peace and the empowerment of
women.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor the representative of Monaco.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): Celebrating
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) in the current context means recognizing
the indispensable role women play in development
and peace. The resolution’s unanimous adoption, and
the six resolutions that subsequently strengthened it,
sent a strong and clear message to the international
community: the threats and violations of human rights
against women in conflict and post-conflict situations
are unacceptable. They are daughters, sisters, wives and
mothers. They are women who have been brutalized,
raped, exploited, enslaved or forced into prostitution.
The global study and its indicators have highlighted
women’s vulnerability, which has worsened as conflicts,
violent extremism and terrorism have proliferated. The
recommendations of the high-level advisory group and
the outstanding and untiring efforts of UN-Women are
more relevant than ever at a time when we are reviewing
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations as well as
celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Platform of Action.

92/96

13/10/2015

We must build on the considerable progress that
has already been made on the women and peace and
security agenda. With their assistance and experience,
the United Nations agencies and the organizations in
the field, particularly the International Committee of
the Red Cross, have made a substantial contribution
by implementing our commitments and sharing their
expertise. The determination of all these actors, to
whom Monaco pays tribute, has helped to mobilize the
international community as a whole. That collective
effort is crucial if we are to achieve gender equality,
empower women and girls and promote effective
institutions, peaceful societies and access to justice, all
Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
To that end, we recognize that educating girls and
women and supporting civil society are priorities.
It is therefore essential that we support the
participation of women and gender experts in conflict
prevention and not merely in peace negotiations and
peacebuilding. Similarly, the judicial proceedings of
our international tribunals should help to strengthen
the fight against impunity and ensure zero tolerance
for those who perpetrate sexual and gender-based
violence. Justice for victims should help to rebuild
not only the victims themselves but also their families
and communities and can also contribute to ending
stigmatization of victims.
Finally, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Spanish presidency
of the Council. Monaco is a sponsor of resolution 2242
(2015), which we adopted today and which breathes
new energy into the political commitment of Member
States and the United Nations to the agenda on women
and peace and security. We will continue to support
UN-Women.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): I would first like to
thank Spain for convening this important open debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2015/716) and to express my gratitude to
all the briefers for their constructive insights into the
progress made over the past 15 years and the challenges
that remain in implementing the agenda on women and
peace and security.
I would like to associate my remarks with the
statement to be delivered tomorrow by the representative

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

of Viet Nam on behalf of the member countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
It is a long-established fact that gender issues cut
across many sectors and that focusing on them can
help us to attain our peace, development and human
rights objectives. Since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), 15 years ago, many thematic discussions and
resolutions on gender have evolved from it, such as
those on small arms, counter-terrorism, peacekeeping
and the protection of civilians. It is particularly
noteworthy that peacekeeping missions have integrated
gender perspectives into their training, operations and
reporting. Nevertheless, the fact remains that women
and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict situations
are still unduly affected and underrepresented, even
with the addition of all the resolutions on women and
peace and security adopted subsequently and aimed
at strengthening action on resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as the creation of relevant mechanisms within
the United Nations. Ultimately, the best measure of
progress is when policy gains are more meaningfully
and tangibly translated into action on the ground.
Moving forward, and building on the momentum
created by the high-level review of the past 15 years,
I would like to suggest that the Council focus on five
areas. First, it should ensure that women have the access
and the capacity they need to participate meaningfully
in conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacebuilding
and decision-making processes in public life generally.
Secondly, it should support advocacy campaigns aimed
at reaching out and empowering society to protect
women and girls and address their specific needs. All
actors and stakeholders, especially at the community
level, should be able to translate international
frameworks on protecting women and girls in conflictand post-conflict-related situations into action on the
ground.
Thirdly, it should empower women and girls to
be agents for change and peace rather than merely
focusing on their vulnerability as victims. Fourthly, it
should put monitoring and evaluation mechanisms in
place in the United Nations system designed to provide
an integrated perspective on implementing resolution
1325 (2000), with the aim of supporting implementation
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Declaration and Platform of Action. Fifthly, it should
continue to encourage synergy with various relevant
initiatives, including any developed outside the United

S/PV.7533

Nations framework, and to galvanize support from
diverse actors, including those working in the field, in
order to promote gender equality and strengthen the
protection of women and girls in armed conflict.
As a major peacekeeping contributor, Indonesia
remains a strong supporter of the Security Council
resolutions that protect and empower women and girls
in situations of armed conflict. Indonesian military
and police units are currently deployed in nine
United Nations operations, totalling more than 1,600
personnel. The Government of Indonesia eventually
aims to contribute 4,000 Indonesian peacekeepers,
including females, and has established a peacekeeping
training centre to serve as a national and regional hub
for integrated peacekeeping training and a centre of
excellence. Gender perspectives have already been
embedded in their training curriculums and syllabuses.
Indonesia will continue to support the Council’s
deliberations on this agenda item and remains resolved
to work with the Council, the United Nations, Member
States and all actors in order to empower women and
girls as agents for change and peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza: My delegation would like to
congratulate Spain on its presidency of the Security
Council this month and its convening of this particularly
important open debate and high-level review of
resolution 1325 (2000). The resolution was historic in
its aim to highlight for the first time the links between
women, armed conflict and peace and security. It
also recognized that women and children are affected
by armed conflict in differentiated and more adverse
ways, and that women play a crucial role in maintaining
and promoting peace and security.
In the light of the number, intensity and changing
nature of current conflicts, the high-level review
and global study we are discussing are very relevant.
Violent extremism and terrorism in many parts of the
world, particularly the Middle East and parts of Africa,
have brought violence to new levels of savagery against
civilians and cultural and religious patrimonies. Women
and girls are caught up in such conflict situations
and subjected to rape, sexual assault, torture, human
trafficking, forced marriages and forced religious
conversions. They are bought and sold and even given
as gifts or trophies to terrorist fighters.

15-3098693/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

13/10/2015

My delegation is particularly appalled by acts of
sexual violence used as a strategy of war and designed
to dehumanize and demoralize women, girls and
their families. Such attacks have long-term, even
lifelong, traumatic effects on women and girls, both
physically and psychologically, and in many cases
the victims of sexual violence are excluded from or
heavily stigmatized in their families and communities.
Such crimes also have a detrimental effect on younger
generations, since women are most often the primary
educators, caregivers and breadwinners. Such realities
are harrowing. As Pope Francis said in his address to the
General Assembly on 25 September, they “should serve
as an urgent call to those charged with the conduct of
international affairs to examine their consciences” (see
A/70/PV.3, page 5).

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
women and peace and security to address the challenges
facing the full implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. I would also like to note the lateness
of the hour this evening, which serves to highlight the
importance of this issue to the many Member States
here today. We also appreciate you and your team’s
leadership, Sir, on this issue. And we applaud Spain
for choosing to highlight this priority issue at a high
level, and thank the United Kingom, as penholder, for
its important work as well. We also note the extensive
efforts by the League of Arab States to combat violence
against women in our region, and in particular the Arab
League strategy, whose full implementation we are all
working towards.

Catholic organizations and agencies rapidly and
effectively respond to needs arising from violence
directed at women and girls in many areas of conflict.
They promote programmes aimed at preventing such
violence and ensuring women’s dignity and effective role
in society by promoting pacification and reconciliation,
while at the same time addressing the deeper causes
of violence against women and girls. They run special
programmes designed to fight the stigmatization of
victims of sexual violence and to reintegrate them into
their families and local communities.

As a proud sponsor of resolution 2242 (2015),
adopted unanimously this morning, the United Arab
Emirates commends the important focus on the role of
women in countering violent extremism and terrorism,
as many delegations highlighted here today. We join
others in thanking the Secretary-General for his bold
call to action and for calling attention to the need to
combat the growing spread of violent extremism. We
would also like to thank the Executive Director of
UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her
briefing on the conclusions of the Secretary-General’s
report on women and peace and security (S/2015/716).
We extend our continued support to UN-Women in
its role as secretariat of the global study. We welcome
the launch of the study and we urge the international
community to implement its key findings, rather than
simply take note of them.

Concerning the efforts to implement resolution
1325 (2000), my delegation strongly objects to the
suggestion that recovery and rehabilitation measures
include abortion.
There is no doubt that much still has to be done.
My delegation encourages the United Nations and its
Member States to recruit more women for preventive
diplomacy, mediation efforts, peacekeeping missions
and peacebuilding processes. Women make specific,
and at times decisive, contributions that are necessary
in such critical areas as helping to foster good relations
with local communities and building trust among
parties in conflict — elements that are essential to the
success of any diplomatic effort and conflict resolution.
The role of women in peace and security should not
be considered as an afterthought or simply as something
politically correct. It is an essential contribution to all
our efforts to spare our world from further scourges of
war and violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.

94/96

The high-level review on women and peace and
security is timely given today’s security challenges,
which have been exacerbated by the growing impact
of non-State actors and violent extremism, as well as
the global refugee crisis. The rise of Daesh and its
systematic use of sexual assault and rape is intended
to destabilize and terrorize communities. Radical
doctrines such as those propagated by Daesh are an
insult to Islam, and in opposition to its universal tenets.
It is the core belief of the United Arab Emirates
that it is critical to tackle the root causes of extremism
before it becomes violent extremism. That requires
collective international intervention to confront
extremist ideology and propaganda, but at the national
level it also requires supportive policies directed
towards girls’ education and women’s empowerment,

15-30986

13/10/2015

Women and peace and security

religious tolerance and a Constitution that guarantees
equal treatment and opportunity. In the United Arab
Emirates, ensuring there are real opportunities for
women’s leadership throughout society has also been
an important policy priority, and is demonstrated
by women such as Major Mariam Al-Mansouri, the
country’s first active-duty female fighter pilot. She
is here this evening in another room in the United
Nations, where she will receive the Asia Society 2015
Game Changers Award for her achievements. We are
so proud of her. There is no better counter to Daesh’s
destructive narrative than the example she provides of
the role and impact of women and peace and security in
a moderate, tolerant Muslim society.
Now more than ever, it is crucial that we recognize
the important and necessary contributions that women
make in international peace and security efforts. We
must place a sharper focus on prevention, the oftenoverlooked pillar of the women and peace and security
agenda. As Alaa Murabit noted this morning, the
engagement of women cannot continue to be a question
of convenience. To truly achieve peace and security, we
must prevent conflict and prevent violent extremism by
addressing the root causes and investing in prevention
early on. That shifting of gears needs to happen across
the entire United Nations house, as well as in the
approach of Member States to conflict prevention.
We know that empowering women and including
their perspectives as part of inclusive peacebuilding is
essential to creating functional, just and stable societies.
That is why in the United Arab Emirates 13 years ago,
under the auspices of our First Lady, Her Highness
Sheikha Fatima bint Mubarak, our country adopted its
national strategy for the advancement of women, which
prioritizes the participation of women in the national
development process in both the public and private
sectors and strengthens the concept of gender equality
in policies, programmes and legislation. That is a live
process, and we continue to work with our partners to
do better as part of a commitment made at the highest
levels of our Government.
In the international realm, the United Arab
Emirates seeks not only to empower women but to
empower society through women, in every setting
and everywhere. That is even more critical when
women are caught up in humanitarian or vulnerable
settings. The United Arab Emirates has continued to
strengthen that platform. Most recently, in February,
we hosted a meeting of development and humanitarian

S/PV.7533

experts in maternal and child health in Abu Dhabi to
engage the Secretary-General’s Every Woman, Every
Child global movement. That unprecedented gathering
developed the Abu Dhabi Declaration, which generated
momentum for the renewed Every Woman, Every Child
global strategy, launched at the General Assembly, to
add focus on the “everywhere” component, that is, to
broaden and strengthen this global movement and leave
no one behind.
The Abu Dhabi Declaration helped ensure not
only that gender is a key consideration in responses to
humanitarian emergencies, but also that humanitarian
settings are a key consideration in strategies for the
advancement of gender equality. As we know, crises
deepen existing gender inequalities, marginalization
and exclusion. Yet women and young people are often
both the first responders to crises and the leading
innovators of sustainable solutions in crises. That
is why the United Arab Emirates is dedicated to this
initiative, for which we will continue to provide our
steadfast support. As such, the United Arab Emirates
will host a conference in Abu Dhabi in February with
the United Nations High-Level Panel on Humanitarian
Financing. Our hope is that the meeting will inform
and enhance international action and innovation for
the implementation and financing of the Every Woman,
Every Child everywhere, in particular in advance of
the World Humanitarian Summit and World Health
Assembly next year.
As many Ministers noted today, there is now
overwhelming evidence and consensus that the wellbeing of women in conflict and post-conflict settings,
respect for women’s rights and their asctive participation
in peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
directly related to the maintenance of international
peace and security and sustainable development. The
United Arab Emirates is committed to advancing
sustainable peace by promoting and respecting women
and girls’ human rights and meaningfully integrating
women within all efforts to prevent, resolve and rebuild
from conflict. In that regard, I would like to share three
priority issues that still must be addressed in order
to achieve the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which we have all committed to.
First, there is a need to prioritize women’s
meaningful participation in all peace and security
processes, as well as efforts to combat, reduce
and prevent terrorism and violent extremism. That
requires increasing the recruitment, retention and

15-3098695/96

S/PV.7533

Women and peace and security

professionalization of women across all justice and
security-sector components, including in peacekeeping
operations.
Secondly, there is a need to recognize that holistic
approaches to conflict prevention should aim to address
the root causes and drivers of conflict and cycles of
violence, including violent extremism, and not just
their impacts on women, men, girls and boys after the
damage is done. That requires engaging women in key
political and decision-making processes, including in
the development of any strategies or approaches aimed
at preventing conflict. And it requires supporting the
development of gender-sensitive security and justice
sectors that are accessible to women and girls, uphold
the rule of law and implement non-discriminatory laws,
policies and practices.
Thirdly, there is a need to advocate for United
Nations system leadership to deliver on the women and
peace and security agenda over the next decade. That
requires systematically integrating women and peace
and security as a cross-cutting issue and recruiting
gender and women and peace and security expertise,
specifically in leadership capacities, both at United
Nations Headquarters and in the field, including with

96/96

13/10/2015

regard to Special Envoys and Representatives and
senior mediators.
Lastly, we must harness the political will
demonstrated
today
under
your
leadership,
Mr. President, and translate it into effective action by
Member States to ensure that we, collectively, move
the women and peace and security agenda forward.
We should do this by tying our funding to the agenda.
Today, I am pleased to announce that the United Arab
Emirates will allocate $500,000 to UN-Women, to be
utilized in countering extremism within the context of
the women and peace and security agenda.
The United Arab Emirates stands in support of all
United Nations efforts on this critical agenda and will
continue working through our national, regional and
international platforms to implement resolution 1325
(2000).
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are a
number of speakers remaining on the list. With the
consent of the Council, I therefore intend to suspend
the meeting until tomorrow at 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 7.40 p.m.

15-30986
