UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/4
24 February 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3856th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 February 1998, in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan of 10 February 1998
(S/1998/113), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of its resolution
1138 (1997) of 14 November 1997.
"The Security Council regrets that during the last three months work
on the implementation of the General Agreement on the Establishment of
Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan (S/1997/510) and the relevant
activities of the Commission on National Reconciliation (CNR) have
proceeded very slowly. It welcomes recent efforts made by the parties in
order to fulfil their obligations. The Council calls upon them to
intensify their efforts to implement fully the General Agreement, including
the Protocol on military issues (S/1997/209, annex II). It also encourages
the CNR to continue its efforts aimed at the institution of a broad
dialogue among the various political forces as foreseen in the General
Agreement.
"The Security Council commends the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the personnel of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) for their work and encourages them to
continue assisting the parties in the implementation of the General
Agreement. It welcomes the results of the international donor conference
in support of peace and reconciliation in Tajikistan convened by the
Secretary-General in Vienna on 24 and 25 November 1997, and looks forward
to the contribution of those results to consolidating the peace process in
Tajikistan.
"The Security Council reiterates its concern that the security
situation in some parts of Tajikistan remains precarious. It reminds both
parties that the international community is ready to continue assisting in
the implementation of the General Agreement as well as in humanitarian and
rehabilitation programmes, but that its ability to do so and also the
98-04247 (E)

240298

/...

S/PRST/1998/4
English
Page 2

ability of UNMOT to carry out its tasks more effectively is linked to
improvements in security conditions.
"The Security Council firmly condemns the hostage-taking of relief
workers that took place in November 1997 and urges the parties to cooperate
further in ensuring the security and freedom of movement of the personnel
of the United Nations, the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (the CIS Peacekeeping Forces) and other
international personnel, and to take practical steps in this respect, such
as those mentioned in paragraph 7 of the report of the Secretary-General.
"The Security Council welcomes the presidential decree establishing a
joint security unit with the task of providing security, including armed
escorts, for UNMOT personnel and calls upon the parties to make the unit
operational as soon as possible. It also welcomes the readiness of the CIS
Peacekeeping Forces to arrange for the guarding of United Nations premises
in Dushanbe, as mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General, and
encourages UNMOT and the CIS Peacekeeping Forces to make the relevant
detailed arrangements.
"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue the
expansion of UNMOT to the strength authorized by its resolution 1138 (1997)
as soon as the Secretary-General deems conditions appropriate."

-----
