United Nations

S/PV.6345

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6345th meeting
Monday, 28 June 2010, 3.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Kimura
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Lolo
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in that country (S/2010/295)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-42534 (E)

*1042534*

S/PV.6345

I invite Mr. Grauls to take a seat at the Council

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic and
on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2010/295)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. PoukréKono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Sahle-Work
Zwede, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ms. Zwede to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jan
Grauls, Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Belgium.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2010/295, which contains
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
the Central African Republic and on the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
that country.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Sahle-Work Zwede and Ambassador
Jan Grauls. I now give the floor to Ms. Zwede.
Ms. Zwede: I am honoured to introduce the
twenty-second report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic (S/2010/295),
my first report since the creation of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic (BINUCA), in January of this year. Allow me
to take this opportunity to thank members of the
Council for their continued support of the peace
process in the Central African Republic.
During my last briefing to the Council, on
15 December 2009, it was highlighted that to achieve
peace and stability in the Central African Republic, the
parties to the peace process needed to show
commitment and political will. I also suggested that
concerted international support and assistance were
required to support the peace process and to avoid a
return to violence. I also requested the support of
Council members to complete the integration process. I
wish to update members of the Council on
developments and the progress achieved in the past six
months.
The Central African Republic process has reached
a critical stage in which the successful holding of
elections and the completion of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) operations
will determine the fate of the peacebuilding process.
Those two major events are among the key
recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue
and are regarded as critical to lasting stabilization of
the Central African Republic.
On 29 April, President François Bozizé convened
a meeting of national stakeholders and international

10-42534

S/PV.6345

partners to find a solution to the tensions around the
organization of the elections. The meeting resulted in
the postponement of the polls. Subsequently, the
National Assembly amended the Constitution to allow
the President and the legislature to remain in their
functions beyond the expiry dates of their tenures on
10 June and 3 June, respectively. Despite uncertainties
about what would happen after the expiration of the
five-year presidential mandate, the 11 June threshold
passed off peacefully and without incident.
After consultations with national political
stakeholders, including leaders of political parties and
politico-military movements, and with the technical
support of national and international experts, the
Independent Electoral Commission shared a draft
electoral time frame with the main international
partners at a meeting of the Steering Committee on
Elections held on 14 June. The dates set for the first
and second rounds of elections are 24 October and
19 December, respectively. The draft also opted for a
general electoral census instead of a revision of the
2005 voter lists.
The successful organization of the presidential
and parliamentary elections hinges on the Electoral
Commission’s capacity to carry out its duties within
the time frame established by the electoral calendar
and the funds available. During the 14 June meeting,
the Independent Electoral Commission also disclosed
that the budget estimates for the electoral process had
been revised upwards and now stood at $19,315,000
for the organization of the polls and at approximately
$1,540,000 for computerizing the voter rolls, bringing
the total budget for the entire process to $20,855,000.
Taking into account the contribution pledged by
the European Union and African Union, as well as the
$1.5 million provided by the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF), the revised budget reflects a funding gap of
about $7.5 million. The Independent Electoral
Commission requested the urgent provision of
$3.5 million to enable it to conduct the electoral census
operations from 14 to 28 July, which is crucial to the
implementation of the draft electoral timetable.
The international community has responded
swiftly to the call of the Government of the Central
African Republic for assistance in the electoral
process. In this context, an electoral needs assessment
mission was undertaken by the Department of Political
Affairs in October. Mindful of the centrality of national

10-42534

leadership and ownership of the electoral process, the
United Nations, together with all international partners,
has been following up on the recommendations of the
needs assessment mission and will continue to provide
technical advice and support.
Eighteen months after the establishment of the
DDR Steering Committee, the demobilization and
disarmament operations continue to be beset by
numerous challenges. It is nevertheless worth noting
the successful completion of the second phase of the
DDR sensitization and information campaign in the
North of the country, including the establishment of
local DDR committees and the deployment of military
observers by the Economic Community of Central
African States in some north-western and central areas.
Also worth noting is the adoption at the DDR Steering
Committee’s 24 June meeting of the terms of reference
for the campaign to launch the process of verification
of the lists of former combatants in the North-West and
North-East of the country, as well as the road map of
DDR activities for the period between June and
September.
However, much more needs to be done in order to
expedite the process. The disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of the estimated 8,000 former
combatants are an essential condition for the success of
the peace and national reconciliation processes and the
creation of a climate of security conducive to the
Central African Republic’s long-term social and
economic development.
Meanwhile, the security situation is being
aggravated by the continuing attacks of the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) on the civilian population in
the Republic’s south-eastern provinces. The activities
of the LRA have resulted in significant displacement of
the population in the Haut-Mbomou and Mbomou
prefectures. We are working closely with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad to
monitor these activities. But there is a need for a more
coordinated regional approach to mitigate this serious
threat to regional peace and security. In this regard, I
welcome the legislation enacted by the United States
Congress on the issue of the LRA, as well as the recent
inter-mission meeting held in Entebbe, Uganda. Such
initiatives are important contributions to the effort to

3

S/PV.6345

devise a regional strategy to deal with the LRA
menace.

and the work of the PBC’s country-specific
configuration under his chairmanship.

The prevailing insecurity continues to contribute
to the deterioration of the human rights situation, with
abuses against vulnerable groups such as refugees and
internally displaced persons, and with women and
children being notable targets and victims of
widespread human rights abuses, such as rape and
other sexual and gender-based violence. The human
rights situation is also characterized by numerous cases
of alleged violations, particularly the prolonged pretrial
detention of individuals held with and without charges,
cases of unlawful arrest and detention, and the illtreatment of detainees.

With regard to the implementation of an
integrated United Nations approach in the Central
African Republic, in accordance with the relevant
decisions of the Security Council, BINUCA and the
country team held a joint retreat on 6 May to articulate
a common United Nations vision and a timetable for
preparing an integrated strategic framework to guide
the peacebuilding activities of the United Nations as a
whole in the Central African Republic. This strategy
will be finalized by September and its implementation
will be monitored through the strategic policy
coordination group, which, under my leadership, brings
together the heads of all United Nations entities in the
country. The group will also ensure that United Nations
system’s activities are fully aligned with and contribute
to the realization of national objectives, as articulated
in the poverty reduction strategy paper, as well other
documents, such as the strategic framework for
peacebuilding adopted with the Peacebuilding
Commission.

While the main focus of the Central African
Republic’s political process has understandably been
on the elections and DDR, it is important that we not
overlook the need to fully implement the other
recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue.
The Dialogue Follow-up Committee recently carried
out a three-week campaign in various parts of the
country to sensitize local populations and assess
progress
in
implementing
the
dialogue
recommendations. Following that mission, the
Committee issued a report that, as well as highlighting
the shortcomings in the implementation of the DDR
and electoral processes, painted a gloomy portrait of
the implementation status of the dialogue’s other
recommendations. In this regard, the Committee
deplored what it perceived as a lack of political will on
the part of the stakeholders.
Despite the difficulties of the prevailing political
and security situation, we have continued to implement
the 12 priority projects under the PBF’s allocation of
$10 million and have articulated projects for the
implementation of its second tranche. The
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has also continued
to work with all national stakeholders, including the
Government and civil society, on the implementation
of the strategic framework for peacebuilding. In that
regard, the Chair of the Commission’s country-specific
configuration on the Central African Republic and
Belgium’s Permanent Representative to the United
Nations, Ambassador Jan Grauls, visited Bangui from
9 to 12 June for discussions with national authorities,
civil society and international partners on the PBC’s
engagement in the Republic. I would like to take this
opportunity to commend Mr. Grauls’ tireless efforts

4

The
overall
political,
security
and
socio-economic situation in the Central African
Republic remains precarious and fraught with
challenges and pitfalls. Preparations for the holding of
elections and the implementation of DDR have
experienced mixed fortunes. The international
community should remain committed to providing firm
political and financial support to the Central African
Republic to address the pressing challenges in the
implementation of all the recommendations of the
inclusive political dialogue. Above all, adequate
funding needs to be provided to the Government of the
Central African Republic in order to enable it to
complete the electoral and DDR processes.
I am deeply concerned by the deteriorating
humanitarian situation and will welcome international
efforts geared towards enhanced humanitarian
assistance to refugees, internally displaced persons and
other vulnerable groups.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Zewde for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Grauls,
Permanent Representative of Belgium and Chairman of
the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

10-42534

S/PV.6345

Mr. Grauls (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to address
the Security Council in my capacity as Chairman of the
Peacebuilding
Commission’s
country-specific
configuration on the Central African Republic.
I went on mission to Bangui from 9 to 12 June.
During that mission, I met with members of the
Government, the Independent Electoral Commission,
the Dialogue Follow-up Committee and the
international community, as well as members of the
United Nations leadership and country team,
representatives of women’s organizations and
humanitarian partners. In my briefing this afternoon, I
would like to highlight some of the issues related to the
implementation of the strategic framework for
peacebuilding in the Central African Republic
discussed during my visit.
First of all, however, allow me to express the
Peacebuilding Commission’s deep appreciation for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, for her work in Bangui in
sometimes difficult circumstances. That work helps us
enormously in achieving the goals that we have set
ourselves within the Peacebuilding Commission.
I wish first of all to say something about the
electoral process. As the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General pointed out, the most recent
postponement of the date for the presidential and
parliamentary elections resulted from a consensual
agreement among the national stakeholders involved in
the electoral process, all of whom, moreover, are
represented in the Independent Electoral Commission.
The international community supported that decision to
postpone, given that it provides the time required for
the proper preparation of credible elections.
During my meeting with the Prime Minister and
the President of the Independent Electoral
Commission, I stressed that the holding of elections,
including the setting of election dates, was a matter of
the country’s national sovereignty, and that the
international community could play a supporting role
by providing technical and financial assistance.
During my mission, the President of the
Independent Electoral Commission informed me of the
new proposed electoral calendar. It envisages a first
round on 24 October and a second on 19 December. In
order to encourage the international community to
further support the electoral process, it is important

10-42534

that those dates be urgently validated by means of a
presidential decree to signify the Government’s
acceptance of the new calendar. That would facilitate
the resource mobilization efforts that I have already
begun and that seek to fill the $7.5-million gap in the
total electoral budget, estimated at $21 million. While
it is necessary to recognize the financial efforts made
to date by the Central African Government, we must
avoid allowing the signing of a presidential decree
sanctioning the calendar to depend on financing by the
international community.
Another important matter that I discussed during
my visit is the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. The requisite gap
between the start of DDR activities, on the one hand,
and the holding of elections, on the other, could
become problematic, given that some rebel leaders
continue to hope to participate in a transitional
Government if the elections are postponed beyond the
constitutional time frame. Such calculations explain
not only the continuously delayed start of DDR, but
also the lack of progress in the Government’s efforts to
hold successful talks with the remaining rebel groups
that have not adhered to the peace process. It would be
desirable for the Security Council to put more pressure
on all stakeholders, in particular the recalcitrant armed
groups, to engage in the DDR process.
The imminent onset of the rainy season will
probably further delay the DDR activities in a large
part of the country. That is why, during my meetings, I
advocated for DDR to start in the zones where security
and weather conditions allow, in particular the areas
controlled by the Armée populaire pour la restauration
de la démocratie in the North-West of the country. That
suggestion was welcomed by the Government and the
United Nations, and will have to be discussed in the
DDR Steering Committee. I also discussed the
possibility of reintegrating a certain number of excombatants into the national security forces, in
particular in secondary functions, such as rangers or
the gendarmerie, but also in the army itself. The
minister in charge of defence was not opposed to that
idea, but indicated that it would have to be executed
according to applicable selection and quota criteria.
Questions also remain with regard to the
reintegration component of the DDR process — that is,
the “R” of DDR. The funding provided by the
international community through the United Nations
Development Programme Trust Fund covers the costs

5

S/PV.6345

of disarmament and demobilization. Currently, the
European Union and the World Bank are jointly
developing a reintegration strategy. I proposed to the
other national and international partners that they
integrate into that strategy their respective
commitments to reinvigorating host communities and
those affected by the conflicts. Such a document
clearly goes beyond the issue of the reintegration of
ex-combatants and also covers more general
reintegration efforts. It could also serve as a basis for
the Government to present its own planned and
ongoing activities, including those financed by funds
of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community.
During my mission, I also discussed the other
priorities of the strategic framework. I reiterated that
the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission was ready to organize an
event following the successful holding of the elections
and the conclusion of the country’s DDR process in
order to mobilize resources for other peacebuilding
priorities in the country, in particular security sector
reform (SSR). In the short term, I have asked the
Government to identify the most urgent priorities in
this field and indicated my willingness to approach
some donors for a limited set of specific interventions.
It was agreed that the European Union SSR expert in
Bangui will work with the SSR technical secretariat to
reformulate and fine-tune SSR projects with a view to
seeking funding from international partners for the
their implementation.
It was further agreed with the Minister of Justice
that a document mapping activities would be drawn up
in the area of the rule of law and justice similar to that
concerning ongoing and planned activities in the
development of communities affected by conflict. The
purpose of the mapping document is to ensure
coordination and coherence in activities in the areas of
justice and the rule of law. It would also allow for gaps
to be identified and to allow new stakeholders to
contribute to efforts in this area in a manner that avoids
duplication and overlap.
I also met representatives of women’s
organizations and stressed the importance of the gender
perspective in all my contacts. I advocated for greater
representation of women in State institutions and for
representatives of women’s organizations to be allowed
to participate as observers in the deliberations of the

6

Independent Electoral Committee and the Dialogue
Follow-up Committee.
I should like to make a final comment on the
planned departure of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) at
the end of the year. I am pleased that resolution 1923
(2010) requests the Secretary-General to provide an
assessment of international and regional options for the
Central African Republic in his July report, since
MINURCAT was a stabilizing presence in the northeastern part of the country. Simply leaving that region,
which is prone to internal turmoil and regional
spillover, is not an option given the genuine risk of
falling back into conflict. If the regional option is
chosen, it will be necessary to strengthen the Mission
for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central African
Republic in terms of numbers and logistics, which can
be achieved only through a combination of
international support measures. If the Central African
Republic is to serve as a successful example of the
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, the
importance of peacekeeping in the short term should
not and must not be forgotten.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Grauls for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Poukré-Kono (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): I should to express my sincerest
thanks to Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her clear,
concise and analytical briefing. She has without a
doubt carried out an outstanding job in a very difficult
situation in a post-conflict country. Essentially, the
report of the Secretary-General that she has just
introduced (S/2010/295) paints a very clear picture of
the atmosphere in the Central African Republic
following the presidential and legislative elections.
Following the inclusive political dialogue, several
recommendations were adopted, including two which
are
considered
priorities:
the
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme
and the electoral process. While some progress has
been made, it is true that the implementation of all of
these recommendations has not been as hoped for.
However, the two areas I just mentioned as priorities
have received focused attention from national
stakeholders and international partners. We all agree

10-42534

S/PV.6345

that restoring security across the entire national
territory is a prerequisite for the successful holding of
fair, credible and transparent elections, which is why
making progress on disarmament and demobilization is
so important.
However, in a country prone to internal rebellion,
groups of foreign rebels and bandits have not made
things easier, despite the contributions of international
partners to conducting the DDR programme, which is
moving ahead but slowly. Nevertheless, the
Government of the Central African Republic agrees
that the DDR programme is lagging and that it is time
to give it renewed impetus. There is also a need in
terms of logistics in order to cover a number of remote
regions.
The electoral process has also encountered many
obstacles that have roiled political life. However, the
atmosphere seems to be growing calm enough for the
organization of fair and proper elections. The
involvement of national and intentional experts in
assisting the Independent Electoral Commission to
draw up the electoral timetable has been commendable.
The dialogue and consultation framework of 22 June
contained in the draft timeline could be changed by the
Commission if the latter deems it necessary to move it
forward in order to meet the intended electoral
deadlines of 14 October and 29 December 2010. The
Commission estimates that it will need $21.6 million in
order to conclude the electoral process. At present,
there is a shortfall of over $7 million.
On behalf of my Government, I should like to
express our heartfelt thanks to all the bilateral and
international partners who have contributed to assisting
the Central African Republic on our quest for
stabilization and sustainable development. However,
my Government does not understand why financing for
part of this gap should be conditional on the signing of
a presidential decree convening the electoral bodies.
We appeal for greater flexibility on this assistance
because the Central African Republic is at a crossroads.
The Central African Republic is pleased to note
that the new United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA) is
taking shape and beginning to fully play its
coordination role under the supervision of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. It is important
to stress that the integrated strategic framework under
development will make it possible for all the

10-42534

representatives of the United Nations system in the
Central African Republic to coordinate their
approaches and speak with a single voice. Such
harmony of action would avoid duplication and crosspurposes and give recipient countries a single
interlocutor. We deeply appreciate this partnership.
Another partnership which I must not neglect to
mention is the Peacebuilding Commission. The
Commission covers a vast range of activities and fully
plays its coordination role with the agencies and funds
of the United Nations system that are assisting the
Central African Republic in its peacebuilding and
sustainable development efforts.
On this occasion, I should like to express my
sincere thanks to Ambassador Jan Grauls, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission configuration for the
Central African Republic, who remains devoted to our
cause. He makes the case for the Central African
Republic with an unshakable determination with his
numerous interlocutors. We highly appreciate the
initiatives he has recently drawn up on the
reintegration of ex-combatants and on the secure
launching of disarmament activities in some areas, as
well as his latest letter calling for contributions.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for having agreed to grant the second tranche
from the Peacebuilding Fund to allow for the
implementation of a number of programmes of the
revised priority plan. We also express our gratitude to
the Peacebuilding Support Office, which assisted the
Steering Committee in its work.
I cannot conclude my remarks without conveying
the encouragement of my Government to you, Sir, in
your role as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. That is an issue close to our
hearts. Therefore, with the support of UNICEF and
other international partners, the Government of the
Central African Republic is working to finalize its
adherence to the two Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

7
