S/2017/293

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 April 2017
Original: English

Special report of the Secretary-General on the review of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 29 of Security Council
resolution 2318 of 15 November 2016, in which the Council requested that the
Secretary-General conduct a strategic review of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA), comprising an in-depth examination of the related
resources and structure of its uniformed and civilian components. The present report
provides recommendations on how UNISFA should be optimally configured and
streamlined, further to an evidence-based assessment of the impact of UNISFA
activities aimed at the implementation of its mandate under resolution 2287 (2016).

II. Strategic review
2.
The review assessed the ability of UNISFA to fulfil its mandate under Security
Council resolutions 1990 (2011), 2024 (2011) and 2318 (2016), considered options
for a possible reconfiguration of the Mission based on its findings and engaged with
the African Union on the way forward in the political process between the Sudan
and South Sudan with respect to Abyei and the implementation of their border
security arrangements. The review included an assessment of the ability of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism to implement its mandate and
achieve full operating capability. The review follows a similar exercise in April
2014 (see S/2014/336), as a result of which it was determined that supporting the
resumption of community dialogue and administration by the communities, under
the supervision of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, would allow the Unite d
Nations to continue meeting its strategic objective of helping to consolidate peace
and security in Abyei and create an environment conducive to the resolution of the
dispute over the final status of Abyei. Regarding the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism, the 2014 exercise had concluded that, in the absence of full
cooperation between the Sudan and South Sudan on border security, the United
Nations should not continue investing in its infrastructure.
3.
The strategic review mission conducted its field visit from 15 and 23 February
2017. The review team was led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
included representatives from the Department of Field Support, the Department of
Political Affairs, the Office for the Coordination o f Humanitarian Affairs (on behalf

17-05227 (E)

110417

*1705227*

S/2017/293

of the humanitarian country team) and the United Nations Development Programme,
as well as personnel from UNISFA. The review team met with senior officials from
the Governments of the Sudan, South Sudan and Ethiopia; repre sentatives of the
Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities; representatives of the African Union,
including the Facilitator of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee; a representative of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel; members of the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee and the African Union Border Programme; and representatives
of the United Nations presences in the region (United Nations Office to the African
Union, Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South
Sudan, and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan). The team also engaged with
the United Nations country team; representatives of key donors in the Sudan and
South Sudan; United Nations agencies, funds and programmes; and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in the Abyei Area.

III. Background and findings of the strategic assessment
4.
The Security Council adopted resolution 1990 (2011) against a backdrop of
increased tensions in the Abyei area at the end of 2010, which had resulted in a
series of violent incidents in the area in early January 2011 and a build -up of forces
from the north and the south. In the absence of a final agreement on the status of the
Abyei Area, temporary security arrangements were agreed upon by the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in January and March 2011. These agreements
were implemented only in part, however, and a number of violent incidents occurred
in April and May 2011. In response to the situation, the Afr ican Union High-level
Implementation Panel, with the support of the Government of Ethiopia, the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and other stakeholders, facilitated high -level meetings
between the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, which led to the
signing of the 20 June 2011 Agreement on temporary arrangements for the
administration and security of the Abyei Area.
5.
In that context, UNISFA was given the mandate, inter alia, to demilitarize the
Abyei Area, to participate in relevant Abyei Area bodies, to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian aid and the free movement of humanitarian personnel and to
strengthen the capacity of the Abyei Police Service. Since its deployment, UNISFA
has effectively delivered on its mandated tasks. Despite the slow progress in finding
a resolution to the dispute on the final status of Abyei, UNISFA has succeeded in
stabilizing the Abyei Area, providing security for the seasonal migration of the
Misseriya and facilitating humanitarian assistance.

Political dynamics
6.
The political process foreseen in the 20 June 2011 Agreement remains in a
state of paralysis. No meaningful progress has been made in the establishment of
joint arrangements since the assassination of the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief on
4 May 2013. The Abyei Joint Oversight Committee — the body with political and
administrative oversight over Abyei — has not met since March 2015, creating a
political vacuum in the formal joint governance of Abyei. Concurrently, no progress
has been made in the resolution of the final status of Abyei since the presentation of
the proposal by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel in September
2012, despite President Al-Bashir of the Sudan and President Kiir of South Sudan
agreeing to discuss and resolve that matter.
7.
At the heart of the paralysis is the stance taken by the parties regarding their
respective positions on the current and future status of Abyei. Neither side has
2/14

17-05227

S/2017/293

demonstrated a willingness to contemplate the concessions necessary for a political
solution. In the meantime, both are preoccupied by internal situations (Darfur and
the Two Areas for the Sudan and the armed conflict in South Sudan) that are of
higher national priority than the administration or the future of Abyei. The result is
a long-term deadlock which compels UNISFA to perform its mandated role as the
guarantor of security in Abyei while also improvising the crafting of ad hoc
solutions to the administrative and law and order demands of Abyei.
8.
The Sudan insists that the literal terms of the 20 June 2011 Agreement are the
sole frame of reference for Abyei and that, accordingly, Abyei remains a part of th e
Sudan unless “the 1 January 1956 line between the north and the south” is “changed
as a result of the outcome of the referendum foreseen in the Abyei Protocol or other
decision of the Parties on the final status of Abyei”. The insistence of the Sudan tha t
the establishment of a joint administration is a sine qua non for addressing all Abyei
issues effectively precludes recourse to alternative channels for discussion and
negotiation. This, in turn, provides justification for the Sudan to retain the presenc e
of armed personnel in the Diffra oil complex, in violation of the 20 June 2011
Agreement.
9.
For its part, South Sudan ascribes prime importance to the July 2009 ruling by
the Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Hague, which is “final and binding” on
the parties and which, in its view, constitutes the most authoritative pronouncement
on the borders of Abyei, namely an affirmation that, under international law, the
Abyei Area is conterminous with the boundaries of the areas over which the nine
Ngok Dinka chiefdoms exercise their traditional prerogative. On 31 October 2016,
in commemoration of the third anniversary of the unilateral referendum held in the
Abyei Area, around 700 Ngok Dinka led by the Paramount Chief demonstrated in
front of UNISFA headquarters in Abyei and handed over a petition letter calling for
recognition of the referendum.
10. The deadlock in the implementation of the 20 June 2011 Agreement leaves
UNISFA, which is intended as an “interim” mission, in a state of limbo. As there is
no clear prospect of a peaceful resolution of the status of Abyei, UNISFA also lacks
an exit horizon.
11. At the community level, both the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya community
leaders expressed a desire for peaceful coexistence. Nevertheless, they continue to
blame each other’s Governments for failing to implement the 20 June 2011
Agreement, and each accuses the United Nations of bias towards the other. The
Misseriya leaders criticized the international community, including the United
Nations and NGOs, for a perceived general lack of support, as well as lack of access
to funding for water, road and other projects. They expressed concerns regarding
access to natural resources in southern Abyei, to Abyei Town and to their homes in
Abyei, as well as the lack of formal administration and a police service. They
requested assistance to enable the safe return to Abyei of 287 Misseriya families
who they stated had been displaced to Muglad and Khartoum during the conflict in
2011. The Misseriya leaders called for the issue of the final status of Abyei to be
resolved.
12. The Ngok Dinka maintained that shared sovereignty over Abyei was of critical
importance and criticized the United Nations for allegedly favouring Sudanese
sovereignty over Abyei. They also raised the issues of the armed Sudanese
personnel at the Diffra oil complex and the presence of armed criminals in Abyei,
while voicing support for the work of the community protection committees. The
Ngok Dinka also were of the view that there had not been sufficient deve lopment
projects in their community. The unresolved killing of the Ngok Dinka Paramount

17-05227

3/14

S/2017/293

Chief in 2013 was mentioned as a serious concern that hindered peaceful
coexistence with the Misseriya.

Security
13. Senior officials in the Sudan, South Sudan and Ethiopia were unanimous in
affirming that UNISFA had successfully fulfilled its security mandate and applauded
the Mission for establishing and maintaining a significant degree of stability in
Abyei. All interlocutors expressed the shared view that, in t he present circumstances
and as long as the status of Abyei remained contested, the withdrawal of UNISFA,
or any weakening in its military strength or posture, could lead to heightened
tensions between the Sudan and South Sudan, with dire consequences for both
countries and for the wider region. Although both the Sudan and South Sudan
assigned high political, strategic and economic importance to Abyei, the presence of
UNISFA forces rendered highly unlikely the possibility of any major confrontation.
14. The security situation in the Abyei Area remains unpredictable but calm,
owing primarily to the robust and proactive military deployment concept employed
by UNISFA. Since 2015, the annual migration season, from October to mid -May,
which is traditionally the time of highest intercommunal tensions and conflict, has
been largely peaceful thanks to the Mission’s implementation of its flexible conflict
management and mitigation strategy, involving the armed enforcement of a line of
disengagement between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities, in close
consultation with the communities themselves. The establishment of community
protection committees in southern Abyei has also served to strengthen community oriented crime prevention. Nevertheless, community protection committees have not
been established in northern Abyei owing to reservations on the part of the Sudan.
The revival of traditional systems of sharing resources and the reinitiation of a
peace dialogue between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities has also
contributed to improving the security situation, as the two communities, with
support from UNISFA, agencies, funds, programmes and NGOs, have embraced
self-regulation, peaceful coexistence and non-violent resolution of disputes through
dialogue.
15. Despite the relative calm achieved by the conflict management and mitigation
strategy and the vigorous posture of UNISFA, the security context is still vulnerable
to a number of risk factors. These include the law and order vacuum created by
the absence of the Abyei Police Service and formal criminal justice institutions, the
potential for increased frequency of violent intercommunal crime fuelled by the
prevalence of small arms and light weapons, and the continued threat of landmines
and explosive remnants of war. A further risk is the fact that both the Sudan and
South Sudan continue to violate aspects of the 20 June 2011 Agreement and related
Security Council resolutions through the presence of armed personnel within the
Abyei Area. The Sudan continues to maintain between 120 and 150 armed personnel
around the Diffra oil complex, while incursions by armed personnel, suspected to be
members of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA), continue to be observed
in the southern parts of the Abyei Area.
16. The proximity of the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and SPLA forces just
outside the boundaries of the Abyei Area underlines the continuing strategic
importance of Abyei to both the Sudan and South Sudan. It also points to the risk
that local conflict between the Misseriya and the Ngok Dinka communities could
escalate into a larger confrontation. That risk was acknowledged by senior officials
of both the Sudan and South Sudan during the strategic review mission. The
presence of UNISFA was, therefore, explicitly recognized as a deterrent to armed
conflict, as well as an effective security buffer between the two communities. With
4/14

17-05227

S/2017/293

the persisting political instability and armed conflict in South Sudan, the potential
effects of the spread of fighting into the Abyei Area should not be overlooked.

Humanitarian situation
17. The humanitarian situation has remained relatively stable in the absence of
large-scale clashes and displacement in the Abyei Area. Nevertheless, the presence
of armed elements, sporadic intercommunal conflict and the absence of public
institutions and government services continue to drive humanitarian and recovery
needs. Approximately 160,000 people are in need of some form of assistance in the
Abyei Area, and 20,000 Ngok Dinka remain displaced after fleeing south of the
Kiir/Bahr-el-Arab River in 2011. Since April 2016, some 13,000 Ngok Dinka have
returned to their areas of origin as a result of a gradual improvement in the security
situation, though many continue to commute to areas further south to access
education and other services. Many have settled very close to the UNISFA company
operating bases. In addition, approximately 8,000 people displaced from
neighbouring areas in South Sudan because of basic food needs and insecurity
remain in the Abyei Area and receive humanitarian assistance across all sec tors. The
failure by the parties to establish the Abyei Area Administration, and the resulting
sense of insecurity, have hampered governance, the rule of law and the sustainable
provision of public services, presenting a considerable impediment to the
sustainable return of displaced persons. In addition to the Ngok Dinka, there are
approximately 25,000 Misseriya in the north of Abyei and 35,000 seasonally
nomadic Misseriya who entered the area in late 2016 and are expected to return in
mid-2017.
18. Funding for humanitarian activities is scarce, including in the health sector,
and engagement is mostly limited to humanitarian assistance, except for quick impact projects that are allocated by UNISFA. The International Organization for
Migration, often in collaboration with international NGOs, helps with the
implementation of quick-impact projects. The activities of international NGOs
(funded directly by donors or through United Nations agencies) cover all sectors,
including nutrition, water, sanitation, hygiene and livelihoods. These activities are
conducted almost entirely in the central and southern parts of Abyei. Some United
Nations agencies and two national NGOs are able to operate in northern Abyei, with
support focused on the rehabilitation of public buildings/facilities and water points,
community livelihoods and vaccination of livestock.
19. Communities returning to Abyei and internally displaced persons from South
Sudan are particularly vulnerable, since few systems are in place to support them.
The unemployment rate in Abyei is extremely high, especially among young people,
who see very few prospects for the future. Some international NGOs, in
collaboration with United Nations agencies, work on reconciliation, including by
facilitating conferences on migration prior to the migration season to prevent
conflict between the Misseriya and Dinka communities. These efforts have been
successful.

Protection of civilians and human rights
20. The mandate of UNISFA includes a role in human rights monitoring and
addressing sexual and gender-based violence and child rights. There has been no
progress, however, in the operationalization of the human rights monitoring and
reporting mandate in the Abyei Area, as called for by the Security Council in its

17-05227

5/14

S/2017/293

resolutions 2318 (2016), 2287 (2016), 2251 (2015) and 2156 (2014), because of the
non-issuance of visas by the Government of the Sudan.
21. Women and children, in particular, face human rights risks in Abyei. The
number of unaccompanied children and children living on the streets has grown
with the conflict in South Sudan. Although most have continued to seek safety in
the Sudan, a general lack of protection mechanisms to address issues relating to
unaccompanied children continues to put many children at risk of violence,
exploitation, abuse, abduction and recruitme nt. Operationalization of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations against children remains a challenge
owing to access difficulties and limited capacity on the ground.
22. The human rights situation in the Abyei Area is exacerbated by t he absence of
a functional criminal justice system and rule of law institutions. Aside from
traditional justice mechanisms, there is no functioning formal judicial system in the
Abyei Area and the existing makeshift detention facilities are in poor conditi on.

IV. Status of mandate implementation
23. The review team considered each of the mandated tasks set out in paragraph 1
of Security Council resolution 2318 (2016), with references to relevant paragraphs
of Security Council resolutions 1990 (2011), 2024 (2011) and 2075 (2012).

Monitoring and verifying the redeployment of the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army from the
Abyei Area, and enforcing demilitarization
24. UNISFA is accomplishing to a large extent its mandated task of monitoring
and verifying the redeployment of SAF and SPLA from the Abyei Area. Those
forces have mostly withdrawn, enabling UNISFA to dominate the Abyei Area
militarily. The exceptions to full accomplishment of this task are the continued
presence of Sudanese armed personnel in the Diffra oil co mplex and occasional
incursions from South Sudan into Abyei by unauthorized elements, including SPLA.
The strategic review noted that, in the current circumstances, such violations do not
constitute any significant threat to security in Abyei and do not in themselves
undermine the relative calm facilitated by the UNISFA forces.
25. With regard to demilitarization, UNISFA successfully enforces a security
regime which prohibits openly carrying or displaying firearms of any kind. The
prohibition is enforced through the swift and robust confiscation of any weapons
that are visible and the systematic destruction of weapons seized, utilizing the
technical support and equipment of the United Nations Mine Action Service
(UNMAS). Approximately 125 weapons and over 8,000 rounds of small arms
ammunition have been destroyed at the UNISFA/UNMAS weapons and ammunition
management facility at Dukra. Mine risk education is also delivered to UNISFA
civilian personnel, military observers, military and United Nations agency per sonnel
and local communities, including nomadic herdsmen and returnees.

Participation in Abyei Area bodies
26. The ability of UNISFA to participate in Abyei Area bodies is dependent on the
establishment and functioning of the Abyei Area Administratio n, the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee, the Abyei Police Service, the Joint Military Observer
Committee, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and other
6/14

17-05227

S/2017/293

bodies foreseen by the 20 June 2011 Agreement. UNISFA has actively participated
in the nine meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee that have been held so
far and continues to participate in, and contribute to, the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism.

Mine action activities
27. Since 2011, UNMAS has provided support for the protection of civilians,
personnel of UNISFA, and humanitarian relief and development actors, allowing
UNIFSA and its partners to rapidly deploy and enabling internally displaced persons
to safely return to their homes. Additionally, it sur veys, verifies and clears UNISFA
and Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism border access and patrol
routes and clears priority areas and explosive threats in the Mission area. UNMAS
patrol support teams remain in a state of readiness to deploy in support of the
Mechanism’s ground patrols at both sector headquarters in Kadugli, Sudan, and in
Gok Machar, South Sudan. Since its deployment, UNMAS has cleared some 957 km
of roads and 2 million m 2 of land within the Abyei Area from explosive hazards,
enabling the safe delivery of humanitarian aid.

Facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid
28. UNISFA supports the work of agencies, funds and programmes, as well as a
number of national and international humanitarian organizations currently operating
in Abyei, including through mine clearance, as described above. Nevertheless,
restrictions imposed by the Government of the Sudan on NGOs limit the
implementation capacity of humanitarian and development actors, especially in
northern parts of Abyei. Additional challenges include lack of adequate funds, high
implementation costs owing to security and logistical constraints, delays in the
issuance of travel permits and delays in the movement of personnel and supplies by
the Government of the Sudan. Poor road conditions impede the delivery of aid and
the movement of personnel. Efforts to bring in badly needed education and health
staff are impeded by high costs and political sensitivities. The conflict in South
Sudan has had an impact on humanitarian operations in Abyei, as illustrated by the
temporary relocation of international staff, the looting of and the charging of high
prices for supplies procured in South Sudan and delays in the activities of NGOs
supported by South Sudan offices, particularly those based in Agok.

Supporting the capacity of the Abyei Police Service, the policing
function and intercommunal engagement
29. The 20 June 2011 Agreement and relevant Security Council resolutions define
the policing functions of UNISFA in terms of support, capacity-building and
training for the Abyei Police Service. To engage with these tasks, Security Council
resolution 1990 (2011) provides for a ceiling of 50 police personnel for the police
contingent of UNISFA, of which only 20 are currently deployed owing to the failure
by the Government of the Sudan to issue visas for police personnel. As the Abyei
Police Service has not been established, there is currently no opportunity for
UNISFA police to perform their support and capacity-building role as originally
envisaged.
30. The lack of criminal justice and rule of law institutions makes it impossible to
effectively prosecute intercommunal crimes and to protect and promote the rights of
individuals, and has contributed to a culture of impunity, with victims and witnesses
17-05227

7/14

S/2017/293

reluctant to report violations and abuses. This notwithstanding, UNISFA police have
found innovative ways to play a critical role in partially filling the law and order
vacuum. The strategic review observed that UNISFA police had made a positive
difference through their direct engagement in promoting peaceful coexistence
between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities. That work had contributed to
ensuring the safety of Abyei residents by mitigating the risks associated with the
seasonal migration of the Misseriya towards the southern part of Abyei, and to the
fact that a number of Misseriya were settling in Abyei on a permanent basis.
31. In the absence of the Abyei Police Service, UNISFA has worked to strengthen
the capacities of community protection committees to assist with the management of
law and order processes. UNISFA restricts its support to facilitating community
protection committees as unarmed neighbourhood watch mechanisms . Despite the
objection of the Sudan to the establishment of community protection committees in
northern Abyei, UNISFA continues to engage with the Sudan in an attempt to
persuade it to permit a similar mechanism in the Misseriya community. While
challenges remain in expanding the concept to the northern parts of Abyei, the
community protection committees in the Ngok Dinka areas have become an
effective, albeit informal, community-based policing mechanism, endorsed by the
Security Council in its resolution 2205 (2015).
32. UNISFA has worked to promote confidence-building measures between the
communities through facilitating reconciliation processes at the grass -roots level. It
has also encouraged the parties to promote community dialogue by convening a
peace conference between the traditional chiefs of the Ngok Dinka and the
Misseriya, which served as a catalyst to renew dialogue between the two
communities. A common market now flourishing in Amiet is a visib le symbol of
improved intercommunity relations, although a simmering dispute about the future
location of the market could potentially spark violence.
33. In the absence of formal detention facilities, individuals suspected of
committing major crimes have been transferred outside of Abyei and handed over to
the relevant Government. Minor crimes are adjudicated by traditional courts in the
Abyei Area. Community protection committees oversee informal detention facilities
in Abyei town, Agok and the Amiet market for the short-term detention of suspects.
UNISFA has deployed two police officers with correctional backgrounds to advise
and assist the committees in providing detention facilities that are safe and humane,
and to focus on mediation, reconciliation and other alternatives to the use of
detention, where appropriate. These officers are instrumental in increasing the
awareness and skills of the committees and in contributing to the strengthening of
existing informal law and order mechanisms. The Mission’s corrections capacity is,
however, unable to effectively cover all relevant detention facilities (in Abyei Town,
Agok and the Amiet market).
34. Other actions taken to address policing functions include the co -location of
United Nations Police (UNPOL) with the Agok community protection committee,
which is supported by approximately 21 unarmed South Sudan National Police
Service personnel to address issues relating to law and order. The police component
provides support and advice to the UNISFA Force Command er and the military
component on public order management and community security issues within the
Abyei Area. UNPOL also conducts joint police and military community -based
interactive patrols to monitor issues related to public order, participates in meeti ngs
of the joint security committee with members of both communities regarding peace
and stability, and advises young people, elders and traditional leaders on law and
order through community policing outreach programs.

8/14

17-05227

S/2017/293

Security-related tasks
35. Thanks to the robust deployment of UNISFA, day and night patrolling and
timely response to incidents, many armed incidents have either been prevented or
had their impact minimized. The military deployment to cope with the security
consequences of political deadlock has been influenced by climatic conditions,
migration patterns, areas of settlement and infrastructure and logistical constraints.
36. During the rainy season, UNISFA troops are deployed along the main supply
road with two other company operating bases in Tajale and Marial Achak, which
were developed as permanent camps to effectively protect communities and
returnees in those areas. As a temporary risk-mitigation measure, three corridors on
the north-south axis were designated for seasonal migration of the three major
Misseriya subclans: the Awlad Kamil and Fayyarin, the Mazaghna (Muzama), and
the Omran and Fadliya. The objective of the corridors is to prevent conflict among
the Misseriya clans, and also between Dinka and Misseriya populations, witho ut
imposing physical separation of these communities.

Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and responsibilities of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
37. The mandate of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism to
assist the parties in ensuring the observance of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone
has made progress only relatively recently. During a 14 October 2015 meeting, the
parties verbally agreed on a centre line for the Zone, following which a meeting of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism was held on 5 June 2016. Operational
activities of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, such as
ground monitoring or the establishment of team sites, have been affected by delays
in obtaining approvals for ground movement, although on 21 January 2017 the
Sudan granted approval for a joint reconnaissance mission to Buram. On 23 January,
South Sudan approved a reconnaissance mission to Malakal, including ground
patrols. The Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism continues to
facilitate liaison between the parties and builds mutual trust. Nevertheless, the
parties have yet to invite the Mechanism to participate in developi ng effective
bilateral management mechanisms along the border or to provide support to ad hoc
committees outside the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone.
38. The 5 June 2016 meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism led to
some positive developments for the mandate of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism. The Sudan authorized its senior national monitor to
approve the scheduled aerial monitoring patrols, and also granted approval for the
ground monitoring missions. Aerial monitoring missions from Gok Machar were
recently approved by South Sudan. Reconnaissance missions to the proposed sector
headquarters in Buram have recently been conducted with consent from both
parties. In November 2016, both the Sudan and South Sudan announced t heir
withdrawal from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. The Sudan has formally
requested the African Union and UNISFA to verify its claim. These activities and
developments are welcome; however, they fall short of the Security Council
benchmarks for the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism to reach
full operating capability. Given the political paralysis regarding the future of Abyei,
it is unlikely that the benchmarks will be met in the medium term. Accordingly, for
the coming period, it is recommended that the Mechanism be authorized and
resourced to function at its present interim operating capacity.

17-05227

9/14

S/2017/293

39. The effectiveness of aerial patrols is severely hampered by the lack of air
assets with the necessary capabilities of range and adequate air-to-ground visibility.
Helicopters are particularly poorly suited to air-to-ground surveillance.
Furthermore, during the wet season, ground patrols are heavily constrained by a
lack of mobility, and the demining of key ground routes is suspended through out the
area of operations in the light of UNMAS standing down during this period. The
review team discussed with both parties the need to enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness of aerial patrols by deploying, within existing budget ceilings, a fixed wing aircraft fitted with imaging technology to increase the situational awareness
and visibility of the area of operations. Both the Sudan and South Sudan welcomed
the suggestion and agreed to commence formal discussions on the proposal.

Force configuration, equipment and staffing
40. The 2015 military capability study found that the authorized military strength
of UNISFA of 5,326 was appropriate to implement its mandate in Abyei and with
respect to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, and stressed
that any reduction in troop numbers would seriously hamper the Mission’s ability to
continue to secure the situation and prevent conflict between the two communities
or a wider escalation that could involve the two countries. Reference was made to
the size of the Abyei Area, the lack of infrastructure, the challenging terrain and the
additional requirement to execute policing tasks. The strategic review reaffirmed
those findings in the light of the current situation as grounds for m aintaining
UNISFA strength at current levels to enable it to protect civilians, humanitarian
personnel and operations, to continue implementing its multifaceted conflict
mitigation strategy and to ensure the safety and security of the Misseriya and Ngok
Dinka communities, including during the migration season, as well as work with the
parties and maintain the dialogue on the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone through
the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
41. In the light of the vulnerabilities of the Misseriya in the north-western
migration corridor, operational adjustments are required to enhance the protection
role of UNISFA, including through the establishment of additional bases in the
north-western migration corridor, all of which will be undertaken with the
authorized ceiling.
42. When considering all options for enhanced efficiency, mention must be made
of the recommendation of the military capability study to repatriate tank and
artillery units in order to generate two additional force reserve companies. That
recommendation was explored as a cost-saving measure but was not pursued further,
as the net savings were minimal. Furthermore, and as stressed by Ethiopia, the
strategic and deterrent value of the tank and artillery units in Abyei should be borne
in mind. That value outweighs any cost considerations.
43. The scope for Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism activity is
significantly limited by the paralysis in the political process. As already mentioned,
the Mechanism should be supported at its present interim operating capacity for the
coming period. Currently, 557 troops are deployed for force protection in Kadugli
and Gok Machar. It is recommended to continue the suspension of the deployment
of the remaining two companies that are foreseen to bring the Mechanism to full
operational capacity. To enable the currently deployed force to capitalize on further
progress between the parties, the aerial surveillance capacity of the Mechanism
should be enhanced within existing resources, by deploying fixed-wing aircraft with
advanced imaging and visibility capabilities.

10/14

17-05227

S/2017/293

44. Recruitment to UNISFA has been severely hampered by delays in the issuance,
and by the non-issuance, of visas. Steps will be taken by UNISFA to fill all exist ing
vacancies in its staffing table, including for positions such as principal officer,
community liaison officers and human rights officers. This will enhance its capacity
to fulfil vital political, coordination, protection and community -relations functions.
Efforts to fill these positions will require the Sudan to grant visa approvals,
including to community liaison officers.
45. Considerable progress has been made in improving the living and working
conditions of UNISFA staff, in refurbishing and upgrad ing the accommodations,
with special attention paid to the needs of female staff, as well as to improving the
staff welfare and recreation facilities. Drainage systems have been improved to
avoid the flooding of airfields, roads and vulnerable parts of the accommodation
areas. With the acquisition of the land adjacent to the existing Mission headquarters
site, the current helicopter parking and landing sites will be relocated farther away
from the residential areas, thus making the camp safer. The ongoing c onstruction of
the perimeter fence, additional guard towers and the installation of closed -circuit
television systems will greatly enhance the safety and security of the premises. The
living and working conditions in Kadugli and other team sites visited ha ve been
upgraded and are in good condition. Nevertheless, there is a general need to develop
more all-weather roads in the Abyei Area and to expedite the installation of
wastewater treatment plants throughout the Mission area that fully comply with
United Nations environmental standards.

V. Observations
46. It is regrettable that the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan have made
no further progress in the implementation of the 20 June 2011 Agreement, including
the establishment of the joint interim institutions: the Abyei Area Administration, the
Abyei Area Council and the Abyei Police Service. There has also been no significant
progress on the border monitoring mechanism. The relative calm achieved by
UNISFA should ideally have served as a foundation on which meaningful political
processes would be based, joint arrangements and public services would function, and
humanitarian, recovery and development initiatives would take root to benefit all of
the people and residents of Abyei. The reality, however, is that the Sudan and South
Sudan have thus far failed to grasp the political and development opportunities
afforded by the effectiveness of UNISFA in Abyei.
47. All interlocutors unanimously commended UNISFA for successfully
maintaining security in Abyei, and reaffirmed its value in creating stability in the
Area, calling for further extensions of the mandate of UNISFA. There was also
consensus that the 20 June 2011 Agreement was moribund. Without a breakthrough,
the political processes that should drive its implementation were in a state of
atrophy, the joint administrative arrangements foreseen in the Agreement were not
likely to be established in the medium term and, in the current regional context, the
Sudan and South Sudan had little inclination to engage constructively on resolving
the question of the future of Abyei. Against that backdrop, the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee, which should be the primary mecha nism through which the parties
amicably resolved joint issues, had itself become a forum for confrontation.
48. In the face of intractable paralysis in implementing the 20 June 2011
Agreement, the people of Abyei are left with a variety of unfulfilled nee ds. These
include formal administrative, policing and rule of law institutions, as well as the
provision of education, health care, sanitation and clean water, and other public and
human development services and humanitarian assistance. In the resulting

17-05227

11/14

S/2017/293

governance void, the expectations placed on the Mission are high, and UNISFA has
been compelled to respond by improvising to partially compensate for the absence
of joint institutions. In so doing, the Mission has utilized its capabilities in
pragmatic, constructive ways to serve the needs of the people of Abyei and advance
security conditions, including through activities that fall outside the literal
provisions of the original mandate of UNISFA. This practical approach is
exemplified by the work of UNISFA civilian staff; UNISFA military staff, through
liaison officers and meetings of the joint security committee; and UNPOL, in
supporting initiatives that promote intercommunal dialogue and harmony and in
developing and supporting the practice of community pol icing through the
community protection committees.

The imperative of reviving political efforts
49. The inflexible political positions of the Sudan and South Sudan, which are
often mirrored in the stances taken by the high-level Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
community leaders, remain the principal impediment to progress on the Abyei issue.
Both Governments must demonstrate a new spirit of compromise and mutual
accommodation to break the deadlock. They must be requested to enhance their
facilitation of UNISFA operations, and to ensure that all operational obstacles faced
by UNISFA are removed, including issues related to the Athony airport. The
influence of the Government of the Sudan on the Misseriya and the Government of
South Sudan on the Ngok Dinka must be exercised in constructive ways that
advance intercommunal harmony and peaceful coexistence, and ensure the
participation of both communities in UNISFA community policing efforts.
50. In this regard, the conflict over Abyei is fundamentally a political problem that
requires a political solution. Growing instability in South Sudan and the remaining
challenges posed by unresolved issues relating to the Darfur region, and South
Kordofan and Blue Nile States, in the Sudan, have served to distract internatio nal
attention from Abyei, leaving it with an uncertain future. The revival of meaningful
political efforts is essential and, in this regard, the role of the African Union in
resuscitating the dialogue between the Sudan and South Sudan over Abyei is
paramount. UNISFA will continue to lend the support necessary to the effort of the
African Union, in collaboration with the Office of the Special Envoy for the Sudan
and South Sudan, to actively engage at the highest levels with the Governments of
both countries, with a view to restarting political dialogue on Abyei and to creating
conditions conducive to resuming the meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee. This should be the basis for further joint meetings that address
outstanding issues of mutual interest to the Sudan and South Sudan.
51. Alongside renewing political engagement with the parties, the United Nations
will continue to work with the Facilitator of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee in
his liaison and coordination role by addressing to the responsible Government the
operational challenges faced by the Mission.

The need for development and humanitarian assistance
52. Interlocutors conveyed the strongly held view that humanitarian and
development assistance was urgently required to build the resilience of local
communities, to promote self-reliance, to lessen dependence on international support
and to contribute to stability and calm in Abyei. Ensuring access to health care,
providing primary and vocational education, establishing livelihood programmes and
continuing the provision of support to the local security committees will help

12/14

17-05227

S/2017/293

maintain peace, minimize recourse to crime and strengthen community cohesion.
The investment and support provided to local community security arrangements are
bearing fruit and serve as a good example of how relatively low-cost development
initiatives can make a difference. To sustain current achievements, coordinated
engagement is required from the United Nations country teams and NGOs in both
the Sudan and South Sudan, with each agency contributing according to its
comparative advantage. Also required is enhanced coordination between UNISFA
and humanitarian and development actors to maximize the impact of projects and
programmes.
53. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and NGOs should also
redouble their efforts to mobilize funding and resources for programmes in the
Abyei Area and give particular attention to the need for recovery and development
projects and public services, as they are required to consolidate stability and calm.
54. Additionally, enhanced coordination with regard to monitoring and reporting
on human rights violations and potential threats to the civilian population;
strengthened efforts to ensure the protection of children, includ ing through the
establishment of the monitoring and reporting mechanism; and the formulation of a
structured, inter-agency approach to tackling sexual and gender-based violence,
must be priorities. Closer coordination is also required between UNISFA and
humanitarian and recovery actors, both at the field level and in the Juba and
Khartoum United Nations country teams.

Policing functions
55. It is clear that the formation of the Abyei Police Service is not likely in the
short or medium term, and that suspending all current policing work pending the
establishment of a joint police service will effectively defer such work indefinitely.
It is equally clear that the community protection committees, despite their highly
commendable achievements, cannot, as informal organizations of unpaid volunteers,
be relied upon to bear full or long-term responsibility for policing functions in
Abyei. The Government of the Sudan must be urged to routinely approve visas in
order to maintain the authorized ceiling of 50 police officers. While the recent
granting of visas for 10 UNPOL officers is welcome, the Sudan must ensure that
visa approvals for all staff members of UNISFA and the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism are regularly and rapidly granted.

Opportunities to promote intercommunal harmony
56. In contrast to the political deadlock at the Juba and Khartoum level, and in the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and other joint institutions, community -level
relationships between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya communities demonstrate
great potential for deepening mutual understanding and peaceful coexistence at the
local level. There is an urgent need, therefore, to strengthen the community liaison
function, particularly considering the fact that the p romotion of intercommunal
harmony contributes to reducing crime and to enhancing the protective
environment. In this regard, there is a need to prevail upon the Government of the
Sudan to routinely approve visas and related permits for community liaison of ficers.

VI. General recommendations
57. Senior officials in the Sudan and South Sudan and other interlocutors of the
review team underlined that, in the current regional context, the continued presence
17-05227

13/14

S/2017/293

of UNISFA remains critical. Any weakening of its strength would be ill advised, as
this could trigger severe consequences for the security and stability of the Abyei
Area, with regional repercussions.
58. Accordingly, I recommend the extension of the mandate of UNISFA for a
further period of six months, along with the implementation of the proposals
contained in paragraphs 38, 39, 43 and 56 of the present report. The Mission as it
currently stands is optimally suited to successfully discharge the security and other
aspects of its mandate. While the accomplishments of UNISFA must be
acknowledged, the Sudan and South Sudan must also recognize that an open -ended
mandate is indefensible.
59. In conclusion, I wish to extend my gratitude and appreciation to Majo rGeneral Hassen Ebrahim Mussa, the former Acting Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNISFA, and to Brigadier General Zewdu Kiros Gebrekidan,
Officer-in-Charge of UNISFA during the period of the review, for their efforts to
enhance peace and stability in the Abyei Area, often under very difficult conditions.
I also commend the Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan, Nicholas
Haysom; the Head of the United Nations Office to the African Union in Addis
Ababa, Haile Menkerios; the African Union, including the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel; and the Government of Ethiopia, for their active engagement
in support of the stabilization of the Abyei Area.

14/14

17-05227
