UNITED NATZONS / NATIONS UNZZ3.S

SECURITY

COUNCIL,

OFFICIAL

RECORDS
NINETEENTH
YEAR
rd MEETING: 13 MARCH 1964
&me SEANCE: 13 MARS 1964
DIX-NEUVIhME
ANNdE

1103
CONSEIL

DE StiCURITd

DOCUMENTS

OFFICIELS

NEW

YORK

TABLE

OF

CONTENTS

P404
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ll03/Rev.l)
.*.**....*...*....
+
Adoption of the agenda l *.**.*....*....*....*,,,*......
1
Letter dated 28 Deoember 1983 from the Permanent Representative of
Cyprus addresred to the President of the Seourity Counoil (S/5488):
Lettw dated 13 Maroh 1964 from the Permanent Reprewntatlve of
Cyprus addressed to the President of the Sewrity Counoil (S/5598)
1
TABLE

DES

MATIliRES

Ordre du jour proviroire (S/Ageenda/llO3/Rev,l~ bbbbbbbbbbbb..
A$+ptton de l’ordre du jour bb*b*obbb*bbbb.bbbbb,bbbbb.*b
Letire, en elate du 25ddoembre 1953, adrerr6e au PrCident du Conaeil
de e6ourit6 par le representant permanent de Ch.yprs (S/6488):

Lettre, en date du 13 mars 1964, adrcssh au Prhidont
du Conseil de
s&urM
par le reprhentant
permanent de Chypre (S/5598). , . . .

S/PV.P103

1
1

1

NOTE

Relevant doouments of the Seourlty Council are publlehed In quarterly
supplements to the Offiofd
Reoorda.
Symbols
of Unfted
Netions
oombined
with
figures.
Mention
a United Nations
cboument.

rn
oomposed of oapltal Jotters
a symbol
indicates
a nferenoe
to

documenta
of suoh
I
I

I

Los dooumentepertlnenta du Coneoil de rburltb sont pub1168
danedoe
euppl&mente
trImestrlels
aux Documents
offfcfefs.
Lea totes dee doouments
de I’Organisetlon
des Nations
&ties
se oomposent
de lettrer
texte

sfgdffe

majwoules
pu’ll s’agft

et de ohffftw.
d’un

document

La simple
mention
de I’Organlsatfon.

d’unc

oote

danr

un

Present:
T
BolIvta , Bra:
Coaet, Marc
Republtos, I
Northern Ire
Provi’

1, Adoption
a. Letter ds
Repreee
dent of th
Letter 1
Reprreen
dent of tb
The agenda
Lattrr
datrd
Roprrsmtc
of the Socu
Lettrr
dot
Roprrsrr
drnt of tt

1. The PRE
oislonr takel
of this Item,
invite the 1
Qreeaeto pa

3. The COW
to whomI no
4. The SEC
that in my r(

12 Mat-oh I
Nutiono~enc
establishedI
to report El0
.9idWable

@

ELEVEN HUNDRED AND THIRD MEETING
Held In New York, on Friday, 13 March 1964, at 6 p.m.
Tenw

MILLE CENT TROlSliME SiANCE
b New York, Ir wndredi
13 mars 1964, b 16 hewer.
Prhident: M. LIU Chleh(Chine).
Prdsenh: Los reprhzentante dez Etutz auk-ante:
Bollvle, BrBzil, Chine, C&e-dWoIre, Etats-Unls
d’Am&rlque, Franoe, Maroo,
Norvbge, Royaume-Uni
de CWande-Bretagne
et d*Irlandedu Nerd, TohBooelovaqule
ot Unlon des R&publlqueeeooialilrteesovl6t1quea.

Prmldent: Mr. LIU Chieh (China).
Present: The representative8of the followingSt&err:
Bolivia, Brazil, China,Czeohoelovakia,Franoe,Ivory
Coast, Moroooo,
Norway, Union of Soviet Soolallzt
Republloz, Unlted Kingdom of Oreat Britain and
Northern Ireland andUnlted Statesof America,
Pravlsionol

agenda

(S/Agenda/l

103/Rov.l)

Ordrr

du lour

provisoirr

(S/Agenda/l

103/Rev.l)

1. Adoptlonde l’ordre du Jour.
1. Adoptionof the agenda.
2. Letter dated26Deoember1963from the Permanent. 2. Lettre, en date du 26 dkembre 1963, udreseee
au Presidentdu Conseilde s4ourlt8par le rep&Representativeof Cyprus addreseedto the Prezlzentant permanentde Cby-pre (S/6488):
dent of the Seourity
Counoil(S/6488):
Letter dated 13 Maroh 1984from the Permanent
Lettre, en date du 13 mm 1964, adrezzhe au
Reprezentativeof Cyprur ad&erred to Ule PreriPrbzldent du Coneeil de z&ourlt& par le reprb
eentantpermanentde Chypre (S/SS98).
dent of the Seourlty CounoIl(S/6698).
Adoption

of thr

Adoption

ogonda

Theagendawadadopted.

do I’ordrr

du lour

Ltordfe do jour est adopt&

Latter
doted 26 Docrmbor
1963 from the Pormanrnt
Roprrrrntotivr
of Cyprus
addrossod
to the Prosldent
of the Security
Council
(S/%88):
Lettrr
dahd
13 March
1964 from
the Permanent
Roprrsontatlvr
of Cyprus
addrossrd
to thr Prrsident of the Socurlty
Council
(S/5598)

Lottro,
on datr
du 26 dkombrr
1963, adrosrk
au PrMdrnt
du Conroll
do s6curit6
par lo ropr&
srntont
permanrnt
do Chyprr
(S/5488):
Lottrr,
en datr
du 13 mars
1964, adrossbo
au
Prbsidrnt
du Consell
do s6eurit6
par Ir rrp+
sontont
permanrnt
do Chyprr
(S/5598)

1. The PRESIDENT;In aooordanoewith prevtour deoirionr taken by the Counoilduring the oonzideratlon
of thlz item, I rhzll, with the oonzentof the Counoll,
invite the reprezsntrtivee of Cyprur, Turkey and

1. Le PRESIDENT(tradult de 1Qnglair): Conform6
mrnt k la dblzion prlee ant6rleurement par 10
Conrei!, lore de llexamen de la quertion inoorlte
P l’ordre du jour, j%Weral, avea l~zrrentiment
du Conzril, ler repr&zentants de Chypre, de lr
Turqule et de la Orboe k prendre part B noed&ib&rationr.
Sur PMf(rtlon dit Pf4Ofdcnt, M. S. Roerfdee
(Cam), M. 0. Emlp (?Wqtde) et M. D. S. BItefor
(Qfdoe) prennentphoe 1141table du Conroll.
1. Lo PRESIDENT(tradult de 1Wglals)r C&to Aunion du Conrefl de rburlt6 a &6 oonvoqub danr lea
d$lris 108 plus rapidor Ir la eulto dbna dsmonde
urgante du reptirenturt permanent de C4ypre, br

OrOOoeto putiolprte

in the dirouarion.

At &a fntihtion of the Pruefdsnt,‘Mr. S. Roreidee

(Cyprus), Mr. 0, EraJp(Tutkey) and Mr. D. S. Bf)sfos
fQree00)kn3kplroer at the Crnmoilk&lo.

2. The PREgIDENTt Tbia meetingof the W%rity
Cowoil has been oonvenodat very rhort notloe ln

rerponre to the urgent requeot of the Wrmanent Repre-

rentstlvr of Oyprus, His l*tter har ken olrouloted in
doo~monts/aseeu andtr nowbefore the msmhsrrof
tlla oouanil.

lot&o IL.6t4 dlrtrihubo mu0 la ootr Vsaes

rt rue

~~ns~fihtaukt ontre lrs mrtns La memf 1y1 61
.
3. Ls Consellentendradkbord le Secr&alre g&&al,

3. The Counollwill firat heartheSeoretary-General,
to whomI nowgive the floor.
4. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
It. muy be reonlled

auquel Je donna 1~.parole.
4. Le SECRETAIRE GENERAL (troduit del’nnglnle):
VOW VOW souviendrez eune doute que dnns lo rapport
[S/66932/]
que j’al adross
au Conseil bier, 12 mara,
jbl indiqub que Jo comptale que la Force ties Nations
Unies chargbe du malntlen de lu puix B Chypre 88,.
rnit rnpldement misc cur pled et que j’espbrnis pouvoir, dons un lxef d6ln1, rendre compte nu Consell

thot in my report [S/65D3] u to the Counofl yesterday,
12 Muoh I oxpre~sed my oonfidence that the Unitod
Nutlons Peace-lteeplng ~oroe In Cypruo would be soon
estubllshed and indionted that I hoped shortly to be able
to report aome positive developments.
It is with ooneidernble grntifiontion
that I um able to inform the
--

1

t3unoil that the Fame now is aotually betngoonatituted.

de oertaine faltr poritifa \ oat @rd. CW aveo uae
satisfaotion que fe rule en meoure de dire
au Conseil que la For00 eat aotuellementen vole
wpproaohedabout providing oontingentethat those d%tre oonetitu6e. Depuiplhler aoir, J’al regu de8
aeeuranoeefermee et offlolelles, de troie de8 goucontingentawill be available. TheseQovornmentsare
vernementaB qui j’ai demand68’Ile pouvalentfourCanada,Ireland and Sweden,With regard to eaohof
there Qovernmrntr
certain oondltioar andprorequlnlr dee oontingente, que oes contingents seraient
dieponibles.Cesgouvernementseontoeux du Canada,
sltaa were defined whtoh either have b+enmet or in
my view oan be oopedwith, I may addthat there are
de 1’Irlande et de la Subde.Chaounde 088gouver
other promleing prospeotafor troops. In theseoirnements avalt poe6 oertainea oonditionaprealablee
qul sont ddjR remplies ou qul, B monavls, pourront
oumetanoee, therefore, I am nowable to state to the
Counoil that the Foroe will be eetabliehedwithout
l’btre.
J’ajouterai qu’il exist0 d’autres perspecfurther delay and that elements of it will soonbe tives favorableed’obtenir de nouvellestroupes. Dans
deployedIn Cyprus, Indeed,a small party of Canadian 088 condltlons, Je puia done dblarer au Consell
que 1~ Force aera or&e aana autre retard et que
offioers will be en route for Cyprus tonigL
dee Bldmentsde cette force seront blent& d8ploy6e
B Chypre. En fait, un petit groupe d’offlclers canadlenspartira oe solr pour Chypre,
6. Thle morning,I reoeived aoommunioatlon
through
6. J’al requ oe matin, par l~Interm6dlelredu reprb
the PermanentRepreeentatlveof Turkey to theUnited sentantFermanentde la Turqule, unecommunloation
Natlone whioh has since been itwed a8 a Seourlty
qul a 6th publi&e depuia en Int que dooumentdu
Councildooument[S/569e],l/ I immediatelyrequeeted Coneell [S/6696u]. J’a1 lmmbctlatementpr16 le rethe PermanentRepresentativeto oonveyto hisQovern- presentant permanentde la Turqule de tranemettre
B son gouvernementl’expresslon de ma profonde
ment my serious oonoern and my urgent appealto
exercise the utmost restraint. A formal reply to his
lnqui&ude ainai qu’un nppel pressant pour que la
plus grande mod&ratlonsoit axerche. Une r6ponee
oommunioatlon
hasalsobeensent.
offlclelle B 58oommunloatlon
aBgalementBtBenvoy&e.
6. Le Consell salt aussl que j’al d&ja requ de la
6. The Counoil1salro awareof the pledesof voluntary finanoial oontrlbution whloh I have already repart de plusleure gouvernementsde8 promeseesde
oontrlbutlona flnanoi)ree volontalree qul aesurent
oeived from aeveral Qovernmente,whiohanour’ the
requisite finanoial support for the Unlted Nations l’appul financler requls pour la Force dee Nations
Unlee oharg& du maintien de la palx B Chypre. Je
Peace-keeingForoe in Cyprus. I am most grateful
to all themeGovernmentsfor their ready andgenerous euis extremementreoonnalsrantenvere tous oeegouvernementsde leur r@onaerapide et g6n6reuee.
response.
7. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprue): My Qovernmenthasarked 7. M. ROSSIDES(Chypre) (traduit de l%@aie]:
for thie meetingbecausewe havehadoneof the most Mon gouvernementa demand6cette r&mion parce
seriousthreat.9of invaeionof Cyprusthatwehave been que nous avons requ llune dee menacesd’invasion
de Chypre lee plus gravea auxquellesnoueayoneeu
faoed with up to this time, in the form of an offiolal
notedated19 Maroh 1984deltvered totheGovernment B faire face &equ’B prbeent; I1 r’agit d’une note
of Cyprue[S/b596,Anmx] whiohperemptorllydemands offlolelle en date du 12 marl 1964 hdreae&e au
that a number of things bs done lmmedlatelyby the
Qouvernementohypriote [S/5696, aanexe], exigeant
de fapon pdremptolre que notre puvernement fasse
Governmentof Cyprue, failiag whiohtheTurkishGo+
ernment rays that it will exeroise it6 allegedright of
1mmOdiatement
un oertain nombre de ohoaea,faute
de quo1 le Gouvernementturo declare qu’il exeroera
intervention in the Internal affair6 of Cyprus, by foroe.
par la force aon prbtendu drolt d%tervention danr
lee affairee int6rleurer de Chypre.
8. Danr la note, on present0 oette exipnos oommr
8, Thlr ir prereated In the note a8 beingunrelated
to
&ant lane rapport aveo le retard rurvenu danr
the delay in the dirpatoh of the United NatlonaForoe
l’envoi de la Force der Nations Unles, mat6oomme
but as b&g related-to the aotual situation ln Cyprus,
whioh the Turkirh Government ohoores to desoribe &ant en llairon aveo la situation aotuelleh Chypre,
que 18 Gouveraementturo Jug8 bon de d6orlrr an de8
in brmr that are aounrealirtio Pndrooontrary to the
term88 rl peu r6allrter et rl QloignQsde8 fait6
Wual foot8 as to remind one-1 am afraid I muut rry
tbir , with all due rrrrpwt ,to theCiovernmeat
of Turkey
r&&r qu’ilr font ranger - jo dois malheureuremerit 10 dire au Gouwaement turo aveo tout le
-0i the unirnq#nabl~falrehoodr uttorad by Hitler oa
rrrpeot qu4 164 lut cbir - aux mar~r
iavr8b
flkwtoo~y thrtc the grtrter the llr, the more rrrily it
&dnBlabl60 pzWW30 par Hitler, qui p8rtolt de l4
tnwmd,
folul Only think that tlut ii the mtive of
thldrie qur plur lr menrongr ert grand plur on y
the Twkleh Government in presenting this story here
-and it la on the baslsof tN8 etory that the Turkish
ajoute faollement fol. de ne vole paa dlautre motlf

Sinoe lab yr&mia~

I have reoeived firm and aWial
aesuranoei from three of the GovernmenteI have

grande

Government oluims n right to intervene in Cyprus
and IS threatening to 1ntorvono In various wnys,

qul alt pu lnclter le Gouvernemenl
turc h nou8
contar Icl cette hlstolre - et c’est tour la bRse de
cette histoire clue le Gouvernement turc prtStends’nrroger le drolt d’intervenlr
h Chypre et menace d’y
intervenlr de dlfffbrentes fuc;ons.
9. En d6pit de coke note, peut-btre n’aurlons-nous
pas demand6 cette rbunlon du Consell ce solr 81 la
note n’uvuit pas 6!6 sui*rle pur des 6v6nements qul
ont nbondnmment prouv6 cl110 In Turqule u eu et 8
encore l’ltltention
tl’envuhir Chypre. Je crnlns clue
l’lnlentlon
n’alt Btb d’envahlr Chypre (‘7 solr. sl

9. In spIk3 of this note, we might not have requested
this meeting tonight were it not for the fuot that the
note hns been followed by other olrcumstances whioh
m&o it abundtlntly clonr thut it bus been tmd it Is the
lntentlgn of ‘I’urltcy to Inundu Cyprus. I am afraid the
intention WIH to Invade Cyprus tonlght. If 11 is not

2

IO ulle
I are
1 vole
u dee
m
foS”UE
r aient
rnada,
SUVBlc

lables
1rront
‘apecDalUY
onEm
et que
>loybe
c ana~eprboation
ent
du
.e renettre
>fonde
JU8 la
tponse
voybe,
de la
me de
lurent
atlons
x-8. Je
8 gou-

Lavadadtonieht, it wfll beinvadedat oomeother timeCbypre n’est par mvahie 06 roir, elle 1s wa h
but the obf&t is to invadsCyprus, beoauseit la he+. un autre moment- ma18l’objeotif est l~lnvarlon de
lieved that only through invaeion oan the einister Chypre, paroe que l’on peneeque n’eet eeulement
objeotive of partition be attained.
par l’invaeion que l’on rbuaslra B attolndre l’objeotif
sinistre quol’on reoherohe:le partage.
10. It is perhaperealised by nowthat partitionir out 10. Peut-btre oomprend-onmaintenantquelepartage
of the question.Any reasonablepersonrealises that est hors de queetion. Toute pereonneraironnahle88
partition, whiohhaeprovedthemootdestruotivepolioy rend oompteque 1s partage, qui e’eat rbvbl$ btre la
wherever it hasbeenapplied,wouldbe inoonoeivablo politique la plus deatruotive qu\ aolt partout oh elle
in Cyprus, where the peopleare interepersed,80that,
a btb appliqube, serait lnoonoevableII Chypre, o8
in order to oreate partition in that small island, the 10s dlvera seoteurede la populat.ionaont mblangbe
populationwould have to be ehifted by foroe, with all
de telle sorte que, pour rballaer lo partage dane
the misery that that would ectail. And then, after
oette petite lie, I1 faudralt tranefbrer dee groups8
partition, there wouldinevitably bea greater struggle, de populatlonpar la foroe, avec toutee lea misbree
inoreaeedhatred, deeper divieion and morebloodehed,
que oela mtrafneralt. Et ensulte, aprbs 1s partage,
reeulting In a greater threat to the peaoeof the ieland, 11y aurait inbvitablementdes luttes plus vlolentes,
the relationsbetweenGreeoc,and Turkey, and theeituadee haines plus vivea, une division plus profonde
tion In the Mediterranean,
et de nouvelles effusion8 de sang, oe qui oompromettrait enoore davantage la paix dans llfIe, lee
relations entre la Grbce et la Turquie et la eituation
dansla Mbdlterranbe.
11. Therefore, it ha8 been realieed-quite rightly11, Cleat pourquoi on a 9ompri8, et B juste tltre,
that partition oannotbe aohieved.Indeed, the resoluque le partagebtait Irrbalisable. La rbeolutionadoption [S/6574]g adoptedby the SeourityCounoil[1102nd t6e le 4 mars [1102bmesbanoe]par le Conaeilde
meeting]makesthie abundantlyolear.
ebouritb (S/6576~] ne laiaae auoundouteBoe sujet..
12, I ehall nawgive an aooountof whathappened
after
12, Je voudraie malntenantexposeroe qul stee.tprothe adoptionof the resolution by the Seourity Counoil,
dult aprbs l’adoption de la rbsolution du Conneil
in order to showwhat is behindthese move6of the
de s6curit6, pour montrer oe qul ~8 oaohederribre
Turklrh Government, itr deolarationr, itr aotioneoea inltlatives du Qouvernementturo, oee dbolathrough ltr ageStoin Cyprur, rlnoe the adoptionof
rations, oes aotee- aooomplispar l’intermbdlalre
the re8olution. andthir latent move,whichhar brought de sea agenlr B Chypre - et ausri derriere oette
member@
oi the Counoilhere this evening,
dernibre lnitlative qui a amenbla rbuniondu Conreil
ce soir.

3.

glais]:
parce
vaeion
me eu
b note
Be au
:fgearh
fans0
faute
eoera

I dans
omme
CIans
omme
kwe,
en der
fait0

13. After ieeuing the note, tha Prime Mini&r of
Turkey addreareda party meetingand raid, a8 reported by Reuters,that he wouldwait untiltoni~ht and
that “if bur oondiMonsprocluoeno reaotion am&g the
Qreeksof the irland. I will makealanditlp~.Thue. not
to have aeked for the oonveningof a n%ting 02the
Counoiltonight would have oonrtituted a tremendous
responribility for the Qovernmentof Cypr~a and for
me, a8 itr repreoentative. Wecould not havefailed to
ask for suohh meetingthis eveningin the faoe of explioit threat8 of the use of foroe againstCyprus and
in view of the terrible oonrequenoeaof ruoh Potion:
the blood#hed,the fighting andao forth, I OM tell the
Seourity Counoil that every Cypriot whoir a Cypriot
will at this momentfight for the territorial integr1t.y
of hir oountry to the lart man, The Governmentir
determinedto proteot the f&pity of Cyprus, whioh,
throughoutitr longhistory of 4,000yearn, har beena
ringle unit,

POUIO-

out 16
rmab
de 1r
fa any
motif
llOU8
1‘963de
1 EI‘al-ce d’y
3--IlOULI

r siln
Lts qul
!U et n
28 clue
Pil,. Sl

14, Henoe, we have 00&M me thir we*

tooxgorr

the wholeroh6methat ib behind%wkeyU plioy,

15. I should like to mention anoiher faotor whioh has
tnade this meeting neoessary. I have had a telephonio
oommuniontion
with the Aotlng Foreign Minister of
Cyprus, Mrs. Soulioti, who said that, in reply to the
Turkleh note, she had delivered n note from the
Government of Cyprus to the Government of Turkey.
The Ambnssudor of Turkey in Cyprus would not take
the note. She therefore read it out to Mm, hut. having
heard it, he &ill refused to aooopt It. These high-

13. Aprbe la publioatlon de la note, le Premier
Mlnistre de Turqule a prir la parole lorn dkne
reunion du part1 et, d’ap& les rapports de l’agenoe
Router, fl aurait dit qu’il attendralt 1urqu’Boe roir
et qui Vi ML) ooniiltions no proioqiient auoune
rbaotion parmi les Qreor de l*fIe, j~ordonnerailo
dbbarquement”.Ainrl, si nousn’avlonspas demandb
la convocation d’une rbunion du Conseil oe roir lo
Gouvernement de Chypre, et moi-meme,qui en auis
le reprbBeentant,
aurionsaraum4 une6normererponsabllitb. Nous btlons obligbe de demanderquo lo
Conseil 80 rbunirse oe aoir, btant donnb loo menaoee
expreseer de reoours b la force oontre Chypn ot
lea terrible8 oonabquenoes
d’un ta1 aotw lee effurrionrr de oang, ler oombatr, eta, Je puis dire au
Conreil de rdourittl quo tous lee Chypriotes dignelr
de 08 nom vont 10 battre jurqu% la mort pour dbfen&e l%&bgritb trrrltoriale de leur p B)tLe gouvernemantert rbrolu B prot6gerl’intbgri s deChypro,
qui, tout aulongd’unehirtoire qul remontoB 4 000 ana,
a-forfnb unb rattle uniM territoriale,
X4, Ndur rommtr dbno OonuuI14 oa roir pour cl&
voiler 160plnnr qul se oaohentderrlbra la politiqus
de la Turqule.
15. Jo voudrals mentlonner
un nutre
fncteur qui
n rendu cette r6unlon nBcessalre. Je me euls entretenu
par t616phone aver le Ministre
des affalres
6trnngbres
par int6rlm de Chypre, Mme Soullotl,
qui m’a fait savolr que, en r6ponse h la note turque,
elle avnit remls une note du Gouvernement chypriote
au Gouvernament
de lu Turquie.
L’Amhassadeur
de Turquie h Chypre u refus6 d’nccepter
cetle
note.
Mme Soulioti lui cn n n6nnmoins donnB
lecture,

3

main, aprb8 llavoir 6oouUo, llmbassadour de
Turqulo a porrict6 danesonrofus de l’aooeptor. Ces
mOthodesoavalibres - je ne r6p6teral paa 1 quo1
elles me font songer, Je l’a1 d6jh dit - appellent
une action du Conseilde s6ourit6.
16. Reportone-nousmalntenantB la lettre dont le
16. Let u8 look at the letter whioh has been oiroulated
texte a 6t6 diatribu6 aufourd’hui sur la demande
today by Turkey, to wbioh the note in appended, The
de la Turquie et R laquelle la note en questlonest
Turkish representative and the Forei
Minister of
jointe en annexe. Le representant de la Turquie et
Turkey allege that sinotf the adoption OYthe resolution
the Government of Cyprus has proceeded to perseoute
le Ministre des affaires Btrang6res de TurquIe
soutlennentque, depuis l’adoptlon de la r6solutlon
the Turks-they oall it a massaore of the Turks-with
du Consell, le Ciouvernementchyprlote s’est llvr6
the aim of eliminating the Turkish element of Cyprus,
B des pers6cutlons centre lea Turos - oe qu’tls
It is alleged that the Turks in Cyprusare in danger of
appellent dee massacres- en vue dt611m1nerde
being extinguished by the aatlun the Government of
Chypre 1’616mentturc. On pretend que les Turcs
Cyprus took immediately -Ster the adoption of the
de Chypre sont menacesd’extermlnation par les
resolution of 4 Maroh 1964 and sinoe that time.
mesuresprlses par le Gouvernement
chyprlote Imm&
diatementaprbsl’adcptlon de la r6solutIon du 4 mars
1964et deputeoette date.
17. Quels sont lea falts? 11sont 6t6 rapport6s par
17, What arethefaots?Thbdefaots have beenrepca’ted
by oorrespondents in Cyprus of the United States Presb,
lea oorrespondantsde la presse des Etata-Unis
B
_
Chypre, qul ne peuvent 6tre consid&& oommeparwhioh oannot be regarded as biased in favour of the
tlaux pour le point de vue ohypriote. Volcl les faite,
Cypriot view. The faots, as they have been reported,
tels qu’ils ont 6t6 rapport&: le oalmear6gn6 pendant
are these:for hvo days after the adoptionofthe resolutlon, oalm prevailed. The time was usedin giving
lea deux Sours qui ont suivl l’adoption de la &sodifferent interpretations of the resolution, Cyprus lution, Pendantces deux jcurs, on a donn6dlverses
saying that it entirely upheldthe prinoiplesfor whioh Interor6tatlons de la r6solutIon du Consell, Chypra
Cyprur rbod, and Turkey saying: aYor, but 1t also disarit que oette r6solutlon corrcborait entibret&
ensureswhat Turkey wants.” Everyone seemedquite lee prinoipes que defendChypre, et la Turqule d&
olarant que cela Btalt exact, male que la r6solution
satisfied, But what happenedon the third day-that Is,
on Saturday7 We heard from the Foreign Mtnlrter of
assurait 6nalementoe que la Turquie d6siraIt. Tout
Turkey-and thir was quite oontrary to the spirit of
le monde-somblalt 6tre plelnementsatjsfait. Maii
the resolution-that the only solution of the problem que sleet-11pass6le troisibme Jour- o’est-h-dire
of Cyp~a would be partition and federation, by the
samedi?Ce Jour-18, le Mlnlstre dena&free &ranrhifting of populatlonr; he addedthat no other oolutlon g6rer de TurquIe - et oeoi btait tout B fait
was aooeptable.Am I have oald, this is oontrary to
oontralre B l’esprit de la r6solution- a declare que
tbe wholo conceptof the Seourlty Ccnmoilresolution, la seule solution au problbme de Chypre seralt le
partageet la f6dbratlon, aveo transfert de population;
which calls for the appointmentof a mediator to
mediate betweenthe ti+%rider and find a solution. I1 a ajout6qu’auouneautre solutionn$taIt aooeptable.
CommeJe l’a1 dit, cola eat contraIre B l’Id6e m6me
The Turkirh Governmentby saying: *We wantfederadont s’inspire la r6solution du Consell de s6ourit6,
tion through the shifting of populations”wantedto
qui recommandela nominationd’un m6diateurdevant
prooludo any negotiation, any mediatton.
stemnlouerR favoriser unesolutlonuprbs avoir prls
oontaothveo lee deux camps,Le Gouiernemantt&c
voulalt etnp6ohertoute n6gooIation,toute m6dIation,
et olest pourquol 11 a d6olar6: “Nous voulons une
f6d6ration au moyen d’un t.ransfert de populations.”
18, At thtlr point I shouldlike to olarify the meaning 18. Je voudrais, P oe atade, pr6olaer le sensdrr
of Y&ration” and “partitiona. aFederatlonm
is used termes ~f6d6ratlonwet %nrtagefi. Le mot WfBdAin tbir cane beoauseit soundsbetter than apartitionnt &ion* eat employ6 dans‘oe oas paroe qu’ll so&
mieux quo le mot vartage”, malo 11sfgnlfle exaotc
but it mean0 oxaotly the aamo thing. In ite proper
ment la m6tne ohore. Au aenspropro, la f6d6ration
rrnae, federation irr a unifying movement,a pooitlvo
movement, For inrtanoe, in Switzerland the oantonr ort un mouvemontd~unifioation,onmouvomentpositif,
woro origlnaliy Merent Staten, with oomplotely Par oxomple, on suiene,lee oantonr6ttalont,B l’origine, doa Etatr diatinot@i ils pratlqualont doa pelt
&ftment
Aioles,ogposodto oeohothor andat timer
tiquo8 entibrement diil(rmntea,
rbpporrirnt
10s uw
Qbrwrr. wi ?i oaoh OtluPl eventually, aa the world doirp&prd krwudr poooeandunderrt@ding, they united aux rutPoe et a9 falrrient parfoio Ia orrel k mesure que le mondeR6~01~6vers la paPx et l’entente,
and-formed a federation. That 1squite &ffer&t from
forcing the peopleof an Island, whoare Interspersed ces cuntons se sent unls et ont form6 une f6d6rntIon.
C’est
lh un processustout h fait dlff6rent
de celui
and have been living togetharalmost everywhere, to
h forcer
les habltunts diune ilo, qul
olltit and form different prrrts of that island, to breuk qui consiste
ensemble
et qul ont toujours
v6cu cBte B
it up into different unlts and than saying; *L,etus now vlvent
federate.@TouseRroughsimile, it IRlike thedifference c&e dam3 presque
toutes
les r6glons
du pays, h &re
et ti occuper
des parties
distinctes
de
betweentuklng two vases and Joi:lIngthem together, transf6r6s
wbloh
15 federation;
and taking one vase, broakhg
It
cette
Re, ?I briser
Chypre
tin plusleurs
unIt65
diffbrentes
pour tllre onsuIte: nFormons
une f6d6into two plocos
and then saying;
nNow thut we huve
broken
the VUYO, lel lis federate
it.”
rutlon.N
Ln dlff6rence
est h peu prB5 In r&me
que
IO~R~II’CIII
pl-end doux vusos et qu’on lea joIn^, 1’~

banded mot&da-I abail not ropeat what they remind
one of1 I hove already said tbia-oall for aotlon by the
Seourity Counoil.

h 1 ‘autre,

ce qul repr6sente

la f6dbratlon,
en deux

prcntl un v:me, qu’on le brlse

4

ou lorsqu’otl

morceauxet.

19. Nt
tion WI
oourse
of the ’
hprdeh
majori
;fs~

objeoti
-anneI
expans
pariltic
regard
affairs
not be
oontral
and00.

20. Tk
prooee
happen
day th
elemen
by mao
the top
Saturds
the we{
seven
oarryir
oasualt
whatso
21. Tt
olashb
attaok,
wasan
of 4 Ma
were k
200081
or reta

22. Iv
howsa(
e moeq
ardler
f lee de
but in a
It wanI
to aoe,
sz?

Qr
i&e:
w&at01

23. I
friend
uotedtc
with hi
to restc
of the
8eoond
“As
rospo

I

cur

de
Gee
h quo1

er.

)pellent

dont le
;emande

,tion eat
wlie 6t
rurqule
solution
Bt

liVl’6

9 qu’ils
Lner de
a Turcs
par lee
3 immh4

mar8

Ms par
-Unis B
me pares falta,
pendant

la r&oiliverses
Chypre
bremsnt
puie dBisolution
bit. Tout
Pt. Mals
t-h-dire
8 &ranB fait
Far6 que
/erait le
?ulation;
,eptable,
be m&me
}6ourite,
ir devant
mir prls
tent turc
gdiatlon,
lone une
latione,R
Cene de0
t “f6db
Ii1 uonne
I exaotc
ld6ration

rt positif,

( B l’orlm
lee pall100 unu
b8 lime=
*enter&,
%rntion.
de celul
no, qui
I cm3 h
8, h &I-e
nctes de
it&3 difAe f&b&me quo
~olnt l’un
orsc~u’on
rceuux et

qu’on dit snauiter eMaintenantqur nounavon%oamrb
le vase, f6d&rons-le.n
19. Now, it ie 80very nalveto presentthis a8 federa19. 11eat vraiment un peunaiTde presenter oomme
tion when really it i8 partition
that i&i metWt.
Ana Ji
une f4dQrationoe qul eet un r&alit6 un partage. Et ei
oour@epartition is required not to protect the rights
llon demandele partage, oe n’esf paspour protbger
les drolts de la minorit turque, qul, blen entendu,
of the Turkish minority whowouldthen suffer greater
hardships-and80 wouldthe Oreek people,the Week
aouffrlrait beauooupplus, de mgmequela population
majority, beoauee there would be greater strife and greoque, la majorIt grecque, car 11y auralt alors
fighting along the borderline and probably greater
plus de troublea et de oombats1slongde la fronttbre
oalamities-rather partition is required to aohlevethe et probablementde plus grands desastrseenocre;
objeotlve that the Turkieh Qovernmenthas in mind on demandele partage pour atteindre l’obleotlf visd
-annexation, Therefore, we really have here an par le Gouvernementturc, qul est l’annexion.11s’agit
done en reallte d’une polltlque expanelonnlsteet
expansionietioand ohauvinletio polioy whlohaims at
partition andannexation,a polioy whiohof oouraehas chauvlne dont le but est le partage et I’annexlon;
11a’aglt d’une polltlque qul, blon entendu,tient uniregard only to what might be helpful in the internal
affairs of Turkey at the present time but whiohwill
quementcomptede ce qul pourrait btre favorablepour
not be at all helpful in the long run, aa it is a polioy
l’lnstant aux affalres lnterleures de la Turqule, ma18
contrary to all moral principles andall ideasof unity
qul ne lul seralt pas du tout favorable h longue
andco-operationin this world,
BchBance,d’une polltlque contralre II tous lee prlnclpes morauxet h toutee leaid&esdluniteet de ooopb
ration dansoe monde.
20. They now say that the Cyprus Governmenthas 20. 11sdltlent maintenant que le Gouvernementde
proceededto a massaoreof the Turks. But what Chypre est en train de massacrer lea Turcs. Male
happened?For two days all was quiet, On the third
que s’est-11 passe en realite? Peadantdew Joure,
day there was a premeditated attaok by Turkish
tout a et& calme. Le troielbme Jour, 11 y a euB
elemente-Turkish terrorlete-in Paphoe,an attack
Paphoa une attaque prOmedlt6e de la part de terby machine-guneandheavyweapons,with firing from
rorletes turcs, arm66 de mltrailleuees et d’armee
the top of a minaret againsttha populationwhoon a
louraes et tlrant du haut d’un minaret 8ur une popuSaturday were lnnooentlymakingtheir purchasesfor
lation lnnocente qul falsalt le earned1aen aohats
the week-end,This attaok resulted in the killing of
pour le week-end, II y a eu 7 Qrecs tuer, 33 bles86e
#even Greeke, the woundingof thirty-eight and the
et pluu de 200 personneaont 6th emmenees
oomme
carrying-away a8 hostages of over 200, with no otagela, alors que lea Turos n’ont subi auoune
oaeualtler on the part of the Turk8 andno retaliation
pert9 et qu’enl’ooourrenoe11n’y a paseu la moindre
whateoeveron that oooarionagainstthe Turks.
rlpoete centre eux.
21. TN8 was not even an attaok, it was not even a 21. 11 ne s’agiesalt done pas d’une 6ohauffourle
olaehbetweenfightera. Itwae a murderoueunprovoked entre combattants, mals d’une attaque crimlnelle,
attack, by those who now olalm to be the viotlms. It
saris la molndre provocation, perp&rOe par ceux qul
was an attaokafter thepaoifylngeffeotof the resolution se posentmalntenanten vlctlmes. C’btalt une attaque
of 4 Maroh, an attaokin whloh-I repeat-sevenQreeks
aprbe lea effete apalsantede la resolutiondu 4 mare,
were killed andthirty-eight were wounded,with over et, je le r&pets, 7 Grece ont 6t6 tube, 38ont 6tb
200oarried away anhostageswithout anyprovocation bleeaes et plus de 200 peraonnesont BtB priaer
or retaliation on their part.
oomme otagee aana qu’ll y alt eu de leur part la
moindreprovocation nl la molndrerlpoete.
22. I wouldtake this oooaaionto sayhowregrettable,
howeadit wasto seea saoredplaoeIike the minaret of
a mosque,a plaoe revered and respeotedby alI reardleer of their rell onbeoau~eit ie areiigioue edif ioe dedloatedto J , ueednot in the servloe of Cod
but in anothereervloe-for thekillingof humanheingo,
It wana aaorllegioueaotwhiohwevery muchregretted
to lee, andit ir evenmoreregrettablethat Qovernment
forom h&dto nttaok that oentrr, whiohWIBthe aouroe
of ord r firing, 00n6to protect therent of the PopuIatioonQrtha town. Par ORthe nextday, gun&y mnxdng

tb*. ~6 qain apwaUlo fi*

from th mtnatult, iid

&at fllM aiiuldthe &vWnulorit foMer h&w &lo?

I have just now hoard from a very rospucted
friend asking why the Government
of Cyprus has not
23.

22. A cette oooaalon, je voudrale dire comblen
11 eat trlste et regrettable qu’un lieu aussl saord
que le minaret d’une moequ&e,r&&r&e et rerpeotbe
par toue, quelle que coit leur religion, paroe qu’il
e’agit d’un monumentBrig6 h la gIoire de Dieu,
ait gte utllls6 non pas pour eervlr Dieu, malr pour
tuer de8 gtres humainr. Cleat un note raorilbge que
nous deploronsprofondgment,et 11ert encore pltu
regrettable qur lea foroee gouvernementoteraioat
bt6 obligles d’attaquer oo paste de tireurr irol60
din de protlger IO resk de Ir
ulatlcm de la oiftr,
Bb e&t, 1# j6ur ruivant, dlrwet% math, il y Watt
&i de nouveliro rnfnlro rpwcrdtqurr pwww
du
minaret. Et quo pouvaient falre lea forces gouvernementoles?
23. Un ami pour leyuel j’~l beaucoupde respect
vient de demander pourquol le Gouvernement
de
Chypre n’ovolt rien fult pour rsstaurer
I’ordre B
Chypre. Je auis nbsolumont d’ucaord nvec 1111:
c’est
le dcvolr
du Gouvernement
chyprlote de restaurer
l’ordre.
Celn est cl’aillturs
@vu dans In r6solutlon
odoptbe 1s 4 mars pnr le Con&l
de s6curit6,
qui
nu paragruphe 2 du dlsposltlf:

aoted to restore law nndorder in Cyprus. I quite agree
wlth him: It is the duty of the Government of Cyprus
to restore luw and order. I’llis IS part of tho resolution
of the Security Counoil of 4 March 1964, whloh III Its
seoond operative paragraph
wAslts the Government of Cyprus, which hus the
rcsponslbillty
for the mnintenanoe und restoration

“Deniancle

respononble
5

au
du

Gouvernement
malntlen

chyprlote,
et

du

qui

r6toblissement

est
de

llordra publio, de prendre toutea lea nouv~llea
meaur85 n&oeaaaireapour arr&er lea aotes da
violence et les effusion6de sangB Chypre”.
Therefore I aak you: what shouldthe Governmentof
Je poae dunola question sulvantet que devait faire
Cyprus do, In view of Its inherent responsibility to
le Gouvernementde Chypre, qul eat responsabledu
preserve law and order and in the faoe of thle oall
mainttende l’ordre publlo et Bqui ie Conseilde s&ourite
a demand6de prep !re toutee lea nouvellee
of the Seourity Counoilto take additionalmeasuresto
preserve law and order? What shouldit do whenit
mesures n6oessalreepour maintenir l’ordre? Que
EBBSaeven people killed and thirty-eight wounded, devait-11 faire en voysnt que 7 personnssBtalent
and continuedsniping from the minaret?What would tubes, 38 autres bless6eset que le tir oontinualtdu
sommetdu minaret? Que devalt faire un gouverneany reasonablegovernmentdo but sendits forces to
put a stopto thesnipingandfiring, to selsethe oentres ment ralsonnable, si ce n’est envoyer ses forces
pour mettre fin h la fusillade et salslr lee tlreurs?
of destruotionandput an end to it?
24. That is what they did. They movedin. They had 24. C’est ce quele gouvsrnementa fait. Se8troupes
to fire, of ooursd; they had to fight; but all those sont pass&esh l’action. Elles ont dQ tlrer, naturellement; elles ont dCIse battre. Mals tousles foyers
oentreswere takenwith the very leastoasualtiesposde rtksistanoeont Bt& prls avec le mains de pertes
sible, and, whentheyreaohedthepointwherethe taking
of other oentres would have Involved bloodshedand possible, et, lorsque la prlse d’autresfoyers auralt
signifib des effuslons de sangdont des femmeset
where women andohildrenwouldhavebeenthevlotims,
desenfantsauralent pu &re les vlotimes, les troupes
they did not prooeedany further.
ne sont pasalleesplus loln.
26. Alnsi, si l’ordre ne rbgnepastotalement, o’est
26. So if psrfeot lawandorder doesnotexist,, it is due
to the faot that the Governmentof Cyprushasnot been parce que le Gouvernementohypriote n’a pas Bt6
able to use all its foroes to seourelaw andorder due en mesure, &ant donn6les oirconstances,de faire
to the oiroumstanoes;andwehopethatwhenthe United usagede la totalit de ses forces pour le restaurer;
et nousesp6roneque lorsqueles forces des Nations
Nationsforoes arrive there, it will be easierand more
Unles arriveront I1 sera plus facile pour le GouverDOadble
for the Governmentof Cyprus,with thea&snementde Chypre, avec l’aide et la contribution de
ianoeandoontribution of the UnitedNationsforces, to
establish peaoeand order in aooordsnoewith its reoellea-oi, de r&ablir l’ordre et la paix oommeil en a
la responsabllit6.
sponslbilities.
26. Peut-on quallfler cela de massacre?OuI oertes,
26. Now, oanthis beoalleda massacre?Wemightwell
male de massaoresperpbtr6s par lee Turos oontre
oall it a massaore,but a massaoreof the Greeksin
Cyprus by the Turks, Rather, let meoorreot myeeli,
les Grecs de Chypre. Ou plutbt, je ne devrais pas
I shouldnot say “by the Turks” of Cyprus, beoause dire “par les Turos de Chypre”, oar nous les respectons et nous estimons qu’ils font partie de la
we reepsot the Turks of Cyprus andoonslderlhema
part of the population. I should say that It was a
population: ces massacressont le felt d%Mments
extr6mistes qui, pour l’instant, ont la hautemain sur
massaorsby extremist elementswho have, for the
time being,the upper handamongthe Turklshpopula- la populationturque de Chypre, et qui, aglssantsur
une instigation ext&rieurs, et Je n’ai pas besolnde
tion of Cyprus and who, acting on instl,,* Jon from
outside-and I neednot mentionwherethe - :igatfon
dire laquelle, car la ohose est Wdente, agissent
oomesfrom; it Is quite clear-are doingthe<Jethings alnsi afin depromouvoir l’id6e departage.
in this way In order to promotethe idea of partition,
27. Quell-s autre raison auruit pu donnerh 1aTurquio
27, The next thing that may have given Turkey the
right or provided it with the osueeofsendingthis note le droit de d6oIderd’envoyer oette noteet de menacer
d’intervenlr h Chypre? Lee inoidentsqui se sont dBandof threateninrrtointervenein Cyorus wasthat there
roulbs B Mallia, un village danalarbglon de Llmassol
wae trouble at %lallia, a villagi- in the distriot
of
Llmarrol at somediatanoefrom Paphos.There was non loin de Paphos?Dee troubles ont &clot& et lea
oometrouble and the aeourity foroeaintervened,They foroes de 66ourit8sontintervenues.Ellesont d6sarm6
tour lea habitantsdu village sanmeffurbn de sang
disarmed all the peoplein the village without bloodabed-only two were allgbtly wounded-and.?eaoeand - 11 y a eu seulementdeux personnes16g8rement
quiet was re-eatubliahedat Mallia, And at Kaaaphani, blese4ea- et la paix et le oalme oont revenua h
the Turk8 there who hadbeenpreparing to fight gave Mallia, De mbme, B Kaaaphani,lea Turor qui me
pr6paraient B lutter ont rendu leura arm60 et, lb
us I their erme, and they were dioarmed without any
. ourely, ihe dlrarming of the paopleand onctore, 11n’y a par eu de vlotima8r A@rur6ment,nul
of=ttrc)jmpk to Witrsg @eul arms ir
jte o@ral$ r*itjrurger paroe que l’oei dWrm0 do8
t shouldOwe anyonedtrpbrsure~ on @nlr ou paroe qufilr aooaptentde rendreleurs a1rnoa1
aot that theyhadgivenup their arms
au oontraire, 16 fait qu’ile rend& leure nrmea
shouldbe a matter for satisfuotion,conslderlngthat
devrait 8tre une cause de satlefactlon, puisque ensuite
sfter the delivery of their BPI;ISthere wascomplete le cnlme rbgno.
calm.
of law and order, lo take all rdditlonaf. maeure8
neoeeearyto stop vtalenoeandbloodshed
in Cyprue;”

2fl. These, thercforc, arc the events that have taken
place In Cyprus 8iIJCe the paLMing of the IW4OlU~iOn
of
4 Mnroh
1964, events rosultlng,
as I have snld, in
the Greeks alrd not to the Turks. Yet we
oasunltit
get this I,,~JI* which tells noomI~letely different story,
a story ubout “mnssacron and ~Lellmination~, wlthout,
of course, monlionlng any figures or places but using
just vnguo words which mny im&rcss those who are
uninformed ns to the situution.

7.0. Tels

tlonc 10s 6v6nements su1’venus
h
l’ncloptlon tic la r6solutlon
et qul,
cllt, ont coQt6 la vie h clos Grncs et
non pns h des Turcs. Or, nous recevons cette note,
cjul clresse un Mlenu ontlbrer,lent dlff6ren1, qul parle
de “mnssncresH et ~cl’6llmlnation~, saris, bienentendu,
mentlonner
nucun chlffre, oucun lieu, et clui utilise
unlquemcnt ties mot8 vugues cIestin66 h lmpressionne~
cc\:x qul ne sent pns nu courant de la sltuntion.
Chyp::e
comtne

scik

dcpuis
je l’ni

98, ’
Turk<
in OF
the P
and 1
want
a hen
folio\
stson
trout

JO.
man0
and (
Natic
as w
dlvid
That
fight,
brine
the I
Invae
state

31.
right
Gus
a lit
who1
befol
integ
art10
tionwhet
mea
art10
there
integ
ooulc
lnteg
there
ever
33.
am81

unwa
inter

to m
there
venti

El
$ltrrc
t!i$w
!*
&

renll
Turk
110

1

sect1
olnir
Ininc
011 t1
Othl
tllosi
1Wil~l

part

bait faire
wmble

du

‘de sbcu~ouvelles
‘ire? Que
b &talent
‘hnualt du

ouvernb
IS forces
tirours?
troupes
knaturel‘asfoyers
de perres
rs aurait
mmes ot
9 troupes
ent, c’est
I pas btb
de faire
sstaurer;
p Nations
I Gouver-

,bution de
jneilena
ri certea,
08 centre
lvrais pas
, les resltie de la
!&lbments
main our
seant sur
besoin de
agisaent

a Turqulo
monacer
I eont dbLimassol
at4 rt los
t d4sarmb
1 de sang
gbrement
;evonus P
pa qui 10
!~,e”il~
u?nlo’ ‘be
pa ekmw

rd) armed
ue ensuite

rvefiw
,n et

h

qul,
I Grecs et
!ette note,
qitl parle
n ententlu,
&II ut111se
esYIcllllnl
‘011.

88, Ono my wonder why this rWudo 18 t&en by 88. On peuut so domandorpour~uoila ‘h~rquioadopt@
o&e attitude. En vbritb, o’oot fort rimale. CWII
Turkey, It is very oimplo, very atmale indaod.It is
pour trouvor uno oxouso..LaTurquio ert ni6oontonto
in order to find an exouse.Turkey is dissatisfiedwith
the turn ovontshave takentowards a oalming-down- de la tournure qu’ont priso los 6vbnomonts,du retour
au calm0 - et lo calme r$gnait vrnimont aprbo
and It was indeedcalm after the resolution-and they
wantto break this oalm,to stopthis movomonttowards l’adop#on do la rbsolution-. et olle vout troubler oo
a healingof the wounde-and
t6wardsoonoiUatlonwhIoh oalmb, supprimer ce dbsir do pansorlee blossuroa,
followedon tho resolution, They hadto do somethinn arrbtor oetto tondancoR la rboonoiIiation QUI#‘omt
strong so as to stir up trouble, so they started the manifostbeaprbsl’adoptionde la rbsolution,‘fl fallait
quo la Turquie puiese invoquer un bvbnomontImtroubleat Paphos.
portant pour suscitor dos troubloc; ollo a dono
aemble dbsordroB Paphos.
30. Tout cola a finalomontbchoubparoo qu’ilr n’ont
JO. Well, that failed in the end beoause they did not
pas rbuosi h divisor la ~1110.L1objoctlf btait de
manageto divide the town. The objective wasto fight
anddIvIde the town into two so that whenthe United dbcloncher la lurte et de divisor la villa on
Nationsoamethere lhey might find a divided Paphos deux camps, afin que lorsquo lee Nations UnIess)y
as well ae a divided Nicosia,After they hadfailed to prbsonteraiontellos trouvont Papho ainsiquoNicosia
divide Limassol,they tried todo scmothings:sowhere. divisbes. Aprbs avcir bchou6dansleur tontativo de
divisor Limasaol, 11sont tent6 autro ohosoaillourr,
That failed hoouusethe peopleno longer wishedto
11sont &chou& parco quo la population no voulait
fight, and then they had to do somethingdynamic to
plus so battro et 11sont d(l, dansCOIconditions,
bring about trouble and invade the island, Sothat IS
faire quolquechose do spoctacula1ropour provqurr
the purposeof this whole story: to openthe way to
I,l;;.p,
as may be seenfrom what I have already destroubles et onvahir llfle. Tols sont donc10svbritables motifs de tout6 l’entreprisot ouvrir la route
A ItInvasion, commeon peut lo voir d’aprbo co quo
jlai d6Jhd6clarb.
31. Le Couvernemontturc dil maintenantqu’il a lo
31. Now the Turkish Governmentsaya that it hasa
right to intervene in Cyprus under the Treaty of
droit d~intervonir B Chypro aux tormos du Traitb do
Guarantee.Thls is a matter which must he examined garantie. Cloet 18 una question qui dolt btrs exaa little more closely because it is fundamentalto the minbo un pou plus attenUvomont,car 0110art cruwholeproblem,The Treaty of Quarantoe, whioh1have clalo. Le Trait6 do garantie, quo J’ai 10.devant moi,
garantit tour d’abordl~inlbgrit6 terri~orialo et l’indbbefore me, first of all guaranteesthe territorial
integrity and independence
of Cyprus and the basio pondancode Chypre ainai queler articles fondamonartioles of the Constitution.Therefore, any intorvontaux de la Constitution. Par cons6qusnt,touto Intortion-and I leave asidefor the time beingthe question vontion, et Jolaissepour lkrtant de cl%4la question
whetherintervention shouldbo by force or by peaceful de savoir 8’11dolt s’agir d’une intervention armbo
means-shouldhe where there is a violation of the ou dkne intervention pacifique, na pout avoir liru
artioles of this Treaty. In the presentcaseof Cyprus quo s’il y a violation des articles de oe traitb, Danr
there has beenno violation of rho independence
and la 0on)oncturo actuolls, 11nty a, R Chypre, l uouno
integrity of Cyprus other than by Turkey, Sc Turkey violation de l’ind6pendanceet do ltintbgrllb du tercould not inrervono to proloot the indopendonooand rltoire, sinon Par la Turauio, Alnoi, la Turauio
Integrity of Cyprus, which it is threateningto do, And no satirait intoivenlr pour ‘protbgor lilndbpond~oo
monaoo.D’autre
there has hoonno violation of theConstitutionwhatso- et llintbgrit6 deChvProc~~~ello~mbmo
ever, and I challengeanyoneto saythat there hauhoon. part, ilnly a ou iuoune violation de la Conrlilutlon,
et Jed6fie quiconquodo meprouver lo ooatrairo.
33. What the Presidentproposedwaotalks inordor to
31, Co quo lo Prbsidont a proposb, oo sent dor
amendthoseprovieionsof the Constitutionwhiohwere oonversationson vuo de modifier lss dirporltions do
unworkableand divlsivo. Thusthere IO no groundfor
la Conrtitution qui, clansla pratiqur, ne rant pu
intorvoningunder the Treaty of Guarantee,WhatI want applioablre et no sont qulun faoteur de divlrlon.
to make olear 1s that under the Treaty of Quarantoo 11n5 a don0auounmotif Justifiant une intarven~ion
aux termor du Trait6 do garmtirc Ce quo je voux
there are only two groundswhiohwouldallow intorvontiont a throat againsttho territorial integrity and rouligner do la manibre la plur olalro, o’e#t qu%n
vertu du Trait4 do amHo II nty a qur deux motllr
indepondenoe-ofw&oh thkire 10 none apart from
Turkey, and a violation of the Conotitution-of whioh qui permettvnt uno Bntwwion,
Le r6mior ert une
tkoro ir nono, Turkey ha@ ueld.t&t it ir entitbd to
monoor oontrr lW@rit6
tsrrl$Wg a! # Icl~
&in’30 k il n$’ on.apau, WI r’u.y.m.8-la6ii
d&l*
Iritimne
up&r the mu&y of C#wMeu
h erdor. to
olrint de ia Tup(iui@ ml et lr daibma
081 une viaW the Turkleh minority in 0 CU& I krve actdo
p”or the time being whether the e
% eats of Turkey’8
letion de la Conotltution- et noussavonequ’ll nv on a
intervention or Turlct!yb interforenoo in Cyprus hnve
really bceu the proteotlcn or the deetructicn of the
Turkish minority, but I would sny thnt in this Treaty
no right of intorvontion by virluo of prctootir~g any
section of the poln~lntion is p;rnntecl. <SOif Turkey
clulms the right to Intarvono for the prctoctlcn of the
tnincrlty under the Tronty of GunrnntBe, it is working
ctt the wrong prumiae. If It olnlms thnt right under
other provisions of Intoi~nnt1oi~ul law, 1otTurkcy b:*liig
ttrovc provieiotls fcrwltrd. Lktl lllifl Tronty Lloos uot
tnnke any tnenllon of protectlou or of sltllng with nny
purl 01 the l~pulation,
nor bus It nrry claueo whloh

pns QU. Ln Turqule d6clare quW10 n Is tlroit d%dervonlr, nux tarmoY tlu Trnlt6 do gcvuntle, i:?lIr protbger
In mincrit(i turquu do Chypra. Jo lnlsm pour l’lnstnnt
de c&6 In quostlcir cl0 snvcir sl l~Intervot~tlcn cu
1 ~immlx~lcn de In Turcli~le duns len nffnires de Chypre
n cu pour effet de prct6ger ou de tlbtrulre In mlnorIt6 turrlue; ce clue Je tlens h dlre, c’est quo le Trnlt6
ne donne n personne lo tlrolt tl’lntervenlr
pour prcl6ger un 8ecteur
quelconque tic la l~opulntlon. De sorb
quo sl 111 l’urrcnle
Invoque
In tlrolt tl~inle~venlr rule
term04 tlu ‘lYn116 (IL! gniSnullc pour
protbgor In
mInorIt
elle
00 f011do wr
uno rlIu8tic pr6tilIfme,

Si ells Invoque 01 drolt dtlntrrvsnlr en v&U d’autres
prinoipes du drolt international, qu’elle le dlse,
qu’elle dnonce 06s prinoipes. 11 n’en demeure pas
molns que le Trait4 ne lui donne ni le droit de
prendre part1 pour un seoteur de la population, ni
d’lntervenlr en auoune manlbre dans des questions
qul lnt&essent les diff6rents seoteurs de oette population. Le Trait4 ne prbvoit que les deux cas que
jcaI Bnonc4s.
33. I ooms now to the next point; to show that there
33, J’en arrive maintenant au point sulvant, B savoir
is no legality whatsoever in the claim of Turkey to
montrer que les revendlcatlons par la Turqule de
intervene in Cyprus, Artiole IV of the Treaty of
son drolt d’lntervenlr B Chypre ne reposent sur
Guaranteev olearly states that: “In the event of a
aucun fondement jurldlque. Sur ce point, 11 y a
breach of the provisions of the present Treaty”-1 have
l’article IV du Trait6 de garantieu, qul dispose t&s
already said_. what the provisions are-the three , nettement que, “en cas de violation des disposltione
_
guarantors wundertake to consult together*. Wlth a : du present ‘l’ralt6” - J’ai deja dlt quelles staient
view to what? With a View to m&king nrepresentations”
! ces dispositions -, les trois Puissances garantee
or taking nmeasures necessary to ensure observanoo : “s’engagent h se concerter”.
En vue de quci? En
of those provisionsw. Therefore, any rlght of iatervenvue “des dbmarches ou mesures n&cessalres* pour
tlon would be to make %epresentationsn or take
assurer l’observation de oes dispositions, Par oonstjameusurw
necwseary to enuure observanct! of those
quent, tout drolt d’intervention conslsteralt B faire
provIaions~, namely, respect for the territorial in- : “de8 dbmarches” ou B prendreles “mesures nbcestegrlty and independence, and for t4e Constitution, : saires” pour assurer l’observatlon de oes dlspoThen the Treaty says: In so far as oommon or con- ; sitlons, h 3avolr le respect de ltint6gr1t6 territorlale
oerted action may not prove possIblen -now the word I ou de l’ind4pendance de Chypre, alnsl que de sa
*aotionn here refers to what was stated before. What a constitution. Le Trait6 dit ensulte: “Dane 18 mesure
Is the aotion? The aotlon is the ‘representations” or I ob une action commune ou concert&e ne s1av4reralt
the taking of the “measures neoessary”. That is the
pas possible”; le mot “action” se rap&te~ a ce qui
aotlon
and nothing else. In oase this aotion cannot
a 6th declare auoaravant. De ouelle acUon stagitbe obtained
by concert, then “eachof the three guarandone? L’aotlon 6onslste en de; Id6marches” ou en
teeing Powers reserves the right to take aotion with
l’adoptlon des amesures n(1oessaires@ et en rlen
the sole aim of re-establishing tha state of affairs
d’autre. Dans la mesure oh une action oommune ou
created by the present Treaty”. Sothe unilateralaotion
oonoertde ne s’av4reralt pas possible, “ohaouns des
oannot be different from the oonoerted action,whioh is
trofr Puissances garantes se r4serve le droit d’agir
to make representations or to take the neoessary
dans le but exolusif du rdtabllssemant de l’ov.lre or46
measures.
par le prdsent Tralt6”. Ainsi, l’aotion unllat6rale no
psut pan &tre diff6rente de ltactlonoonoert4e, laquelle
oonslste B faire des d4marches ou ?I prendre les
mesures n&essaires.

charbm that th

34, Now th6Se representationsor measurescannotbe
but by peacefulmeans.That is the proper interpretution, partioularly a8 the Charter makesit olear that
the obligationOf-MemberStatesIs to respectthe territorial integrity andindependenoe
of other Statesunder
Artlole 2,-paiagraph 4; Therefore, by vl.rtue of that
Artiole, they are not entitled to intervenein Cyprus by
foroe, It it is to be interpreted In the proper way, But
if they are to interpret it in any other way-as for
exsmpleinterpreting artlole IV of the Treaty asgiving
themthe right to intervene by force-then that artiole
woulditself becomevoid underthe Char&r, by virtue
of Arttole 108~?fthe Charter, whiohspsoifioally providss that the obligstioneof Membr Statesunderthe
Water
prerrtl over their sbll atlons underanyother
@qa+nhl agrmmont-like de TreatydOuaranm,

34. Mais oes demarohesou ces mesuresne peuvent
&re entreprlses que par des moyens paolfiques.
Telle est l’lnterpr&atlon correote du Trait& d’autant
que la Charte disposeclairement, au paragrnphe4
de 1’Artlcle 2, que les Etats Membresont l’obligation
de respeoter l’int6grlt6 territorlale et ltlnd8pendance des autres Etate. Par oons&quent,d’aprbs
oet artiole, la Turqule n’a paa le drolt d’intervenir
?4Chypre par la foroe, al elle interprbte oomme11
oonvlent sesdlsposltions,Mais sl elle veut leur donner une autre interprbtation, qul lui oonf&reralt le
droit d’intervenir par la foroe, alors l’artlole XV
du TraAt6 de garantie serait nut aux termes de
1’Artiole 103 de Is Charte, qui spQoiffsqueler obll@lonr aorumbespar lee Etatrr Memhres en vertu
f g- ta ahme pr&talent aur tea oblt~atjonr qiri Iair
Ikiiiombetii*fi vwtu iii tout autre ao6otiinteuatiwl,
6ommepar exemplele Trait6 de garantfe.

97. This letter
a violation of the
andan indioatfon
I oanoall it nothl
warningthan thli
I am afraid that
plain of threats
aotuslinvmfoe

35. Eurthermore-and here is what I would like to
emphasize-beyond these considerationswhioh are
very clear, the International Court of Justicu is not
required to look into thesematters booausewe have

35. De plus - et je tiens h lo soullgner avec force -,
au-deltc de ces considbratlons
qul sont tout h fait
clalres,
11 n’est pas nbccssairede demanderh la
Cour internationals
de Justice son avis en la matlbro, parce que la Charte est lh. Sl, cn vue d’interprber un article quelconque de la Charte, 1’Article 103
par exemple, nous devons saislr la Cour internat\oride de Justice, nous serons obllgbs de nousadres-

oonoarna the different seutions of the population, It
merely provides for thee6 two grounds,

the Charter. If in order to Interpret any Article of the
Charter, such as Article
103, we had to go to the
InternatIonal
Court of Justice, thbn we would have to
be there every day because there is not a duy that we
do not have to interpret clear provisions of the Churler. This Is the clearest possible provision cf the

ser tow 10s Jours h elle, pnrce que, chaquejour,
nous sommes appelbs h ihterpr&er

8

de8

dlsposltlotis

vail ovsr the obl
1wantittobsol
the Turk&h Qov
legalltr they hs
Cyprus.

36, Thenwe OO
4 Maroh 1964u
rafers to the pee
to the Treaty 8
What were
the g
cyprur was thal
giving the rlght
tion then prooeec

tee-aprovisio~
and its Artiol
Members shal
tions from th
territorhl inte
stat+ or in u
Purpoeesof th

“1. Calls upc
uponTurkeyunder the Ch&
obligation to H
In tie preoedl
aotionor tbrea
tion in the 80~

98.

Aooordhg

b

evenin words, la
graph 4. And 1 I
and w&t wae 19

Seourity Counoil
foroe, wbicb no
integrity

and lndl

30. It is not on
this situation. 1
la the one whloh
ante nnd lntegri
and of all Stater
are flqedom and

~turtm that the obligationa undw the Charter prevail over the obligations of international agreement&
1 want it to be oleariy empbasiaed and brought borne to
the Turkish Qovernment that 1l they want to Pnt with
legality they have no right to intervene by foroe in
cyprue.

86. Thenwe oometo the Se&rity Counoilresolution
of
4 Maroh 1964whioh m&es that abundantlyolear. It
rafers to the positionstaken by the partiesin J~Iation
to the Treaty eignedat Nloosia on 16 August 1960.
What were the poeitionstaken?The positiontaken by
Cyprus wss that this Treaty oannotbe interpreted aa
giving the right of intarventlon by foroe. The resolution then prooeedsto say the following:
“Havin in mind the relevant”-relevant to the imme& preaedinyparagraph,the Treaty of auarantee--“provisions of the Charter of theUnitedNations
and iis Article 9, paragraph 4, wbioh reads: ‘All
Members shall refrtiln in their international relations from the threat or use of force againstthe
territorial integrity or politloal independenoe
of any
state, or in any other mannerlnoonristentwith the
Purposesof the UnitedNationsl,
“1. Calls uponallMember Statean-thereforeoalla
uponTurkey-% oonformity with t&ir obligations
under the Charter of the United Nationa@-andthe
obligationto whioh it refers is the onerpelled out
in the preoedingparrqrapb-“to refrain from any
action or threat of action likely to worsenthe sltuation in the sovereignReplblio of Cyprus , , .”
37. This letter to the SeoretarPQeneral
is in itself
a violation of the Charter, a viol&on of the resolution
andanindioationof disrerpeotfor theSeourityCounoil.
I OM oall it &hin# lur thin that, andunlasr a olearer
warning than thlr is givento theQovwnmentof Turkey,
I am afraid that we#ballbeoominghere again to oomplain cd threatr of invarion agalnrt Cyprus, if not
aotuallnvarlon,
88. Aooordinnto internationallsw,thethreat of foroe,
evenin wonir;le in itulf aviolatlofiof Artiole 1 para;
graph 4. And I ray BOWthat the nota #antb Twkey
ad what WM said by the Mme MinirUr ot Turkey,
With thr @OODShiDS and the Wootn&%&n#

Security Counoilto take stepsso that there threats of

foroe, whioh aotually amount to a violation
integrity rind independenoo of Cyprus, OOasO.

of the

30. It is not only Cyprus whioh is oolloerned
&out
this situntlcn, The oomplaint is by Cyprus. Cyprus
\e the one wlioh is threatoned today ,but the independence rind integrity of all States of the Unit.ed Nations
and of till St&s in generul is one and indivisible. So
are freedom snd juetioe.

tout B fait olairee de la Cbarte. Et o’emt 1Wo der
plur olaires dioposltlonade notm ohartr qua oelb
aw Hermesde IPquellelee obligations oontraot6w
en vertu de la Charte pr6valent sur lee obligatione
dboulant d’aooords internationaux, C’est un point
que fe tiens \ &aNir olairement et h bienfaire
oomprendreau Qauvernementturo, a savolr quo s’ll
d&ire demeurer dons la lSgalit& 11n’a pae19droit
dWarvenir
a Chypre par la foroe.
96. Nous en arrivons enfin R la rdsolution adopt&e
par le Conseil de sdcurit6 le 4 msrs 1964,qui falt
reeeortlr de la msnlbre la plus oleire tout oe que
Je viens de dire. Cette rdsolution
ae rdfbre aux
&eltions prines par lea parties au sujet du TraW
sign6 le 16 aodt 1960 h Nioasia. Quslles dtaient
do& oes positions?La position de Chypre Wit quo
oe trait6 ne peut sYnterpr&er oomme dormantle
drolt d’intervenir par la force. Ln r&solution se lit
enaulteainsi:
“Ayant pr&sentesP l’esprft lea dispositionspertinantes” - o’est-h-dire oelles qul se rapportsnt
au parsgrapheprbCldent relatif au Trait6 de gorantie - “de la Charte desNationsUnleset oellw
du prrsgraphe 4 de 1’Artlole 2, qui eat ainsl oonpu:
*Lea Msmbres de llOrganisation slabatlennent,
dans leurs relations internatfonales, de reoourlr
P la menaoeou B l(emplo1de la foroe, soft oontre
lVnt6grit6 territorlsle ou l~lnd6pendanoe
politlque
de tout Etat, solt de touts autre manlbre inoompatlble aveales kits des NationsUniesm;
“1. &&I tour Ies Etats Msmbres,” - et par
oons6quentla Turqule - woonform6menth leurr
obllgationc aux termes de la Chnrte der Nations
Unlet4,n- et l~obligationdent 11ret question101ret
prbis&ment oelle qui ent dhfinie au paragrrpbe
prbobdent- “P s’abatenir
de toute aotion ou de
toute
menaoed(aotlon qui rirquerait d’aggraver
la situation dans la R6publique rouveratw de
Chypre...”
37. La lsttre adrers6eau Seor6tdre
g&&al ooartitue en elle-mame une violation de la Cbarti, une
violation de la r&solution et un maaquedo reqaeot
R l%gard du Coneeil de &ourit& Je ue peux la
qualifier mains shvbrement et, P mainsqu’unavertirrement plur olair ne soit donnbau Gouvernement
two, je orrinr
quo noun n’ayonr h rewnir
iol pour
noua plaindre de menaoescVinvuion de Obypre, ri
oe n’eat m&med’uneinvuion effeotive,
88. En drolt international, la mews de reoour~ b
la foroe, mame verb&,
art en ello-time una
vlelation da IWtiole 0, paragraphs 4, de la Chute.
Or, je routienr quo la

marine, oonstftuent une violation flngrsnte de la
Chnrte. Je demnnderoi dono au Cons&l de s6ourit6
de prendre des mesures nfin que oessent de telles
mennces de reooura h la foroe, qul ne constituent
rien de moins qu’une violation de l~int4gz~it6 et de
l’ind8pandance de Chypre.
39. Mals Chypre n’est pas seule impllqu6e dans oette
.&tuatlon. La plointe dont lo Conseil est oaisi vient
de Chypre, qui ost menu&e aujourd%ui. Mais l’iud&
pendance et l%k6grlt6
de tous lea Etnts Membrcs
de I’Organisation
des N&ions Unles, et de tous les
Etats en g&&ral, est une et indivisible.
La libert6
et In justice le sont Bgnlcment.

,
40, Chypre cat aotuellomentmonaobopar unogrande
puiaaanoavoisine. Xl ee peut qu’il n(r ait auoune
invaaion. La nuit qui vient n’en verra probablement
auoune,maia 11eet bgalementprobablequel’invaalon
aurait eu lieu et le Coneell de sbouritb ne slbgeatt
pas en oe moment. De toute fapon, OOttepolitique de
menaoe8et de diktat appartientBune bpaquerdvolue
et n’a paa ea place dans le monded’aujourd’huj,
Elle nousrappel10la politique qui fut SuIvIeexactem8nt de la mbmemanibreh l’bgard de la Tohbcoslovaquie - oomme l’a trbs justement fait obeerver
18reprbeentantde oe pays (1097bmerbanoe] - et qui
a oommenobpar la protection dea minoritbs des
Sudbtee
en vue de prbsenter une demandede partags, pour paarer ensuiteB l’ocoupationde toute la
rbglon par Hitler, qui a occupb par la suite la
Tohbooalovaquietout entibru et dbolenohbla seoonde
WOr.
guerre mondiale.
41. But today we have theUnitedNatione,andwehava 41. Maie nousavone aujourd’hui les Nations Unies
the Seourity Counoil,and this polioy oannotb8pureued et le Consellde sbourltb, et oette polltique ne sauralt
with impunity, The world ia thue safe from another btre po\**suivie impunbment.Le monde eat aIns
world war. And1wouldoalltheattentionof the Security prbservb d’unennuvelleguerre mondiale,Jevoudrals
Counoi!.to the ‘faot that althoughCyprue is small and
attirer ltattention du Consell de sbcuritb sur le fait
appearsineignifioant on the map, it haseg.ualrights
que, bien que Chypre ne soit qU’Un6fI8 n’oaaupant
with every other Stat8 Memberof the United Nations. qu’une tout8 petite place sur la aarte, 8118a lea
Juat aa every other State, it has a right to proteot its
mbmeadrolta que nYmportequel autre Etat Membre
de I’Organleation des Katlons Unles. Exaatement
independenoe
ad ito integrity, and if the prinoiple of
the proteotion of independenoe
and inteurity is not oommetout autre Etat, Chypre a clroit h la protectton
upbeid, all small nati&e will be in da&r- andthe
de aon Indbpendanoeet de 80~ intbgrltb et, s1l’on
United Nationr ibelf undermined.The reperousa!.ons ne dbhnd pas le princlpe de la protection de l’lndbof ruoh a policy would be felt not only by the small pendanceet del’intbgritb dea Etats, toutes leapetite8
nations eeront en danger et lee NntionaUnieselleaStaten, but by all Member8 of thie Organization.
mbmesseront atteintes juaquedaneleur fondement.
Lee rbpercuesionsd’une telle politlque attelndraient
non seulementlee petite Etats, maistousleaMembres
de cette organlratlon.
43. We put our trurt in the UnitedNationsandin the
41. Nous plaponr notre oonfianoedans lee Nations
Unies et le Conreil de ebcurltb. En fait, now avow
Seourity COuncii.In faot, we have observedthat the
dieouaaionin the Seourity Counoilhas already introconstatbquelee dbbataqulsesontdbroulb;eauConseII
ont dbjla cr6e un olimat nouveau, de
duoeda newolimate, newIdrae; it haspointedto what de rbourit6
ir right. That ir probablyTurkey’s oonoernandwhat nouvellos idbea, qu’fls ont permia de dbgageroe qul
ha8 brought about there erratio, apuamodiomoves eat juste, C%et )jrobablement oe qui inquibte la
whioh have followed the adoptionof the reeolution of
Turquie et oe qui a provoqub oea mouvementa
rpaamodiqueaet dbeordonnbequi ont suivi l’adoption
4 March,
de la rbeolution.
43. J’&i &t( t&e houreux d’apprendredu Seorbtah
43, 1 M very happyto haveheardfrom the SeoretaryGeneral
that arrangementsfor a peaoe-keepingforoe gbnbral quo deaprogrbs rati8faiaantaont bt4 aooomIse prooreding ratiriaotorily, andit ir hopedthatwe plia Vera la constitution d’une force de maintlen
r&all soon have that foroe on the island. Then there do la paix et uo l’on pout eriybrer queoette force
will ha l olhnate of froedam andaeourity whiohwill
merendra bien%t danalt¶le, Xly aura alorr un olimat
alow thmpeopl*ta iBtograt00Boemorel tide Olirn&ta do likrt6
et de dourltb qul permottrr auxhabitant8
WW owe thmbarriwr whlah nowd&i& them to Is
de r’lntbgrw 0 nouwaut OQ&mat kra tomber lea
barriOremqul 10s6bpprrdntaotu8llemrntt11rpport8ra

40, Cyprus 18 now tb38at8ned by a big Power close ta
it. There may be no invrelon-probably there will b8
uo invasion tonight-but it ie equally probable that
there would have b8en an invasion if the Security
Caunoil M not been sitting at this time. At any rate,
tbb praotioe of threatening and diotating la one which
belon to the part age8 and har noplaoe In our world
of tx y, It ie reminiaoent of the policy whioh wa8
followed in 8xaotly the earn8 way In respeat of Ceoohorlovakia-aa was very aptly pointed out by the reprorentative of Caeohoelovakia [ 1097th meeting]-and
wbioh began with the proteotion of the minorities of
tb6 Sudetenland for the plrpoee of prooeeding withthe
olaim for partition, and from there to the oooupation
of that area by Hitler, who overran the wholeof
Czeohorlovakia and brought about the Seootid World

two communities, if we have a el’ ltion in whioh
clashesare avoidedonly bocauso a wull husbeenbuilt
betweenthem or If the p8aco is kept at gunpoint.It
must be renlieed that In the absence of u wall and with
the assistance of the UnIted Nations I1’crce, the Greeks
and Turks will be nllowf4
to move about freely wlthout
danger ond without
few.
The Turks who have been
fdrced by the Turkish terrorlets to move from their

villages, where they hsd lived together in peaceand
amity with the Greeks, andwho sre obligedto 11~~III
campsltkkerefugeesso aa to promototheulnistor iduu
of partition, should be given security ugninst those
terrorists
and nllowed to return to their villages to
resume their ntirmal IIves. 0nly irl this wayoanthere

Ia rkwlt4 B twr eCuns atmqypti#rocb owlrtwe
ti. frailitm :la rM$len du..prWi&m, &In.,#f&t,
1i rat impi&MibtOdltirrr
pafvrdr S UPO.
8OltittbB

a1desmura sont brigbs entre lea deux oommunautis,
a1 nous nous trcuvons
dans une situntion tello que

l’on n’bvite des conflIts
que parco qu’uu mur s6pure
les communnut6s, ~‘11 n’est posslble de maintanlr In
pnlx que ROW la menace des fuslls. On dolt ccrnprcndre qu’en l’nbsence de mur et avec l’asslstnnce
dc lu I’crce des Nations Unles lea Grecs et les ‘l’urcs
pourront
se d6plucer
llbrement,
sans cralnte et
saris danger, Les Turcs, clui ont 6t6 for&
pur 1(;9
tsrroristes
turcs
de cpltter
leurs villugos, oh 11s
vivulent nvec les Grecs dans la palx et l’amItI6,
et contralnts de vivre
en r6fhgi6s
dens ties canq)s
nfln de renforcer la thbse sinlstre du purtage, devrtiletit 0tre prct6g6s de ces terrorlstes
et nutcris6Y

oourse-like a
for therlghtef
or any other
other eolution

44. I donotw

We rule it ou

negative. I re
of the two OOI
assumptionth
somethingwhl
lived in p8aoe
during the lai
tion &as aria
partition in tl

klieve that t

niats andextr
were to win th
that ooexisten
would be the (
of theJournal1
terdai in the !
wouldbe that
ooexist in CYF
to oausefurth
thoee who we
CyprUe,
But 1
satiefaotory 0
We believe th
ruled out of 01
not poeeible
fa
and live tog8ll
our time to be
of Cyprus oou
98part of on8
in&eat In the

46, But to do
tiation, we w(
order to make
That ir what
qwated, and
troublo,
le. I wlrh ta

47. One prov
the oneto dep
dent. Althoug
everywhera e
the Vioe-Pres
President of tl
has legislativ
with the axeo
based on dlsol
I am away, I Y
for me, no m

dlsoriniItlat1ot
awny.” The F

1 retournw dam leurr vitlagw pour y reprendre
une vi@normale. C’ert reulement de oette mudbrr
que l’on peut esp6rer or6er un olimat de oompr6hensionet de ooop6rationentre lee deux partiee et
permettre lo retour aux oondltionr norm&lea,danr
un Etat unitalre dirig6 par un roul gouvernement,
reepeatant la volont6 de la majorit oomme tout
autrs Etat, maio @arantllrsantpleinement lee droito
de la minorit par lMerm6dIaIre desNation@Unier
ou de tout autre rystbme InternatIonal. ll ne aaurait
y avolr dqautrerolution.
44. I donotwlshtodirouartheother porsible eolution. 44. Je ne rouhalte pa8 dirouter l’autre rolutlon enWe rule it out of our mind8 beooueewe oonelderIt
via&e, Noun la rejetone de notre esprit, oar noun
negative. I refer to the eolutionto the effeot that one la jugeonen6gatIve.Je me r6Rre Ir oelle qul oonelrof the two oommunitieswouldleave the Irlmd, on the teralt pour l’une de8 deux oommunautdsD.qultter
assumptionthat they were not able to ooexlet. This in
1’Ile en partant de I’hypothbee que la ooexirtenoe
something
whIohwe do not believe, beoaurethey have est Imposrlble, Nous ne pouvonel’aooepter, oar oen
lived in peaoeandamity over the oenturien. It ir only
deux oommunaut6s
ont v6ou dane la prix et l’rmIti6
during the lart eight yearn that the quertion of partipendantdee rlbolsr. C’eat depulr huit mr reulemrnt
tlon hra arisen and the polioy of oampaigningfor
que 8’ext por&e la question du partage et qua lr
parritlon In the irland haa orrated the clivirion. We
oampagneentreprtre pour 88 r6rIiratIon a ruroIt6
believe that they OM live together. But if the ohauvila dlvirion. Noue oroyonr que ler deux oommunrut&
nists andextremists
and threewhoagitatefor partition
peuvent vivre ensemble.Male quoles ohauvlnr et.lea
were to win the upper hand among the Turks and inelet
extr6miste8, et oeux qul r6olament le partage vIenthat ooexiatenoewas ImposeIble,thenthe only solution nent B prendre la haute maln our 1’616mentturo,
wouldbe the one80 aptly desoribedby that wise dean et B r6p6ter que lu ooexistenoeest Imposrfble, la
of theJournalistlooorpsWalter Lippmann.He raId yerseule rolutlon aeralt oelle qu’a pldrentC awo tant
terday in the NewYork Herald Tribune that a solution de talent le doyen avid des journalIsten dlplomawouldbe that thoseTurk8 whofeel that they oouldnot tiquer, M. Walter LIppmmn.M. Lippmrnn a dit hior,
ooexirt In Cyprur rhould leave the irrlandin order not danrr 18 New York Herald Tribune, quo ler Turor
to oauaefurther troubleandgobaok to Turkey, andthat
qu1 oroient que la ooexirtenoe rot Impor~ible h
thosewho wertt wiiiing to integrate ahouldremain in
Chypre $evraIent quitter l’lle afln de ne plur oauaer
Cyprus. But we do not oonrider that rolution to be a de nouwaux troubler et retourner en Turqulr, tandlr
eatirfaotory one beoauseit take8 hatred for granted, que oeux qul sontpr6ta P aooepterlM6gratIon rwWe believe that hatred 10romethIngwhioh rhould ba teraient P Chypre.
Ceptindant,nou8 no oonrId6ronr
ruled out of our mindsandwe do not believe that it III
par oette rolutlon oommeortIrfrIrante, pamequ’elle
not possiblefor anypeopleto oompoee
their differences part de l’Id6e quelu hrlne exirte. Nounertimonr quela
andIIvo together, It wouldbe oontrary to the rpirit of
haine dolt 8tre ray6e de nor erprlta et qu’il n’rrt
our time to believe that the Greek and Turkish people nullement lmporrible Four un peuple quel qu91 soit
of Cyprus oouldnot live togathor,oouldnot co-operate
de rtsoudre aeo dlwrgenoer et de vivre enremble
aop6rt of oneandthe eameoountry,havinga oommon dans la paix. II rerait oontraire h l’wprit de notre
interest In the progrere of that oountry.
6poquede oroira quo lee populationa greoquer et
turquor de C re no pruvent vivre rnaemble et
III peuvent ooop
v rer en tant ue mrmbrw d’un arul
et m8me pay@,uyant un Ins rat oommundanr lo
progrbr de 08 pay@.
45. But to do that, andit would baa matter for nogo46, Mair pour oela, 11 faudrr entuner de8 n6gatiation, we would have to amendthe Conrtitition in
oiatione et modifier la Cotutitution, pour en faire
order to makeit leer divi&a andmoreoo-oparative.
un faotrur de ooop6rntion plutbt que ds dIvirion.
That is what the Pm&lent of the Republiohar reCW oe que le Pldrldent de Ir Rbpubliqura demra&
quested,and that ir what ir ruid to haveoaurmdthio
et otwt la oauoe k 14urlle on a rttribu6 tour oea
trouble,
h6nementr.
46. I Wi& to draw attintion only to two point6from
bo say hop for underrtanding andoo-operrtion between
the two rider and a return to normality, au a unitary
State with one Qovernment, with a majority de, of
couree-Iike all other State&+-but with full guarantees
for tharightsof theminority throughtheUnitedNations
or any other international @yetem,There OM bo no
other solution.

4’1. One provided that, when the President was away,
the one to deputise for him should be the Vioe-President. Although the Vioe-President
is n Turk, IIke
everywhere
else, when the President
is away,
it Is
the Vioe-President
who deputlzes for him, and not the
President of the House of Hepresentntlves, a body whioh
has legislative authority and wlfoh has nothing to do
with the exeoutive. This was an unomuly and it wus
bcrsed on dlsorimlnntion.
So the President said: “When
1 am tawny, I would hko the Vioe-President
to deputixe
for me, no mutter thnt he Is u Turk. We do not want
disorimlnution.
Let tlm be the President while I urn
away.”
The President Is often nwny, at times for one

47. L’uno prhoyalt que, lorsque 10 Pr6sIdent sernlt
absent, ciest le Vice-Prbsldont
qul devrait le remplnoer. Bien que la VIoe-Pr6sIdent
solt un Turo,
oiest lid qui, comme partout allleurs, doit assurer
la pr6sldenoe
en liubsence du PrBsident, et non
le Pr6sident
de la Chambre
des repr6sentants
- organe lbglslntlf qul nln rlen B voir aveo l’ex6oulif.
C’Btnlt lb uno unomalie, fond6e aur la dlsorimlnatlot~.
Aussl la Pr6sIdent n-t-11 d6olor6: HJe voudrnls
quien
mon absence me8 fonclions flolent assur6es pnr le
Vloe-PrBsldent,
m6me ~‘11 est Turc. Nous ne voulons
ptis de discrimination.
Quill assure lu pr6sIdonoe en
man sbsence.*
Le Pr6sldent s’nbsente
souvent,
pnr11

or two fnontiu during the year, rind the Turkirh VioePreridont would be tho Prrrid8nt with all the power8

of the Prerident.
48. Tba other point ia a matter whiohaleoreeulted ln
dieorimination; under the preoent Constitution, the
ViocPresident of theNoueeof Raprerrentatlvee ,wholo
a Turk, oennotdepuUsefor the $reoid@ntwbn be ir
nww, but anotherQrwk deputlzeefor him. That ie a
oar; -& dieorimlnetionandthat makesfor divialon. 90
the PrealLnt said: We shell ebollehtbnt, The VloeBreeident of the House of Repreeentativeerhall
deputisefor the Prerldent in order that weoanhave a
normal etate.n

!oie pondant un molr ou doux au oours da l%nn6e,
bt lo Woe-XW~idrdt two errurorrlt la pr6eldenoo
we0 tous lea pouvoire rff4rentr h oette fonotion.

LB. Lo seoondpoint quo fe veux bW@er, qui a trait
kalement .h un faoteur de dlaorimination, Oonoerne
IiT fait que, d’aprbsla Conrtitutlon eotuelle,le Vloepr6rtdent de la Chembredes repr6rentant6, qui eat
l’uro, ne peut remplaoer1sPrbrident en l’abreioe de
38 dernier. la fonotion devant btre aaaur6e par
An Qrec. kelte dleporltlon est dleorimInatoire et
sonrtltue un faoteur de divioion. Le Pr6aldent a dlt
rlors: nNous abolironr cela. Le Vice-Pr6sIdent de
la Chambredee reprdrsntontsremplaoerale Pr6at
dent, afln de rsndre les ohoeeeno$maleedanenotre
Etat.”
49. These proporals were to the advantageof the 49. Gee deux propoelt!ons6talent B l’avantage de8
Turkr. The other polntewere all intendedto do away Turor. Les autres pointa avaient tour pour objet
de eupprlmer la divirion - m,lnIolpalit6edivle6ee,
with divirion-divided munloipolitier,dividedoourteof
tribunaux dlvIr6r, divielon euaol, et eou8 de muljurtioe, divirion in varlour waya, divided edmlnirtration of jurtioe, divielon in the Civil !3ervloeCommie- tiplee aopeota, dans ltadmlnlrtration de la jurtloe,
rion, tie wantedto doawaywith divirlone andwlth d.Is- I la Commlraionde la fonotlonpubllque.Le Pr6rident
oriminetion. However, althoughhe wantedto do that,
voulalt en fink evoo lss divirlona et la dlsorlminahe did not interfore with the right of the Turks to have tlon. Cependant,malgr6 sead6sIr.9,11n’a pan touohd
au drolt de.9Turos dl6tre repr6sent6eh l’Aeeembl6e
a repreoentrtlonof 30 per oent in the Legislative Aerembly, thnt 18 in the House of Repreeentativee, 16gielative, o’eet-B-dire B la Chamhre de8 repr6”
althoughtbir numerioalstrength in the populetlonle sentants, donsla proportion do 30 p, 100, alore que
only 16 per oent. That remainedunaltered.It ir wrong, num6rlquementilr repr6rentent 18 p. 100eeulement
de la population.Cette dirpooltlon eat reet6e inohanbut the Prerident allowedthe Turka to keep it.
@es.Ells ret injuste, maim le Pr6sident en a lair86
le b6n6floeaux Turor.
60. The other thing to be ebolirhed ir the right of
10. I1 feudrait aurrl abollr le droit de veto, dontlo
Pr6aident et le Woe-Pr6eidentdirporent 6galement.
veto wbloh ir vsrtid ln the Preeident andtbo VioePratident equally, Both would diveet tb6mrelver of Tour deux renonoeraientB oe drolt, qui n’eat qu’un
pouvolr n6getif, oar lornqu’uned6olrlon du Conreil
thie right, whiohir l negative power, beoeurewhena
deoirion of the Counollof Minirtera or a deoreeoon- der mlnlrtrrr ou lladoption d’une 101relative aux
oernlnq foreign effrlra or defenoe WM paered&ndwee affalrer 6trangbres ou h la d6fense eat frepph
vetoedby either the Prerident or the Woe-President, de veto rolt per le Pr6rident, eolt pas le Viob
there was no alte~Wv& Tb 00~ntry was left Without Pr6sldent euouneeutre solution n’ert porrible. Le
law, So all there divisive elementa-the divided pays peut ee trourer einsi priv6 de 16girlaUon.Aintll,
mrforitie8 in the Hoursof Reprersntativess,
wbiohretour 008616mentsde divlslon - notemmentleema+
nulted Antb oountry having no inoomotax-were to be rit68 dlvir6es h la Chambredes repr6rentants qui
abolirhed. The abolition of there diviirrive elements ont prlv6 le peyr dar reoettes de l’impbt aur le
wouldnot &foot the right8 of theTurk& Therefore, the
revenu - reraient rupprlm6s. LWollUon des 616idee whioh WIO ingrnined in people, by propagwla,
mentr da dlvlirion nkureit pas der6perourrion our les
that the Arohbirhop was proporing to take awaythe
droltr der Twos. Cleat pourquoi ltimprprssion,ferrights of the Turkirh minority lr not txue. Evenif all
momentenreoin6epar la propyande, relon lequelle
tbrr provirionr wem pawed, the ri ta of the Turkirh
lterohev6que Makarior proporerait de rupprimcrr 1eU
minority would be frr in oxoeaa
dmttr de la minorlt6 turqur eat faurre. M&IN3 en
minority in my part of the world, Misreprermtatlon,
ou d’edoptlonde touter 0611dirporltionr, lea drolts
of oourw, oen k oarried a longway, and,a# I @aid de la mlnorlt6 turque d6perrrrebnt de kauooup
on a&her
ooo~ion in one of my rtetmentr, the
lsu droitr de n’importe quell6 autrs minor&6ailleurr
di6tum l oei6mnirr, oalomniw, I1 en mrtere toujoura danr 16 monde. La feurrr repr6scsntetlonde8 falts
lqw ohow* epfiw hare in thtr letter whiobkr
pwt owter tnomr trbr loin et, oommr jr l’al d6
d an in theproviour mattw whiohhave Cut dana Itune de me%d6olaretlonr ent4rieure8,

68. Tha PI
Cyprw, we

63. Mr. El
Ihavenoin

ty CounoilI
beenwed b
aeemnto ig
Minister ek
oauseet grf

64. A8 fox

letters and
1nformeUo

alight upon
to gointotl
andno emo

56. Thir n
radar Ror13
the Prime 1
sayingthat
note wa.shl
eome’mdy
‘8
whlohhave
to the faot
morning, ex

68. This n
a letter wh
with the en
birhop Mah
wNoh has I
ultimatum.
murt be put
oertain oon
the nameof
Uons,whiol:
nny rerponr

57. Amber
the poeition
We are the
the oner WI
and,ne I ha

cdioton-welomltt6o, -6LtQrnRiwr U-cm~PWt6w t6
Qu6lqus dhwe (; IU~IBR- t~#lio6tten .dew
Qul m18 II 6t4 dirtribu66 et dana loa qurrtions put
ont 6t6 antbrleurementsoulev6e8,

61. But I think a olear oaee is in tho mindsof the
memix3ro of the Seourity Counoil, aa a result of the
previous dlsoussion and what we have said tonight, that
is thnt we must have the proteotlon of the Seourlty
Counoll for the independenoe and the integrity of
‘Jyprue. I hope to pkduce a resolution whioh wlll
Ituarantee the independence
and the integrity
of
??yprue onoe and for 1111,nndI hopethe Seourity Counoil
will either in tlda wny or in some other wny, in its
wisdom, protect Cyprus from the tlrrcrsts.

61. Mnis Je crois qu’une chose stImpoee clairement
h l’esprit de8 membres du Consoil de s6curlt6
II In
suite
de la discussionclui a eu lieu pr6ckklemment et
de ce qul n 6t6 dlt ce soir, c’est qu’ll fuut h Chypre
lo proteotlon
du Consall pour pr6sorver son indbpendunce et aon Intbgrlt6. J’espbre pr6senter un
projet de r6solutlon qui gnranllrn cotta indbpen.bnce
et cette Int6grit6 une folo pour touter, et j’ec$re
que, de cetta mnnib~oou tl~une nuke, le Conseil de
s6curll6, duns ea eugeeee, prot6gern Chypre centre
lee menaces.

60. This a:
has paseed.

Natlons,wh
tha messq
Ganeral

tllr

“I requf
ncoordnnc
the Secur

68, The PRESIDENTI I thank tb roprw~ntativr of
Cyprur , and I now or11on the roprrclentativo of Turkey,

68. La PRESIDENTt JI rrmoroie Jr rep,rbawtant
de Chypre et jr donnemaintenantla parole au rep&-

a&ant de la Turquie.
69, M, ERALP (Turqutr) (traduit de llanglalrl: J’ai
l~intmtlon dWe trbs brrf. Je no veux auounement
abuser de la patienoedu Coneeilde s6ourlt6 en rearaeeant toue lee arwmente qui ont d6jh 6M expor6s
au Conreil. M. l’ambasradeurRorsideoremble ignorer que aon minirtre deo affairer 6trangbreoa d6f9
expoe6 longuementet aveo (Iloqudnoeootte oauee
perdueet ind6fendable.
de Ch;)rpre,lettree etoontrb
54. As for the event8 in Cyprue, there have been 64. Sur lea 6v6nemente.
letter8 andoounter-letter.%information andoounterlettrea ee ront suoobd6ainrl querenrelgnementret
information, which have beoomeSeaurity Counofl oontre-reneeignements,qul sont tour devenur den
dooumentrand whioh have been oimulrted. It ie a
dooumentr du Coneeil de rbouritd et qul ont 6tb
alight uponthe wisdomof the member8of the Council distribube. Cleat mettre en doute la rageese des
to go into themagain, The faoto are there to be reen, membreedu Conrril que de lee 6voquer h nouveau.
Lrs faits aont 18,et auouneffort d’6loquenoene peut
andno amountof eloquenoeoanohangethe truth.
modlfler la v6rit6.
66. Thir meetingWLI oaled at therequert of Ambas- 66. Cette r6union du Conneil a 6M oonvoqu6ab
sadorRoeeideebeoaueeof a rumour to the eff& that la demandsde l*ambasradeurRosrlder B la ruite
d’une rumeur relon laquelle le Premier Minlrtre
the Prime Minister of Turkey had (riven an ultlmatum
sayingthat aotionwouldbetakenlate tonightunleeethe de Turquie aurait lanod un ultimatum lndiquant
note was heeded,Well, this seemsto be a figment of
que deemeeureeaeraientprirer tard danela eolr6e,
some’~dy’eimagination,a8are 80manyother rumours B moine qu’il no soit d6fOr6 B 8a note, I1 semble
whiohhave beenoiroulated, MayI draw your attention bien queoe ne soit quepure imagination,oommetant
to the faot that in Ankara it is now 1.16tomorrow d’autree rumeure qui ont 6W Apanduer. Pulr-je
morning, andlate tonight har parred long ago.
attirer votre attention aur le fait qu’il eat aotuellement 2 h 16 du matin, heure d’Ankarn, et quele
momentoorrerpondantP l’exprerrion %ard danr la
eoir6e” eat depuislongtempopare67
68. Cette a6anoea 6t6 oonvoqude
6galementenraiaon
66. This meetingwas also oalled on the pretext of
a letter wNoh I submittedto the Seoretary-General d’une lbttre que j*ai eoumiseau Secr(Staireg6nbral
aveo la note qul l’aooompagnaltet qui 6tait adrerr6e
with the annexednote whiohwasaddressedto Arohbirhop Makarioe. This note of ro-oalled warning, B l’arohev6que Makarios. Cette note de pr6tendu
whioh has beendeeoribedas an ultimatum, ir not an
navertia8ementn, que l’on a pr6eent6e oomme un
ultimatum, n’en eat pas un. Ells neprerorlt l’adop
ultimatum, It doer not oontainanyurgentdeoirionthat
mustbe put into effect immediately,It only envisages tion Imm6diated’aucuned6oirlon urge&. Elle nefait
qur sugg6rer oertainer oonditionr et demander
oertain oonditiona,and aekr that they beobrerved in
the nameof humanrlghte andhumanitarianoonridera- qu’elles soient obeerv6er au nom den droitr de la
peraonne humaine et en vertu de oonrid6rationr
tione, whiohstill remain amongthe primary dutiee of
humanitaires,qui rortent enooreau premier rangder
anyrerponrible Government.
devoirs de tout gouvernementresponsable.
67, Ambaaaador Roaddeshaaattemptedto put ua in
67, LWnbaeaadeurRoaeideea oherohdhnourplaoer
the porition of the aooured.We are the %ggreeeorrn, au banode8 aoour6r. Nour aommooles “agrenreurr’.
We tare the oneswho *threaten”, Weare noti we are Noue sommeroeux aui lanoentder “menaoera.Cola
tb on&swho aoou~e.The faotr are there to be wen
art inexaot, oar chit nounqui aooueone,Lee falk
and,&III haveraid, no eloquenoeOM ohangethem,
oont 18 et peuvent 6tre oonrtrt60, et, oommejr 1W
dit, nulle 6ioqurnoene pout lee tranrf&m@r.
SE, Let me auk Ambrrruior Rorrider thirr OM he bll, Je voudrair demander ib M. l~amkraadeur
rolemnl~ Mb offioiall~ deolulQ that Turkteh houree Rorridea r’il pout rolennellsment et O~iOiJlemrtrt
d6alerer quo lrr w4tieotu turquaoae rsroat plur in0 oUlPOorohypriokr tura nfagmt3t
3-t l$@@ rR!@&u.-mw! .tim,ti
i +&I&I’wa ~&@&t&e&ail %.wal plz’
ouge leer aera mmlue, et qu*il ren

63. Mr. ERALP (Turkoyja I lntind to be very brief,
I haveno intentionof taxing thepatienoeof the Seourlty Counoilby rebarhing all the argumentawhich have
beenured kfore in this Counoil.AmbarradorRorridei
oeemsto ignore the faot that hirdirtinguirhed Foreign
Minirbr eloquentlyexposedtbir losing andunfounded
uauaeat great length.

mfs fin nux effusIona de sang? Je souhaite qu’ll
veuille bien r6pondre h ce8 questions.
69. De tout cela, 11 ressort que lo ternpa des distours est pas&. Cleat tnalntenant h 1~Organlsation
de8 Nations Unies de prendre de8 memires, mesure
qui sont dovenues urgentes. Le dernier pnrugraphe
du measu.ge que jki @sent6 oe mntln au Seorbtoire
gh&xl
dlt notamment h oe sujet:
“Jc wus scrnls oblig6 do Men vouloir, uunform6ment h 1’Artlcle 54 de la Churte, informer le
Consell de s6curit6 de la 8Ituntlon et falro la

GD. This all adds up to the fnot thut the time for words
has paaBed. We are nowfaoedwith~\otion~y
the United
Nntione, whloh we urgently noed. The last paragnphof
the message whioh I presented to the SeoretaryGoneral this morning snys:
“1 request Your Exoellenoy to be good enough, in
aooordunoo with Artiole G4 of the Churtor,to inform
tho Socurlty Counoll of the eituntlon und to take the
13

-

-

neo8Ieasy eteaa for an urfmnt disuatoh of theunitod

--~-

-_-_

1

doost?alre pour que la Fores drs Nations Unles

,oharg& du maintien de la paix eolt envoy&ed’urgenoo,oonform6mentau parrgraphe 4 de la r&solution adopt4eper le Conreil de e4ourit4le 4 mars
1964.”
60, AmbassadorRossideshasspokenat great length 60. M. F7ossldes a par16 lonnuementdu fond du nrodo
on tho morlta of the issue. Well, the merits have been bI&mr, et oelul-al a 0t6 di&t6 ioi, Le Coned11
dlsouesd here. The Seourlty Counoil ha8 passeda
r6ouritb a adopt6 une r4solutlon. Nousavonsmaintenant la devoir de mettre tout en aeuvavpour obtenir
roaolution. It is nowour duty In allearnoetnoseto try
ltepplicatlon de cette r6solutionet nondlen d6former
to put that resolutioninto effect, and not to distort its
les olausea.Le reprhsentantde Chypre a par14 de
olaueoe,Ho hasspokenof partition, uEnosien,ofsplltting jugs four ways and two wnyr. Let us not go into partage, dtEnosls de vases oass6sen deux ou en
pasdensla &mansemantloe.While we are taking our time epeaklng quatre morc88ux.he nous1anc;ons
tique. Alors que nousparlons ici h loislr, il y a des
here, there are thousandsof Turks who are living in
dreadfor their lives,
mllliera de Turcs qui craignent pour leur vie.
61. The time for words haspassed,Let ua proaeed 61. Le temps des paroles esl pass& 11faut agir.
to eotlon. I wasvery happyto hearfrom the SeoretaryJ’ai Bt6 tr& heureuxd’entendrele Seor4telreg6n4ral
Qenerelthat the diepatohof the UnitedNationsPeaoe- me dire quel’envoi dans1Yle de In Force des Nations
keeplng Force to the Island is imminent. That Is a
Unies pour le maintlen de la peix etait imminent,
C’est une grande satisfaction pour mon pays. CVest
aouroe of great satiefaotlon to my country. That is
oneof the objeoUveethat we have in mind. May I eleo l’un dee objectifs que nous visions. Puis-fe aussi
ajouter que, en &pit du fait que nousevonsengage
addthat, in spiteof the faot thatwe are goingto greet
expense to ald the beleugueredTurkish people of
de grandesd6pensespour aider la populationturque
essi4g6eB Chypre, nous avons accept6 d’apporter
Cyprus, we have’agreed to oontribute as a voluntary
oontribution, the sumof $100,000for the maintenance une contribution ben4vole de 100000 c!ollars pour
l’entretien de la Force de maintieade la paix?
of the Peaoe-keeping.Foroe.
62. I b&eve that there ls not muohmore to be said. 62. Je ne oroie pas qu’il y eit grand-choseda plus
h dire. Un mot enoore oependant,une r6ponse B
There is only onething, only one reply to be given to
Mr. RoseIdes.He has spokenabout these faots at
dormer a M. Rossides,qui a par16 longuementde
oen felts, Consent-11B oe qu’unemission d’enqu6te
rest length, Is he willing to have en impartial faot4lndlngmlssiongo to Cyprus andreport to the Seouri- impartiale se rende B Chypre et fesse re.pport au
Conseilde s6ourit4 en lui disantla v&it67
ty Counoilon the truth?
66. Mr. BITS109(Orewe) (tranelatedfrom French):
63. M. BITS109(Qrboe):La r6ponsequele Ministre
The reply whloh the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
de8 nffaires 6trangbrea de Chypre a, eveo beauooup
Cyprus tried, very persistently but unsuooesefully,to
dtinsistanoe mais en vela, oheroh6 B obtenir de
elloit from the representative of Turkey during the la part dr: reprbsentantde la Turquie durant lee r4recent dlsoussionein the Seourlty
Counoll on the oents d4bats du Conseil de e4curit4 sur ltaffeire de
Cyprus question,haebeengiven to us by the Turkish
Chypre, 1s Clouvernementturo nousla donnemainGovernmentnow, in spite of the faot that the matter
tenant, en d6pit du fait qu’entre-tempele Conseilde
bar in the meantimeken settledbythe Seourity Coun- sburit6, en adoptantB l’unanimit4 se r6solution du
4 mars, a lui-m8metranoh6la question.
oil itself in ite unanimousresolutionof 4 Maroh.
64. In the note it delivered yesterday to the Qovern- 64. Le Oouvernementturo, dans sa note or4eent4e
ment of Cypnrr, the Turklrh Governmentthreatens, bier au Gouvernementde dhypre, meneoe,oettefair
thlr time ti&t
beotlngaboutthe burh, to intervene saneembages,d’intervenir unllat6ralementBChypre.
Unilaterally in Cyprus, The reason given to justify
La raison avano4epour fustifler ootte men808eat,
tbir threat Is--or Turkey sees it-to proteat the toujourr d’rpr&e la thko turaue. de urot&rer
Turkish oommuntty, wblohis threatened wltb oomplote
la bommunatit4turque, menao6e-d&e an&llat?on
annibilatlon.
totalo.
66. What the Turkleh note does not explain is why a 66. Ce que la noteturque ne nouaexpliquepal, o’ost
minority whiohir afraid of oomplote annihilation should
oomment ll se falt qu’unemlnorlt6 qul orPint un6
dafAde, on& three dws aftor the ado&ion of the
annihilation totrlo d6oido, et orla troir joure aprbr
that is, on‘7 Mmh-to
lo veto do la r6rolut!on du Conarfl da r6ourlt4,
NaUonr &a&keeping F-oroe ti oonformlty with
paragraph 4 of the Seourity Oounoil resolution of
4 Maioli 1984.m

town of KUma Paphoe,

of aypriot QreQ6 WI

66. Is this deliberateattaok,this defianoeof theappeal

for restraint oontained in your Ccunoil~s resolution, the
attitude of a suffering minority? The Turkish minority
in Cyprus has, I am sorry to say, very often been innited to violenoc.
These unfortunate people hAVe hen
persuaded that, whatever happens, a very oioso
neighbour , infinitely stronger thnn Cyprus, w 111rush
to their aid. They have been enoouraged in their exorIJitllnt
dOlluuld~
of luying tlown llre luw to t110 great
majority find sotling themselves up as n State. Thoy
hnve
our
synqx1t11y
, Ix3cuuso they llre being saorifiood
to ends
wllichhuve
no cOnnoxlOn
with the& own welfare.

-

~~~
It is thus tl
tion of P n
;$;;Y;g

my deelre
leesly term
eographio
fragmontat
up by the 1

synonymous

axplanatlon
of lntervenl

67. For, u
of the pest
7 Maroh,
Qroeksat 1
the CounoL
President I
olared at Is
the treaty
oaaew-I re
to

intmven

Turkish a0
favourable
be taken t
consent.

BR. This 11
beenreoeil
note of yes
of having 1
manner, BI
epeoify a d
taken. Far
that this ag
threat of an
at e time \
Members a
heavy reep
to the lrlan
69. In an)
notified by
despite the
the Seoreb
unllaterellq
meUoaIlya
C&ewe,wh
eovoreignty

70, arwoc
dom and p1
Counotl wi
~~~n~
~-~~~~~
threat of in

I’nppel h la rctenue
quo
c:onthd
i0 rbsode votre Cons41 eat 1Wtitude d’una minoritb
en d6tresse’l La minorit
turque de Cbypre R 6t6,
je
regrette
de le dire,
trbs
souveut
Incit6e
h In
violence. Ces mniheureux ont 6t6 coIlvaincus que,
cpol qu’il Ilclvlenne,
une
puissance
trb3
volslne,
infinlment
plus forte quo Chypre, volern h leura
seCOUrs. 11s ont &6 oIlcourllg6s
tluns
leurs pr&
tentions exorbitantes
de f81re In 101 A la grnnde
mnJorlt6 et de s%riger en Etnt. Notre sympnthie vn
vfm
eux,
~111’ 11s sent ancrifies
a des flus yul n’ont
contre
lutiou

letbr
add]
Permnnent
oxplui~ls thl
it snys thll
exeroise 01
and will UC
l’oaco-keo~
the resoluti
u date has
HepI’est~ntfl
tIlla
letter

I
gir.
ml
ion8

snt.
rest
rss!
wb
we
:ter
our

1lus
3 R
de
Iat0
au

pm
p’W
I,,“:
I de

! de
Id’2
it&
tOi8

ire.
SEt,
Kz

l&f1
&1:;
ito,
1 la
uet
‘ne,
Ill-8
:P4p3

I vn
ont

-

IsIt is

we

that

we hwe

oom8

to tit8

---

paradoxioal

Situp-

t!on of a majority menaoedwith serlouodange~r
by a
minorityy, Th8 unrcknowlodged
reaaonlbehtndtb!snow
ohroniothreat of !ntervent!on mU8t not be @ought
in
any deelre to save the minority from what ie shamelesslytermed gOnOOid8;
it is rather in tiaeecheme8of
the goale of udminietrative
eographioalpartition,
!ragmmtatlon, it is In all theseplanuthatare summed
up by the word %krlmn whioh hae now oometo be
eynonymouawith the ug!y word aparth8ld, that the
explanationfor this obeeesionwith the so-oalledright
of intervention is to be found.

rlen i
c!ufon

VOir
we0 1eUrpmpre bien-&re. C’68t @in81
8n sot
arriv0 h la situation
Paradoxale
d’unr

t%ajor!t6 menaobed’un danger &i&x par une mlnorit&. Cleat ailleura que dana le souo! de 8auver
la minorit de oe que, sanevergogne,11sont oaraot&rise de gdnooidequ’il faut reoheroher les motif8
lnavoudsde oette menaoed’interventiondevenueohronique; o’est dans de8 vis6ee tantbt de partag8 g6ographique, tant8t de fragmentation administrative,
oleet dane toua 088plans quereeurnele mot pkrlm,
eynonymedo&avant du vilain mot d’apartheld,qu’on
trouvera l~expl!oat!ondeoette !d6efixe qu’onnomme
droit d’intervention.
61. For, while yeeterday’e ultimatumoiteetheevent8 67. Car ei l~ultlmatum dlhler se prevaut dee BVBof the paet threedays,it shouldnotbe forgotten that on nemontadesdernlers trola jours, 11nefaut pasoublier
que le 7 mars, le Jour m&mede l’agresrlon oontre
7 Maroh, the very day of the attaok on the Cypriot
Greeksat Paphosandthree day8 after the adoptionof
les Grecs chypriotes B Paphos,et trois jours aprAs
the Couno!llr resolution, Mr. KemalSatir, the Vioele vote de la r6eolutiondu Coneeil,le Vioe-PrCident
President of the Counoilof Ministers of Turkey, de- du Coneeil des minietrea de Turqule, M. Kemal
olaredat Istanbul: “Turkey’s right to intervene under Satir, d6olaraIt R Istanbul: “Le droit de la Turquie
the treaty ie reserved by the reeolution and, !n any
d’intervenir en vertu du Trait6 eat r(serv6 par la
oaee”-I
repeat--in any oaae,Turkey ha8the ability
r6eolutIon et, en toue lee oaa- Je r6abte en toua lea
to inkrvene”, Mr. Kemal Satir aleodeolared that the
OM - la Turquie a la poasi~ilit~’ d’intervenir.”
Turkish Governmentwouldnot aooeptanydecisionunM. Kemal Satir d6olaralt au881uuele Qouoernement
favourableto Turkey andthe Cypriot Turksthat might turc n’aooepterait auouned6oIsiondefavorable A la
be taken by the medlatore appointedwith Turkey’8
Turquie et aux Turos ohyprlotea que pourraientdvenconsent.
tuellementprendre lee m&iiateure nomm6eaveol’aooord de la Turquie.
68. This ie howthe Seourity Counoil’eresolutionhas 68. VoilA la faqondont la r&solutiondu Conseila bt6
beenreceived by Turkey, wbioh, nonethe leee, !n Its
repue par la Turquie, qui, pourtant, dane sa note
note of yerterday, aoou5ea the Governmentof Cyprur
dthier, aoounele Qouvernementde Chypre d’avoir
of hav!ng interpreted it in a thoroughlyirresponsible interpr&b
cette r6eolutlon saneauounsensdes resmanner, But, we are told, the Turklab noto doe8not
ponsab!l!t& Mais, nou8 dit-on, la note turqus no
apeally a date on which the unilateral aotionir to be mentionnepar la date A laquellel’aotion un!lat&ale
taken, Far from mak!ng matters easier, I am afraid
aura lieu. Loin de rendre lea ohoeesplus faoiles,
that thir aggravate8the eituationby holdlngaoonstant Je orains que oela n’aggrave la rituation en fairrnt
threat of an explosionover Cyprus andaroundCyprue planer une menaoeconstanted’exploeion8ur Chypre
at a time when the UnitedNationsandao manyof its
et autour de Chypre, quand les Nations We8 et
Member8 are exerting all their effort8 andassuming tant de 881 membrer sont en train de d&ployertour
heavy reepon8!b!l!tiee in order to help restore peaoe lqurs effort8 et d’a88umerde lourder oharger pour
to the Island.
aider R la paoifioationde l’lle.
69, In any Oa8eth8 Turk!sh Governmentha8 been 89. En tout &at de oauae, le Gouvernrment turo
notified by-the Greek Qovernr &at that shouldTurkeya Bt4 avie& par le Oouvernement8rec sue danr le
despitethe Seourity COUnOi1’8
rerolution anddeeoite oas oh, malgr6 la r6solution du Co&e11di 86ourit6,
the-Seoretary-C&n&al18appeals-deoideto Lnterdene malgr0 lea appelsdu Seorbtaire gh6rti,
la Turquie
unilaterally in Cyprus, it8 intervention would~auto- d&o!dera!t d’lntervenlr
unilat4ralementA Chypre 8on
mat!oally &d !m!i&!ately bring aboutinterventionby intervention entrafnerait automatiquementrt immb
Greeoe, wh!ohie a&our to prOt8Otthe independenoe, diatem8nt
oelle do la Q&toe, rouoieuse
de protiger
eovereigntyandintegrity of Cyprur.
l~indbpendnnoe,la rouveralnet6 at lt!nt48r!# da
Chypie.

70, CJreeoe
oontinu88to hop8that theoounrelrof w!rdam end prudenoewill prevail md tFw% Se~urlty

threat of intervention which la eetforth!ndeta!l in thi
letter addressed to the Secrotnry-Qensral
by the
Permanent Hepresentative of Turkey, n lettor whioh
explains the duration of the mission of the foroe when
it suys that a foroe will be sent from Turkey in the
exeroise of n right deriving expressly from treaties
nud will coritinue to ogernte until the Uuibd Nations
Peace-keeping
Foroe, provided
for in pnragraph 4 of
the resolution, reuohes Cyprus. Thereis a timc-llmlt,
a dute has beer1 set, and I believe thnt the llermaneiit
1leprem~nt.n Hvo of Turkey kuew very we!1 whcu ho sent
this letter to the Suaretary-Geuernl
thnt the Intur-

TO, La arbor oontinueA esgbrer
que ler oonreiIr
de 6 168 et de prudenor pr6vaudMnt et qur 10
Sonar
T 1 de rburlt& prbtora, moora uno fair, tout
lo poi& de ron autwlt6pour rappelorauQouoernament
two---l8u-o~~ati~ - quo I8 .cm- Il?l$ou. r -tot@
fib 3$md3r&8“de-~~~atllrati8n~ dM mtmu tMis8~Y
di uWutmir
dr, r6cwrir A ta menaoeBUII lwpliii
de la force et d’auvrer on communpour la paix.
Cur 11 y 0. mennce dLinterveutiou,
et cette menuoe
est expos6e en d&nil dans la lettre adress&
au
Secrbtnlre
g&i&al
pRr le repr6seatnut
perrnauenl
de la Turquie,
lnquelle Indlque lu dur6e de In ml+
sion do In force turque en disnnt cpe cette dcrulbre
sern envoy!3e daus I’exercice
d’uu droit bmnuant
express6ment dus Irnltbs et op6rern Jusqu’nu moment
oh ln Force des Nntlons Unles chnrgbe du mnlntien
do ln pnlx, envlsngbe uu pnrngrnphe 4 doln r6solutIou
du 4 mnrs, se rendrri
h Chypre. La lettre flxe un
termn et uuc dute, et je croio qua lo ropr6sontnnt

nattoual For00wu aboutto leavefor oypw, Heuou, pormanont do la Tuzquie r&v&it trbu bien, quand 11
tbrni~a~tmd1emlo~tarrythtittrnota
figme of our imagluation.

a envoy6 ootto Iettrr au SeurMain gWral, qua la
fomo intarnationalo 6tait our lo point do partlr wur
Chyprs. Par oons6quent,il y 4 menaod,et j6 regrette de dire quo 00 n’oat pae pure imrgination de

rotabIll
tar.’ N

"NC

exirk
dealir
of inl
priatc

notre part.

71. Mr. FtOSSIDES (Cyprur)~ I should like to ray a
fuw brief worda in reply to tha Turkish reprerontativo.

71. M. RCSSIDE8 (Chypro) [tradult de ltanglalr]r
Jo voudrals
r4pondre trbr brihomont aurepr6eontant
de la Turqule, Xl a demand6 rl je pouvalame porter

Ho askedwhetherI wouldguaranteethat therewouldbe
no fightlng. or burning or anything of that rort in
Cyprus, I would oak him to tell me howI or any
reaeoaable person oould say that there would not
be any fightlng, lf the Turks themrelveekeepprovoking it ae they did in Paphorafter the resolution wae
adopt& Howcould the Governmentof Cyprueguaranbe that thore will be no firing bookor fires breaking
out when we had to repel the attaoke in order to
eliminate the aouroee of firing by rnlpero and tlie
killing of persons?If the Turks were not proddedinto
fighting in Cyprus there would be immediatepeaoe.

garant qu’il n(y auralt pae de combat&par d’inoendier, ou tout autre lnoldent de oe genre RChypre.
Je lul demanderai de dire commentmoi=m6meou
toute pereonne raieonnable pourrait garantlr quY1
n’y aura paa de combatsal lee Turos lea provoquent,
oomme ilr l’ont fait B Paphosaprbs lladoption de
la r6eolution. Commontpourrionr-nous garantir quU
nly aura pas de ooups de feu et d*lnoendies~‘11
faut repousnerlee attaquee, supprimer lee francstlreurs et emp6oher10s massaores?91 lee Turos
nIbtalent pas pouaaba B la lutte, II Chypre, 11y auralt
unepalx imm6diate.
73. 11 ert Bvldent quo o’ert noue- o’est-k-dire la
Qouvernement- qul voulonsune r6publlqueohyprlote
paoifique afin d’avolr une nation unifl6e, un Etat
unitalre; o’est nounqui voulons la palx; c’eet noue
qul refurons lee oombats; o’eet le Qouvernement
de Chypre et la peuplegreo de Chypre qui affirmant
que la oooxlrtenoe eat possible, Nousn’avonsauoun
int6r6t B provoquer lee oombatset lee marsaores.
73. Ceux qul ont int6r6t Boe qu’ll y ait des oombatr
et de8 maeeaoroeoont oeux qui attlrment que la
ooexlstenoeest lmpoesible,quele partageeetla seule
solution. 91 lee provooatlone
turquer oeraent, lo
oalme reviendra oertainementB Chypre. Je la r6pate, la majorit de la populationturque de Chypre
ne veut ni la lutte nl la haine. Elle veut vivre en
bonneentente avec la oommunaut6greoque,h oondition
qu’on
In loieseen palx.
74, Je voudraie aoulever un autre point, Le reprb
rentult de la Turqule a dlt qu’ll n’6talt pasquestion
d’lnvasion, qu’il n’6talt pa8questiond’entrer BChypre
par la foroe. Je savah queoela reralt dlt au Conaefl
de r6ouritk
Male que voyons-nouedansla lettre du
reprdaentant pormanentde la Turqule? NOUSlisons
quo a... lo Oouvornomontde la Rbpubliqueturque . . .
en vertu du drolt quo lul confire l~artlole IV du
Trait6 do garantie, a d6old6.. , [quVl] prondrait les
moeuroeappropri600~,La lottre pourault en diraut
quo oeo ameeureu appmprl6etP roralot ler ruloantor; “La Fomo qul mora onvoy6e P Chypre, dam

73. It ir obvious that it is we, the Qovernment,who
want a peaoeful,Cyprur in order to have a tiled
Cyprur, a unified State, that it 1swe whopTethe onee
wl~owant paoe, that it ir we whodo not want fighting,
that it is the Qovernmentof Cyprus and the Qreek
peopleof Cyprur who say that ooexirtenoeIs porslble,
We have no ventedinterert in fighting andkilling.
73. The verted interest in fighting andkilling 18with
there who want to rhJw that there oan beno ooexietenoe,that partition ir theonly solution.If the provooation from the Turkleh side oeaeea,oalmwill eurely
be regained in Cyprw I repeat again, that the bulk of
the Turkish peopleln Cyprur do not wantfighti;lg and
hatrod, They want to live together-if they are only
left alone.
74. There ir onootherpointthat I shouldlike to make,
The reprorentative of Turkey raid that there ir no
quortion of invasion, there is no quertlon of entering
Cyprur by fomti, I knew that that wouldbe raid in the
Seourlty Counoil. But what does the letter from the
pmanent Representativeof Turkey ray? It read&
I.. the Governmentof the Turkish Republio , , , by
virtue of tho right oonforreduponit by artloie IV of the
Troaty of CWranteo, hasdeoided to take appropriate
aatioua. The lot&W then goer on to ray what that
eappropriataaotion” will bar ‘The foroo wbloh will

be sent to the irlend in exeroiso of tho above-mentioned
right , * a’

l’oxoroioo du droit rurmontionn6,. .”
71. Le Qouvernomont turo inform0 oinri offloIollament lo kor;)tairo
Jrrt ot la Conreil do r6ourit6 au’il a &id6 br’O~VOYOC
uno fomo 1 Clwwr,

arrux

mP
Turkey
tue of :

regard

eubjeot
and the

Turkirt
what it
out t&i
It from

77, Th
Turkey
“II

aooor

the 5(
neoes
Natior
P%:

Thin, a
Turkoy
United
one dil
lnberen
Govern]
to the
another
territoz
78. I h
IF%
t$%
under&

78. Ar
mont iu
*,.wit
I want

!t2E
~~
rrirtlq

pour now lamenter our la &uatlon or660 6 Chypre?

tion that hadarisen in Cyprus.But this la not a proper

Mais cola n%st pas une bonnepolitlque h sulvre.
Jo dh qu’il axiste malntenant une menace nette
envers Chypre, h laquelle il faut rbpondre par un
avertlssement
solennel A la Turquie, lul enjoigunnt
d’abandonnor cette mbthode m6dibvale qubst l’usnge

polioy to follow. I suy that we now have u olear Want
to Cyprus, whioh shouldbc met by a tltern wurulngto
Turkey to desist from this mediooval method of fcrcc
agalnat a smull ocuntry.

do la forca centre u41 petit pays.
7G. There Is anothar point which shows their Intention
to use force in Cyprus. The letter from tho Permanent
Reprcsentntive
of Turkey states: *Upon the oontlnuntlon of these nttnoks efforts wore made in order to expnud and strengthen
the trlpurtlte
force whioh wan

76. 11 est un a&re point qui prouve l’intontion d’utillser la force ?I Chypre. La lettre (1u repr6sentant
permunent de la Turqule dbclare: Wornme ties nttaq44es
c0nt11N444ie14t,
clew efforts ont Btb falts pour
Blnryir et ranforcer lo force trlpartlte cr66e oonfor16

Et02

Vention
A41y
re
Gunranl
Artiole
t0

CypJ

C01l410ll

and for
Cyprue.
udopt D

1
Iand 11
we la
P pour
/:n%
glals] 1
pntant
porter
lnoenWPre.
pm ou
qu’il
‘quent,
ion de
r qu’il
08 e’il
Lanos~Turas
aurait
hre lo
‘priote
‘1 Etat
it nous
Lement

.rmsnt
1auoun
‘aoren.
‘mbats
que la
f seule
jnt, 1s
f&-$
we en
oondiI
xtprb,eation
2%

itre &I
ilirOtlB
pAe.*.

IV du
‘ait les
cuilant
b ruit, danr

m6ment h I’Article SPdo la Chart%” Or, voioi oa
ertablishedin oonfortntty with Artiole 69 of the Ch&rquedit 1’Artiolo sgr
to%@Now, thle ir what Artlole II sayrl
“Auoune dirposition de la prbsente Charte no
“Nothing in the present Charter preoludeethe
s’oppose0 ltexirtenoe d’aooordsou d’organismes
oxlrtenoe of regional arrangementsor agenoieefor
dealingwith suohmattersrelating to themaintenance
regionaux destindsh r6gler lea sffaires qui, touchant au maintien de la paix et de la sburitb
of international peaoeand 8eourity as are appropriate for regional aotion, provided that euoh
internationales,se pr8tsnt b une sanctionde oar&toorranpments or agenoies, , , are consistentwiththe
the r&ional, pourvu quo 08s accords ou oes
PurposesandPrinoiples of the UnitedNations.”
roisnt oompatibler aveo lea Butr
oT*rmer***
et
es Prinoipesdes NationsUnies.n
Turkey olaimsthe right to intsrvenein Cyprusby virLa Turquie revendiqusle droit dt1nt8rvenir B Chypre
tue of regional arrangementsunder Artiole 61, disen vertu d’aooordsrbglonaux,oonform8menth l’Arregarding the foot that suoh arrangementsmurt be tiole 52, sans tenir oomptedu fait que oesaooords
subjeatto the Purposesand Principles of the Charter
doivent Btre compatiblesaveoleaButset lee Prinoipes
and therefore subjeot to Article 2, para raph 4. The
de la Charte et, par oone&quent,oompatible8aveo
Turkirh letter therefore oontradiotsitsed ,dieregards
le paragraphe4 de 1’Artiole 2. La lettre turqus se
what it wiehesto dieregard,andquotasArtiole 61 withoontredit dono elle-m&me, nbglige 08 qu’elle veut
out taking aooountof thefaot that that Artiole precludes nbgliger et oite 1’Artiole 62 sane teni? oomptedu
it from aotingoontrary to the Charter.
fait que oet artiole s’opposeh 08 qutells agisse
oontrairementaux stipulationsde la Charts,
77. The latter from thd PermanentRepresentativeof 77. La lettre du representant de la Turquie se
Turkey then endswith this statement:
termine par oette dblaration:
‘1 request Your Exoellenoyto be goodenough,in
“Je vous serais oblige de bien vouloir, oonforaooordanoe
with Artiole 64 of the Ckter, to inform
mbment B 1lArtiole 64 de la Charte, informer 1s
the Seourity Counoilof the situationandto take the
Conseil de eburitb de la situation et faire lo
nboeesairepour que la Foroe des Nations Unies
neoessarystepsfor an urgent dispatohof theUnited
Nations Pesos-keepingForoe in oonformity wttb
oharg&e du maintien de la paix soit envoy&e
paragraph 4 of the Ssourity Council resolution of
d’urgenoe, oonformbmentau paragraphs 4 de la
4 Maroh 1964.”
r&solution adopt&epar le Conoeil de sburit& lo
4 mars 1984.”
This, again, oontradlots itself. The letter says that
C’est 18 enoore une contradiction. La lettre dit que
Turkey is dispatohinga foroe, but it alro oalls on the la Turquie envoie une force B Chypre, ma10ells
United Nations to dispatoha foroe-meaning that the demandebgalementaux Nations Union d’en envoyer
one diapatah doea not prevent the other. And it is une, co qui signifie qu’un envoi ntempbohepam
inherent in the wholeoommunioation
that the Turkish llautre. Toute la lettre en quertion montre que le
Qouvernementturo estime qu’il a le droit d’envoyer
Qovernmentoonsidersitself entitled to senda foroe
to the island as a psuoe-keepingforoe, whereasin
dans llfle une foroe de maintien de la paix, alorr
another plaoe it uees an ultimatum, threatening the qua, par ailleurs, il lance un ultimatum menaqant
territorial integrity andindependenoe
of Cyprus,
ltint8gritb territoriale et l~ind&pendanoe
de Chypre.
78. I have here before me the NewYork%/prld-Tele78. J’ai ooun les yeux le World-Telenram and Sun
ram andSun,whiohsays: “Turkey 1ssueLultimatum de NewYork, qui dit oe qui suitr “La Turquie adresre
yprlots and Greek Clovernmenta.Well,
un ultimatum aux Chypriotes grecs et aUQ6uvernei!!nsmsurely, if everybody understandsit in this way, perment greo.” 81 tout le mondeoomprendIes ohosar
hapsthe represcntativs of Turkey will pardonme for
de oatte fagon, lo reprgsentantde la Turquie mtexouunderstandingit in the sameway-as an ultimatum.
sera peut-gtre de les ~omprendrs de m&me,
otest-bdlre
oommeun ultimatum,
78, Artiole 68 of tha Ohartar rtatell that %oenforoe- 79. L’Artiole 63 de 1~ Charta prbvoit qutauaunr
merit Potion&all betakenunderregionalarrangements “aotion ooeroitiva no aera entreprine en vertu d’ao, , , without the authorifiationof thekourity Counoil~, oords rbgionaux. , , ssns l~autorisation du Consefl
I wult the repre8entotlve of Turkey to oonvoyto his de eburit6.n Jo voudrais que le reprdrrntant 6
Cio~rnmeat that, if it relies on Artiole 51 for intsrla Turquir diae k songouvernementquo, r’il invQqu0
vsnthn in Cyprw, It murt rlro Ww ln mind Artiole
ltArttole IS pour intb
the ~urkhh Oovernmcmtmtut obtain the

Weoannotallow Turkey to threatenCypruswith inter-

d’uti3entnnt
8 ntta3 pour
!OlIfOP

vention and with violation of its integrity and independence on the grounds that there is a regional arrangoment in the form of the Treaty of Guarantee.
Any regional
arrangement,
under the Treaty of
Guarantee or under any other treaty, mu& oomeunder
Article G3, and no Turlrlsh foroo oan be dbpotohed
to Cyprus without the nuthorizetion
of the Srlourity
Counoil. Let us have an end to this sbuation, onoe
and for all; let uti have an -md of these threats to
Cyprus. I would ask ngaln that the Seourity Counoil
adopt a resolution
whioh wtll put an end to these

Nous ne pouvonelaisser la Turquie menacer Chypre
dbno intervention et d’une violation de Bon intbgritb
et de son ind6pendnnce SOW prbtexte qu’il existe
un aoaord r6giona1, en Itesp60e oe trait6 de garantie.
Tout accord rbgional, qu’il s’agisse du Trait6 de
garantie ou de tout nutra trult6, tombe soua le coup
de 1’Artiole 53, et auoune force turque ne put Qtre
envoybe B Chypro flat18 l’autorisution
du Conseil
do sf3curltb. Mettons une foi3 pour toutes un terme
B cette situntlon; mettons un terme B tea menaces
centre Chypre. Je demandarai une foltl encore que
le Conseil de &curitB
adopte une rbsolution
qui

of intervention, beoaurethesethreat8 against
Cyprus are threatr against the wholeOrganisation,
threats

80. Mr. FEDORENKO(Unionof Soviet SooialietRepublior) (translatedfrom Russian): TheSeourityCounoil la holding tbiB emerg8noymeetingat the request
of the PermanentRepreeentativeof Cyprusbeoauseof
the direot threat of foreign military intervention
overhangingthe Republioof Cyprus, a Member of the
Unitcd Nations, The representative of Cyprus, in his
letter of today%date, apeoifioally refers tothe nolear
threat of Imminentinvasionof the territory of the Republic of Cyprus by Turkish foroes”.
81.. The statementwe have just heard from thereprosentativeof Cyprus likewise makesit quite olear that
Cyprus’ fears are justified. The latest reports from
newa agenoiesindioate that the threat is beoomlng
extremely ominous.
Followingyesterday’s ultimatum
by Turkey to Cyprus, aooordingto the UPI agenoy,the
Prime Minister of Turkey has stated today that if
Turkey doesnot receive a satisfaotory reply lo its note
from Cyprus by the eveningof 13 Maruh, its foroes
will land on the island. At the aametime, aooording
to the same reports, the embarkation of Turkish
foroee-invnslon foroes-by warships in the port of
Iskenderunhas already begun, Thus, a8 a result of
provooatlve unilateral aotioneby Turkey, theeituation
in the Cyprus area is beoomlnghighly menaoing.
82. This kind of behaviourby Turkey throws light on

many thinge; thua it ie nowunderstandable
why, when

the Cyprus eituation was riiaouesedat the Seourity
Counollts meetingof 28 February, the representative
of Turkey stubbornly refused to answerthe question
he was askedby the Soviet delegationandthe delegatione of other oountiies, a questionof fundamentalimportanoeto the Counoil-nameiy, whetherthe Turkish
Governmentwaswilling, in aooordanoewith theCharter of our Organiration, to respeot the sovereignty,
independenoe
&d territorial int&ity of Cyprus.Why,
indeed. rrhouldthe representativeof Turkey not bave
anrwered thie perfeotiy olear queationin & equally
olear andartioulate manner? The reply oouldbepoeirive or negative, but the Seourity Couno~ldid not reoeive any reply to thie question.It dtdnot reoelve one,
obvlourly, not beoauaethe Turkieh representativehad
suddenly lost the power of epeeoh,but beoaure the
Turk8 hadin aotualfaot from the very beginningbeen
oontemplatingan invasionof Cyprus.
88, A# we know, the Seourity Counoil,in the reeolution unanhously adopted on 4 Maroht

alI Memba f!tMa lh QorXOrrmlt witi
r-~~theu~rdthe~d~d

-lr

efrain from any aotion or threat of

.wi. Ifr. $tM f4fWm, aon?wWw~
&li@ticidr &III termei; ‘do la OBrr& 68
Wniea, tt e’abrtenir de toute aotlon Ou

Nations
de touto mcnnce dWtion qul rlsquernlt
d’aggrnver
la situation clans In IIBpublique souvernine c!oChyprc
ou de mdttre en danger la paix InternatlonnleR.
On snlt nussl quo In Turquie n’n pns 6lev6 tl’objeclion
centre cette r6solutlon.

notion likely to worsen tho situation in the sovereign
Itept:~lio of Cyprus, or to endanger international
poaoe.”

Turkey, a8 is nlso known, ralsed no objeotlon
resolution.

mettra fin aux menaoead’lntrrvention, oar des
menaoesoontro Ch;ypre ront der menaoeeoontre
llOrganisationtout entiare.
60. M. FEDORENKO(Union desR4publiqueaeoolalletee sovl6tiquea)[tradult du russe]: Le Conseilde
ebourlt$ atest r&n1 d’urgence, sur la demandedu
reorbsentant aermanent de Chypre, en raieon de
la-menacedireote dVntervention-6trimgbrequi pbse
aur la RBaubllaue
de Chyore. Btat Membredel’Organisation des N‘ationsUnies..Dansla lettre du rep&aentant permanent de Chypre, dat6e d’aujourd’hui,
I1 est questlond’une “menacemanifeste d’invasion
immlnentedu territoire de la RBpubllquede Cbypre
par les forces turquef3”.
81. L’intervention du representant de Chypre, que
nous venonscl’entendre,montre blen que lea cralntes
du Gouvernement
chypriote sont JustifiBes.11ressort
dee dernibree dep6ohesd’agenoeede preose que
cette menaceest des plus s6rieuseb.A la suite de
llultimatum que la Turquie a adress bier B Chypre,
le Premier Ministre turc a dbolar6 aujourd’hui,
comma l’ennonce llagenco United Press, que 81,
au solr du 13 mara, la Turqule n’a pas recu de
rbponsesatisfaisantede Chypre Bsu note seaforoes
dbbarquerontdansIIRe. D’aprbslea mB,ilesd6p6ohes
dlagences,les forces turqueed’intervention ont oomnrenceB embarquer sur des navires c’eguerre dans
le port d%kenderun. Ainel, B la euite deemeeurea
unilatbrales prises par la Turquie, la situation dans
la region de Chypre devient alarmante.
82. Le oomportementde Ia Turqule dclaire bien
des ohoees.Le Consell de s&curit&oomprendmalntenant pourquoi, lore de la e4ancequ’il a oonaaor6e
le 28 fdvrler B l’examen de la questionde Chypre,
le reprbeontant de la Turquie atest obstin6ment
refus4 B rbpondre B la queetlonqul lui a 4th pos&e
B plusleure reprlees par la d616gatlonsovl6tique
et par d’autree dU4rratlons:11e’agisealtdlunequeation de prinolpe fondamentalepour le Conseil. La
voioi: le Oouvernementturo est-il pr&, oonform6ment h la Charte de notre organieatlon,b reepeoter
la souveralnet6, l’lnd4pendanoeet l~lnt6grlt6 territorlale de Chypre? Comment 88 fait-11 que le
repr&entant de la Turqule n’alt don& alar8 auoune
r4ponse pr&clee B une question auasi Claire? 11
uurait pu rdpondre par un ~oulnou par un “non”,
Maie le Consellde e4ourit4 nra entendualors auoune
rbponee h oette question, non pas paror que le
representant de la Turquie avait eubltementperdu
la parole, mais paroe que, dbs le donit, la Turqule
profetrlt une intervention 8 Chypre.
88. Commeon le Bait, danr 6a &solution du 4 mart%
adopt&eIt lQnutnimit4,16Conreil de e4ourlt4l

to this

R4. Qui plu8 ost, drms lu nolo qu’il a udrcss6e B

84. Furthermore,
iu a note sent yesterday to Archbishop Maknrlos,
the Prosidont of Cyprus [S/S69(i,
Annex], the Turkish Government even reforfi to tho
Seourlty Counoll resolution. AclmIttedly, ~8 IR oleur
from tho note, Turkey obviously prefers to pass over
in oompletu silence whut Is In fuel tho key provision

1’archevBque Maknrios, pr6sltlent de Chypre (S/669G,
annexe], le Gouvornement turc vu iusqu’h se r6fbrer
A In r6solutlon
tlu Con~ell de s6cl\rIt6. I1 est vral
qu’il pr6IEre - ulnsI quo celn rcoeort de lu lecture
80~6 silence
de cetle note - pnsscr complbtnment
18

of we

This 1
reason
lost tl
note 1
Seourl
lengin
organ
lnternr
to die:
charte
would
did nc
oountr

86, T.
is too
faot is
the Rr
vlolenc
zation.
affalrs
weak k
is neon
oern 1
The Se
threat

86. AI
spirit
stralgk
mouslJ
ourity
aote PI
arisen
meaew
Nation
the obl

07. T
attenti
in Art,
amSeouri
itself (
it to OI
delega
the Co
events
overhi
;fbi?7
$$‘I
&. .i,

delega
me881
I~luYlel

of the 1
“TI
001’11(

Scow

for
8DOU
Iihp
tionll
111’1’1

p,

, oontre
I eooiairaeil de
ande du
bon de
‘;1;;;:
t

N

rep&
‘Jrd’hui,
‘nvasion
Chypre
,m clue
:rnlntes
reaeort
pee que
suite de

Chypre,

urd’hui,
lque al,
,repu de
I foroes
&p@ohes
nt oom‘re

of thJsresolution-that IP, the onewehavejust quoted.
Thin is in no way surprising. It Is olrar that th%
reanon is not that the writers of the nota suddenly
lost their memories, The whole implioatlon of the
note is nothing other than open defiance of the
Seourity Counoil resolution. Turkey Is openly ohallenging the Security Counoil, the United Nations
organ prlmarily responB1ble
for the maintenanoeof
international peaoeandeeourity, Turkey haedeoided
to disregard the prinoiples of the United Nations
Charter, and there oan be no doubt that Turkey
would soaroely dare to behave 80 provooatively if it
did not feel Iteelf to be baoked by the Western
countries’ aggrees!vebloo-NATO.

la dirporitbn esrentlellr de la r6eolutIon, oelle
dont je vlsnr de voua donnor leoture. Cola n’ert pas

86. This Is no time for big speeohes.The situation
Is 1.00alarming andseriousfor dallianoe.Theoardinal
faot 113a dir& threat of military aggreeionagainst
the RepublIo
of CYI)ru& The Counoiloannot permit
violeno~to be donsio a ems11
Memberof our organization. Thetimeswhenarbitrary aotionin international
affairs was possible,whenthe etrong oouldorush the
weak with impunity, are gone,never to return. And It
Ie neoesoaryto repeat this to whomsoeverit may oonoorn in oonnexionwith the presentCyprus situation.
The Security Counollmustresolutely put anond to tho
threat of aggressionhangingover Cyprue,

86. Le momentn’est guu8reprop100aux longa disoours.
La sItuatlon eat trop gruve et trap alarmnnts
pour que l’on puisse s’attarder, Nouenou8trouvona
dtlvant une menaoedlreote dlagreeBlonoontre la
R6aubliauede Ctire. Le Coneellns eaurait tol6rer
yuion 66 llvre h-he.5 aotes de jurtioe sommalreb
l’buard d’unpetit Etat Membre. Leo temm ob l’arbitrajre Malt admir danr lea rel&lonr Int~rnationalsr,
et oh le fort pouvait lmpun6mentBoraser le faible
sent B jamais r6volus, I1 oonvient de le rappeler
h ceux que cela Interease aujourd’huih propoa de
la situation de Chypre. Le Conseil de ebourit6 dolt
r6aolument oouper oourt h la menaoedlagrerrion
qui pbse8ur Chypre.
66. En outre, on se trouve en pr6eenoed’uneviolntlon flagrante de l’enprit et de la lettre de la Chart@
des NationsUnles, d’un m6prIs affloh6 de la r68olutlon adoptdeh l~unanimIt6le 4 mar6 par le Consell
de s6curit6. Le Conseil ne peut nl ne dolt demeurer
impassibledevant ten acts5nrbltralres. Etant don&
la sltuatlon, 11doil prendre lea mesure nQoenraIrer
pour obliger la Turqule, Etut Membre de I’ONU,
h mettre en wuvre lea d6oLlonr du Conseil et h
respecter lea obligatlonr qu’elle assumeen vrrtu
de la Churte de8NatlonsUnion.

dam

neaurea
,,on dans
I
,re bien
d mainhsaorbe
Chypre,

lnbment

t4 poebe
,vietique
p ques-

seil. La
nform6bapeoter
it4 ter~ que le
I auoune
air07 ll
h *non”,
1 auoune
que le
rt perdu
,Turquie
,4 mars,

86. Another faot faoing ua 18the openviolationof the
epirit and letter t?f the United Nation.5Charter and
etraightforvfard disregard of the resolution unanimouely adoptedby the Counoil on 4 Maroh. The Seourity Counoiloannotandmustnot let theeearbitrary
acts pas6 with indifferenoe, In the situation that ha0
arioen, the Seourity Counoilmusttake the neoe8rary
meaaure8to make Turkey, a Member of the United
Natione, implementthe Counoilledeoioioneand fulfil
the obligationait hasansumrdunder the Charter.
87. The Counoil18entitled in this oonnexionto draw
attentionto what the Chartor of ourOrgan1cationsays,
in Artiole 96: “The Members of the United Nations
agree to aooept and oarry out the deoisioneof the
Seourity Counoil.. ,n It ie the Counoil’aduty to avail
1teeU of thoseprovision8by whiohtheCharter enable8
it to seoureoomplinnoe with its deoirions,The Sovtet
delegationhasalready emphasizedin it6 statementto
the Counoilon 19 February [1096thmeeting],that the
eventsIn the Cyprus area and thethreat of aggrerelon
overhanglng3the
youngaoverelgnStuk of the Republio
of Cyprur &re not the oonoernof the Cypriot8 alone,
Thor eituation involve8 matter6 of prlnoiple that are

important in inWnatiottaA relations , 6nd the lnteM6ts
of~oil-genoclo~g
peepleo,
I~i..‘~..
.:
..
6& At War time whloh Is onrslrf fob us, the t%vbt

delegationwouldremindthe Councilonoemore of the
!nCSSn~o
dated 7 hJtJl'Ufll*y
from Nlkitu Sul~#W’ich
I~hrushohcv,
Chalrmnn of the Counoil of Minlatora

of

jcss6e A
[S/tm6,
rOfbrer
est

vrul

! 1ccturo
1 eilence

the

UssIt,

in

WMOll

he

stutod,

Inter

ullu,

!ht:

“Tlw Sovlct Governnlont
urgcv
all lho Stuletl
conocrnctl,
cepeclnlly
the pel~mcumnl
n~OnhorY
Seourlty
Council,
whloh
hour
primary
rosporx3lbllit.y
for
the
rnuintcnunao
Of intortmt~lOnu1
petioo
~mcl
seourity-lt~olllcll~Ig
Iho unitot1
stntcs
untl
lhu Ullltctl
I~lngxlonl--lo
c:xcr01s0
fcHtl’llIllt,
tu conskier
rOullYthlly
ulKi fully
nil lhe pOYYll~l0
conYO~punOeY
of LLll
IllTIed
invuslon
of
Cypu3,
UIKI
to rcspoct
the

of lb0

pour nous Btonner. Evidemment, la raislon de oe
silence n’eet paa un oubli de la part de l’auteur de
la note. Celle-oi n’aboutit qu% fouler aux pied6
la r6solutIondu Coneellde s6ourlt6. Ainsi, la Turquie
lance ouvertement un d6fI au C&sail de s6ourlt6,
organe prinoipal de ltOrganiratIon des NationsUnies
oharg6 du maintirn de la paix et do 1ss6ourit6 internationales. Elle a oholei de faire I! declprlnolper
de la Charte des Nation6 Unler, et ello n’auralt
oertainement pas 086 adopter une attltude ausri
provooante 81 elle ne 88 eentalt forte de llappui du
bloc agressif des puissancesoooidentales,I’OTAN.

87. A oe propos, le Conrail eat en drolt de rappeler
oe qua stlpule 1’Artiola OSde la Charter XOL~Mombres de ltO;*ganisatlonoonvlennrntd’aooepter et d’appliqurr les ddoirlonsdu Conorll dc sbourMoonform6ment B la pr6sente oharts,” Le devolr du Conroll
eet d’employer lea disporitione pertlnenter de la

Chart6 pour awrer
l~applioation de ae8 d6ulr!onrr
Ln d616gation sovi6tiqus a d6jh soullgn6, danr non
intervention du 19 f6vrirr (10966me a66no4, quo
lee 6v6nemrntr de Chypre et la mrnaoe dkgrerrlon
qui pbre our un foune Etat rouvrraln, la IMp”,“I~,e
de Chypre, nW6rerrent pa6 eeulem$nt 16sC
Us mrttsnt sn oau6o d’importmtes quortlonrb”ate pri&
olpe qui touohent aux rolationr intemrtknrlos et
8UX
-de t%U8!66 8)6@-plo~@i :. .-.; -. ].; :
--: i8@&8
j..
80, Bh eette heurcr grass, Ii. dW&ijn
ecdttqw
tlent h rappeler ce que M. Khrouchtohev,pr6rldent
clu Conscll de8 Mlnlslres
de l%JItSS, dlenit tlnns
son mossage clu 7 f6vrlor
tlcrnlcr:

peut avoir une invuion arm6a do Chypro et h
rerpeoter
la zouveralnet6 et lYnd6pendanoe
de Ia
R6publiquede CRscpre.w
[S/5534Y.]
89, The PRESIDENT:DoesuryrsprrrenhUvewiohto
89. Le PRESIDENT(traduit de l%mgIair):Un mombre du Conzeil d6eire-t-i1 prendre la par&? La
take the floor? I oall on the reprszentstlve of Brazil.
parole eat au repr6rentant du Br6zil.
90. M. BERNARDES(Brbbil) [traduit de l%nglaiz)~
90, Mr. BERNARDES(Brazil}: I azkedfor theflooron
a point of order beouueethie meetingwas oonvened J’ai demand6la parole our un point d’ordre. En
effet, oe#e s6anoea 6t6 oonvoqu6eaveo un pr4avia
at very zhort notioe. Wehave heard ztatementzby the
parties oonaernedendonememberof the Counoilha8 tuba oourt. Nousavone entendu10sd6olarationrdes
parties et un membre du Coneeil a fait oonnaftre
exprerred hi8 views. It might perhapebe useful, Mr.
Prerident, ii we couldhavea euepeneionof
the meeting I& position. Il eerait peutJtre utile, Monsieur lo
for thirty minutesin order that weoouldconsiderwhat PrBsident, de ruspendrela a6anoependantunedemiwould be the most appropriateaotionfor the Counoil heure pour quo nou8 examinionr oe qu’il oonvienl
de faire B oe stade.Je soumeteoette id6e au Conreil
to take at this ]unoture. I wouldlike to put forth that
idepand #eewhether the Counoilin agreeableto it.
B touter fins utileo.
01. The PRESIDENT: It has beenproposedby the
91. Le PRESIDENT(traduit de l’anglair): Le reprb
representativeof Brazil that themeetingberuzpended sentantdu Br6ril vlent depropoaerqua l’on rurpende
for half an hour to enablemember8 of the Counoilto
la s6anoependant une demi-heure pour permettm
aw membreedu Conreil de IO oonrul’er. 9’11n)y a
oonaulton this problem.If there ie noobjeotlon,I will
nowl urpendthe meetinguntil twenty minutesto nine. pas d’objeotion,Jesurpendsla e6anoejuequ*P20h 40.
m meeting yas suspended at 8.10 p.m. and reLa sdanoe est suspendue d 10 h 10: 0110 est reprise d 21 h 55.
sumod at 9.55p.m.
92. Mr. BERKARDES(Brazil): We haw, heard the
92. M. BEPNARDES(Br6ril) (traduit ii6 i’@h]:
Nous avona entendu 10s d6olarationz der repr6rtatementa madeby the representatives Jf Cypruz,
Greeae and Turkey :n the situation nowprevailing in
aentants de Chypre, de la Crboe et de la Turquie
Cyprur andthe area aroundit. I muzt eaythat we have our la rituation qui rbgne aotuellementP Chypre et
beenenoouragcdby the report preeontedbythe Seore- dannrla r6gion voisine. Jo doir dire qua noun avona
tary-General a8 to the progreee whioh he hau been tir6 encouragementdu rnpport quo lo Seor6Mre
able to make in the Impk,nentation of the rerolution
g6n6ral noun a prlrent6 our lea progrbr qu’il a pu
of 4 March 1984adoptedunanimouslyby the Council.
r6aliuer en oe qui oonoerne l~applioation de la
r6solution du 4 mare 1984, adopt60par le Conoeil
P l’unanimit6.
aover6ipLty and indafwImoe of the Roplblio of
Cyprur

[wJh84].~

01. The rtatemsnt whiohtheSeoretary-Generalmade
at the beginning of our meetingalsogiver evidencethat
hlr endeavour6are oomlngto a euoosrsfuloompletion,
04. Now the letter dated 13 Maroh 1964from the
reprerentatlve of Turkey addressedto the Saoretary-nerd glvea us oause for great oonoern. Wo note
that, aooordingto that letter, the TurkirhClovernment
lnbndz k, rend to tha i&and a foroe whiohwill be entruzted with thz tazk of rertoring
law bnd order in
Cyps\ur*

B3. La ddolaration que le Seor6taire g6n6rala faite
au d6butde la r6anoed*au)ourd’huimontre 6gnlement
queseaefforta sont our le point dlaboutir.
04. En revanohe,la lettre adresz6e1s13 mars 1964
par le reppldrentantde la Turquie au Seor6taire
gh6rd
noun inquibte vivement. Nour notonr qua,
d’aprbe oette lettre, lo Clouvernemsnt
two r’appr6ta
P envoyer danz l’fle une foroe oharg6ede r6tablir
l’ordre.

06. Witbout going into the merit8 of the Turkirh
Uovernmont~r lntentlonr, my delegationfeelsrtrongly
that tlm parties oonoernedshouldat thio rtageabrtain
fmn any aotion whloh ml&t exacerbate the urave

95. Quellee quo iroient la8 intentionr du Couvern6ment turo, ma d616gationeat oonvainouoqu’aurtade
aotuol lez pa-ties devraient e’abatenirde touti action

(S
u
a8

N8

th
Cl
4
ad

to

oa
of
th
ra

na
Wl

se
St
til
B6.
&

ham
it oc
87.
vtiq
reli
ulul
s/51
tain
WOU

tion
96.

ritul

rim
the
N&l
whit
into
gj

purpore in mind, and on behalf of the delegation8of
Bolivia, Brncil, Ivory Coast, Morooooand“orway, I
should like to introduoe a draft resolution Aloh the
five delegntions will now submit for the Counoil’s
oonsideration.
Wlth your permission, Sir, I shall now
mud the text of that draft resolution:
*The
----- Seourity Council,
wllavin -I---heard the statemente of the representative=
t ae Republio of Cyprue, Greeoe rind Turkey,
1/ -__--.-.--.-.
Ulflcml
Hecords
of the Security
Council,
mmt Ior Ja~nmry, fshruot-j
and Mnrch f’J64.

Nlnateenth

Yeor,

Supple-

fW

Maroc et de In NorvBge, ]e desirerala
pr6sentar
le projet de r6solution que lea cinq d616gations ausmentionn&s
soumettent h l’nttention du Conseil. Si
voue 1s permettez, Monsieur le PrBsident, Je donneral
lecture du texte de ce projet:
“L_e Conseil de s6curB,
“Bunt entendu
lea d6clnratlone deo repr6sentants
__de la-ublique
de Chypre, de la Grbce et de In
Turqule,

wha
hnE
Pl’O
tt
the
effo
olus
SllOl
ta Sk

-La

- ate
mnt

mRoaffir~
itu rorolution of 4 Maroh 1964
CSAJmT
%elng deeplyconoernedover developmentsin the
area,
“Notln the progreee reported by the SeoretaryQener
-if
in regard to the eetabliehmentof a United
Nationspea@+keeping
foroe in Cyprus,

“R6affirmant ea rdrolution du 4 mare 1964
Is/aa7sl,
“Profond6ment pr6oooup6des 6v6nementede la
MWn,
“Prenant note deeprogrhs indiqu6edar lo &orb
taire g6dral en oe qui oonoere la oonstltution
d’une foroe des NationsUniesoharg6edu maintien
de la palx B Chypre,
“Notin the aeauranoefromthe Searetary-Ceneral
“Prepant note de lbm~ranoe do&e par lo
that-iI? e United Nations Peaoe-keepingFame In
Seor6taire g6n6ral que la Foroe deeNationr Unier
Cyprur envisaged in tb3 CounollV~rerolutlon of
oharg6edu maintiende la paix 0.Chypre, envlrag6e
4 Maroh 1964 le about to be established,andthat
dans la rdeolutlon du Conreil de uburlt6 en date
advanoeelement8of that Foroe are alreadyenroute
du 4 marn 1984, eet cur le point d%tre oonrtltu6e
to Cyprus,
et que dee 616mentravancdede la Foroe sontd6jh
en route vera Cbypre,
“1. Henffirme ite oall uponall Member States,in
“1. R6affirme l’appel qu’il a adress k taur lee
oonformity with their obligationsundertlm Charter
Etats Membrerpour qu’ilr r Iaktiennent, oonformb
of the UnitedNatione,to refrain from any aotionor
ment L leurr obligatione aux termer do la Cbarte
threat of aotion likely to worren the eltuatlon in the
dea Natione Unlee, de to& Potion ou de toub
sovereignRepubltoof Cyprur , or to endangerintermennoed’aotlonqul rlrquorait d’aggraver la rltuanationalpeaoe;
tion dnns la R6publiquerouveraine de Chypre ou
de mettre en dangerla paix internationale;
‘2. Reuueetethe Seoretary-General to preee on
“9. Prie le Seor6tatre g6drnI
de pourruivre
with hie efforts to implementthe Seourity Counoil
aotivement 888 efforte pour mettre en ceuvro la
resolution of 4 Maroh 1984and request8 Member
r6solutiondu Conreil de l 6ourit6 en date du 4 mare
State8 to co-operate with the Seoretaryaneral to
1964et prle lee Etatr Mombrer de ooop6reraveo
that end.” [S/6601].~
le Seolbtaire g6dral h odte fin.” [S/lWl~.]
96. Qiven the urgenoyof the rltuation andoonridering 96. Etnnt dond l’urgmoe de la rituation et lVnt6the urrefulneeaof promptaotionby theCounoil,it ir th
r6t qu’fl y a P oe que1sCones11
agieeerapldemont,
hopeof the oo-rponeorr that after thir draft rerolution
lee auteurr du projet eep6rent quo 00 text+ qul v8
hae beenoiroulated amongmemberr of ths Council, 6tre dirtribu6 aux membreedu Coneefl,pourra 6tre
it oouldbe voted uponat the present meeting.
mir aux volx aujourdtiui meme.
97. Sir Patrlok DEAN (United Kingdom): I rhnll be 97. Sir Patrlok DEAN (Ftoyaume-Ual)[tradutt de
lhnglais]: Je rerai trbr bref. Cleat, je lo #ail, avw
very brief. It was, I know, with a generalfeeling of
reUef andratirfaotion that theSecurity Counoilpaered un l entiment de roulagementet de ratirfaotlon quo,
unanimously the reeolution oontained in Qoument le 4 marr dernier, il y a tout furte neuf jaw, lo
S/6576on 4 Mmh, jurt ninedaysago,u.J it waeoerConreil de rburit6 a adopt6h lknanimit6 la r6wtainly the hopeof my dele tion that thir rerolution
lutlon qui a 6t6 dirtribu6e l oue la oote S/6676,et
wouldloadto a relaxation or te~ion andto a reotorao’6tait oertainement l’erpoir de ma d616gationquo
tlon of normal oonditionr in the Republioof Cypn~r, oette rdrolution ambneraituned6tent4l t lo r6tablb
momentde oondttloru norm&leeduu la R6publique
de Chypre.
98. We have now km oalled toether beoaursthe 98. NOM avonu 6t6 oonvoqu6r do nuuveauparoe
rituation 10 rtill tense. I believe, however, that we que la eituatlon rerb tondue. Jo oroie n6enmolne
rhould keep our eyer firmly fixed on what shouldbe que nounno devonepu perdre de vue 00 qui demeure
the main purposeof thir Counofl and of the United l’objeotif principal du Coneoflot LlQrganieationder
Nationr a# a whole,that is to oneurethat the resolution Nation6 Uniee danr ron ensemble,h ravoir
auurer,
whiob wu unanimourlyandhappily adoptedbiro lr put
avow
lo minimum de retard, la mire en ouvre do
into sirrot with the minimumof delay.
la r6roluttoa qul s 6t6 adopt60h lcuaurimlt4 at fort
P propoepar 10Conroil.
@9,An we all know, the Sooretary-Qeneralhambeen SO. Commenouelo Iwow tow, lo 8oor6taireg6n6ral
effort0 to oarrly out th8 ta&r put upon II% a&aq+ woun effort pour r~6oquit&r do la t&ha
~~~
Ymrtorday ho iuudd himfirat interim
qui hi &it oonfi60,Hlor, il a pr)eokkt4eoapmmbr
report, andwi wdre ableto drawenooura6qmentfrom rapport proviroire, qul neue a peru emouragemt.
what it oontained.Todayhehasmadea statementwhioh Aujourd’hui, la dbolarntion qu’il a faite noue a
has udded to this enoouragement and shown that good
progress is being mnde. I would therefore suggest that
tl First message from this Counoil should be one to
the Seoretary-General
asking him to redouble his
offorts so that they may be brought to a speedy oonolusicn, and that all Members of the UnItad Nationa
should do all in their lower to help him oomplete hts
tbsk ln the shortest possible time.

confirm&
dans ce .entiment, oar ello montrait que
des progrbb notables avaient Bt6 r6alis6s. Je ponse
done que le premier
message du Conseil devrait
&re ndress6 au Secr&nire
g&&al,
pour lui demander de redoubler d’efforts en vue de mener rapidement sa t&e
B blen, et fe pensebgrtlementque
nous devrions demander II tous les Membres de
I~Organisation
des N&Ions Unies de faire tout oe
qui eat en leur pouvolr pour l’y aider.

21

r

100, J%atlmo auoal put11 ost du dove& du ConroIl
de rblt6ror l’appel adrosa k touslos Etats Membres
pour qu’ilr s’abstiennent, oonform6mont R leurs
obltgatlona aux terinor de la Charte der Nations
Unles, de toute aotlon ou de toute menaoed’aotion
qui rlaquorrit d’aggravor la situation danr la RbpuInternational peaoe.
bllque rouvoraine de Chypro ou de mottro on danger
la palx internatlonate,
101. AI I understandft,thedraftresolution whlohwas 101, 91 je 1sosmprendsblon, le projet de r6salution
dont lo ropr6eentantdu Brdsil noua a donna leoture
read aut to ub a fow minutes ago by the reprerentative
of Braril had these objeotivesIn mindandwill lead, 11y a quolquesminutesrdpond P tea objectifs et 11
oondutra, je ltosPBre. 5 une mlse en asuvro rapide
I bpe, 00 a vary rpedy Implementation ofour agreed
quk nous avons adopt6e11y a
resolution of nine days ap, Subje&to seeingit when de la rb&lutl&
It is alreulated, my delegationwill behappyto v&o for
nouf joun, Soua rhewe dten voir 16 texts 6ortt
lorsqu’ll aera dlstrlbu6, ma d616gation
sepahoureuee
it,
de voter pour oe prolet.
101. M. YOST (Etats~Unisd’Am6rlque) [traduit de
KS. Mr, YOST (WnltodStatesof Amerioa] : I amoonfident that I apoakfor a peat many peopleall over the
l’anglafs]: Je suls oertaln ds tradulre les sontlmenb
world whenI expressthe gratlfioatlonof mydelegatlon d’un grand nombro do personneson exprlmant au
tc the Seoretary-Boneralfar his etrenuour0ffortr on
Soor6talre gdndral In reaonnalssanoede ma d616behalf 0f paroe In the Eastern Moditorranoan
during gatlon pour les efforte tnlassablesqu’ll a d6ploy6s
there anxlaus days and for bir moat helpful interau service de In palx dons la r6gIon de la MBdltervention at tbia meetingtoday,
ran6e orlentale, pendant oea @urnbee d’an@ase, et
pour la d6olaratlon enoourageantequ’il a faite k
la s6anoedtaujourd’hui.
103. We weloomethe assuranoesgiven hero tN#
103, Nous aoouelllonsavbo aatlI!faotiOn la0 aaruevening by all ocnoernedsndthe expressedlntenticn ranoee qui noua ont 6t6 donn6osoe roir par tour 10s
by the p&rtlos conoernedto avotd aotionwNohwould lnt6rees6s, alnsi que l’expresslon de leur lntontlon
dt6viter toute action qul rlsquoralt d’aaraver la
worsenthe rltuation.
rltuatlon.
104 we we alsodeep!y grateful to the Qovsrnments 104. Nousnommosprofond6mentroosnnalrsantsaux
of banada, Swedenand Ireland for respondingto the
&uvernements oanadlon, su6dolset Irlandair, quk
oall to manthe barrioadeaof poaoein the Republloof
ont fournl des troupes pour garder lee barrloades
Cyprus. I thLnkwe all ohwed a great senseof relief
de la palx dansla Rbpubliquede Chypre. Nousavons
juat a fow hours ap at the newsthat an advanoeparty
tous 6p~ouv6,j’en suir Oortain, un vif rentlment de
of Cmadlan ofitoors =e on pouto b Cyprus. Our
roulagement on apprenantl 11y a quelquesheures’
blesslngago with them andwith thosewhowill follow
qu’un premier contingentdtoffioiers aanadlens6tcrlt
to make up tNs poaoe-keepingmlseion-and may they
en route vors Chypre. Nos v~~ux10saoaompagnent,
fQllowas qut&iy as pcarlble,
oux et ooux qul lo6 sulvront pour eta8motor Boetta
mission de sauvogardode la palx - et pulrrent-ils
aulvre aurrl rapldemontquepornfblo.
105. I1 esralt malr6ant do passer eoussllonee loo
105. And It wouldbe lerr thandooentto omit heartfelt
thaukr al10 TVtire gallant British foraea whiahhave vtillantes foroes brltanniqueequi ont eouvrbof dureworked so hard and sowell unlor nearly impossible mont et 81 blent dansdas oondltlonrprosquclmpor~~~~~
to kook the poaoe ln Cyprur until help etblor, paup malntonlr la palx k Chypro juaquO
8
l*ar~tv6o desrenfortr, ot qui m6ritont norohrlouroux
loo, I ah feel, tit&t it I@ the duty d wm OountJil to
reeffirm t.ha oall wNoh was madeupon ail Member
States, in confortity with tbslr obligationsunder the
Shader
of the United NMxir,
to rofrah from any
aotionor threat of aotionlikely to wiwn the situation
in the sovoreig4t i?epuNloaf Cyprueor to endangwin-

the dolo@ionr
andNorway,
168. My dole
oonoernodin tl
restraint from
partler and I
roaervatlon w
Forooo and wit
that the S@re
neoeerary

rgr

to help guide
andpeaoefulse

110, Mr. Rot
whloh has kc
Bras11la one
oontoxt: it oani
dueingthe drai
of Braell, nor I
Oenorol addrel
of Turkey in
Cyprur t aoopy
Qenoraltor to
111. The met
nowis that it re
In oonformlty Y
of the United 1
threat of rotlc
anythingother
tho rubjoot of c
that 0n this o(
for mirinterpr
terpretlq

thtr

to protaot the
utd lta terrlto
to oomohere a
to mnke It rti,
pendontand se
Natione, and U
of any powor,
may bo,
111. Thorofor
pa.rtioularly as
meeting in or
tomplatodagrfr

romerolementr,

soutom& depuio lo d6hut de drtto tr&tr affaira, quo
lw wrmlbre
t&N
Dour lea Nationa Unlor, gt la

bus offered

$2 million

makes pass6es,les Etats-Unls ont fait tout oe qui
&nit en leur pouvolr pour fnciliter lu constitution

to the Unlted Nutlons to help

removetho finanoiulobstaoleto rapid aotlon.

de cette force,. et c’es< nussl pourquol mon gouvernement a offert uux Nntions Unles une aomme de
2 millions de dollars pour lea uider h r&oudre les
dIfficult6s finnnclbros qui s’opposaient B une action
rnplde.

107. Oilr thnrtits also go out to those other Governments which have madethcrir oontrlbutlons.

107. Nous snvons gr6 aux nutres gouvernements
qul ont eux aussi npport6 leur contribution finnncibre.

108. In this spirit we support the draft resolu~.lon
whioh hus just hectn presented by the represenlatlve
of 13rn~il on behalf of Ills dulHgutlonundon behalf of

108. C’est dnns cet esprlt que nous nnpuyons le projet de rbsolution dont la ropr6sentnnt du DrGsil vlent
de dormer lecture, nu noin de .3a d616gntion ot flu
22

115, I wlrh t
and goloother
tNr dNt rem
olssrationon I

L;.
fil.

&.‘&A

the President
muoh for hfivin
views of my GI
is before the 1
to express the
which have bee
the Seoretaryl-t penoo-Itsapt
lurid of the trak
Tllcull~s we Uli
Sweden and Irf
the on11 to pe1
in order to sto;

the deLgationo of tba Xvory Coaat, Morooce, Eollvia
and Norway,
108. My delegation appeale to all parties dlreotly
oonoernedIn thlo dirpute toexeroire the mostextreme
rertraint from this momentforth, We hopethat all
parties and all Members will oo-operate without
reservation with the Unlted Nationr Peaoe-keeping
Foroer andwith the Sear&ary4eneral. Wetrurt alao
that the Secretary-General wlll promptly woure the
nweerary agreementand promptly name 8 modirtor
to help guide all partlee to this disputeto a ratlonal
andpeaoefulsettlement.

nom deed616gationrdo la Bollvie, dola C&e-dPv&e,
du Maw et do la Nordge.

114. Mr. ERALP (Turkey)1 I rhould Ukofirrttothank
the Prosldent and the membersof the Counollvery
muchfor hnvinggivenmethoopportunity to exi’ress tho
views of my Governmenton the trnglo quesllonwhloh
1s before the Counoll this ovenlng,I wouldalso wish
to expressthe thankaof my delegationfor the efforts
whiohhavelx~n andare beingrelentlesslypursuedby
the Seorotary-aonernl in order to bring to the lslund
a penoe-lteoplngforoe whlohwill rid that unfortunute
land of tho trnglo eve&l whiohhuvobeenharassingit.
Thnnks are also duo to the Governmantsof Canudn,
Swadonand Ireland for havinghastenedto reslmndto
the on11to perform n humanitarianJobon the island
in order to stopbloodshedandvlolenoe.

h.

109. Ma d6lQgationfait appel k toutoe 10spartlen
dlreotomont lnt6resr4ea dam oo dlff6rond pour que,
Qe maintenant,ellee faesentpreuve d’uno extldmo
modbrrtlon. Nousesp6ronr que touter lee parties et
toue lee Etats Mombree ooop6rorontsane r6rorw
aveo la foroo dos NationsUnlesohar@edu malntlon
de la paix et aveole Seor6talreg6dral, Nouserp6row Bsalemontquo lo Seorbtotre g6n6ral obtlendra
rapldementl’aooord n6oossaireet nommerasanetarder un m6dlatourqul sauragulder touter lea partlee
au dlfierend vers un rbglementpaolflquoet ratlonnol.
110. Mr. ROSSIDES(Cyprue): The draft rerolutlon
110. M. ROSSIDES(Chypre) (tradult do ltanglalr]t
whioh has been proposedby the represontatlve of
Le projet de rbsolutlon qui vfent d’6tre soumlspar
Brorfl ir one that ehould be viewed in lte proper
lo repr6sontant du Brdall dolt 6tro oxrmln6 danr son
aontext: it oannotheunrelatedto the statementlntrooontexto propro et 11 ne peut 6tre &par6 de la
duolnpthe draft resolutionmadebytherepresentative d6olarrtlon falte par le repr6rentant du Br6all en
of Bracll, nor unrelatedto the letter of the Seoretarypr6eontantle toxte, nonplur que de lrlettro adror~&
General addressedto the PermanentRepresentative par lo Seor6tairog6nCal au repr6rentant permanent
of Turkey in regard to the note whioh wasrent to
de la Turquie h propor do la note envoy6e1,Chypro,
Cyprur, a oopyof whiohwandeliveredto the Seoretarydont unocop10avalt 6t6 remlro auSoor6taimg6n6rd,
General, or to the statementsmadeIn this Counoll,
ou onoore des d6olaratlonsfaltoa devantlo Conaoll.
111. The meanlngof the draft resolution proposed 111. Lo but du projot de rdsolution qul noueost
nowir that it reaffirms its 0811
upn ~11Member States, malntenantsoumlr eat de r6sfflrmor IQume adrorr6
tn oonformlty with their obligation0under theCharter
B tour 10sEt&r Mombrer pour que, okiform6mont
of the United Nationr, to refrain from anyaotionor
aw ObllgatiJna qul lour lnoombent aux tormor de
threat of rot&on, Tbtr threat of aotion oannot mean
la Charti, tlr riobotlonnont do tout8 rotlon ou do
anythingother than the threat of foroe wbiohhaaken
tout0 menaoodkotlon. Cotte menaoed’aation nbrt
the rubjeot of dirouorfon ln mr CounolltonIght,I hope rutro chore que la menaoodo reoour’I k la foror qui
that on thir oooarlon at leart there oannotbe room
a fait op roir l’oblot doed6batr du Consoil.JtosD)ro
for mirlnterprntatlon or for anydevlour wayr of Inque aur oe point, iout au molnr, U no raurait y ivolr
terpretlng thlr draft resolution other than as intended malentondu,al auounepoarlblIlt6 do faurror lo aona
to proteot the roverelpty of the Reprblio of Cyprus
do oo profot, qul tend 1 pmtdgor la rouvurrlnotd
and itr territorial lntegrlty, so that we may not have de la R6publlquodo Chypre et son intbgrlt6 torto oomehere againh order to seekanotherrerolutfon
ritorlalo, En offot, 11no faut pas quo nouoayonr k
to make It et111more olear that Cyprus Ir an tiderevonlr 101pour demander Itadoption dkno au&a
pendantand roverelgn State, a Member of the United r6rolutlon, afflrmant plus olairomont enooro que
N&lone, and that it oannotbe threatenedby the wlll
Chypro ert un Etat Ind6pondmtet souvoraln,unMomof any Power, no mattar how rtrong or rupportedit
bro do 1’0rganlratlon der NationsUnior, et qutauouno
may be,
pulrranoo no saurait menaoor C&pro Ir ron gr6,
quo10 que rolont la force et 10s appdr dont0110
dlrpore.
111, Thorofore, we weloomethlr draft resolution, 11’2. Doneooaoonditlonr,nounaoouofllonefavorablopartioularly ar it har orl inatedtonight at thle urgent
mont IO projot do r6rolutlon, ayant p&ant 8 l’orprlt
meeting in order to hefp atop the aggreerion oon- lo fait qu’ll a 6t6 6labr6 A la pr6aonte 16aaoe,
templatedagainatmy oountry.
oonvoqu6ed’urgonorpour ompkhor I %gruaion onvirag64oontro monpays,
11% I wtrh to thank the roprorontativo of Bra611 11% Jr tlonnr h romoroier lo repr6~ntant du Br6etl
and the otkr four oo-rpnrorr for putting forwwd
et lea qurtro autrer autaurr duprojat da lw inltb
thin draft resolution, and partioularly for their ootlvo et de lour oonoourh k romoroio @lmont tour
opration on t&r qumtion, and 1 wirb ta thank ail
lrr mombror du Conreil do four ooophatloa,
I
f’::?’
@I40
tnomtmr of the Martty CWnoil for their w+ li’i
..I_. _..I..
?
ymlone

a3

M, ERALP (Turquio) ftradult de ltmglalr]r
Jo tlens, tout d’nhord, h remeroler lo Pr6sldont et
les membresdu Consellde m’uvoir permlsdkucposer
l’oplnlon de moo gouvernementaur la quastlontrnglquedoatlo Consellest snisl cosolr.Je tiens 6gnlement h exprhner au Seor6talre gBn6ral 10s remeroiemonts de ma d616gntlonpour les efforts qu’ll
a dbploybset qu’ll pouroultsnnsrelhoheafln d’envoyer
dnns 1% une foroe de maintlen de la pafx, qul
mettra un terme nux incidents trngiquos dont ootto
torre lnfortun6e est le thbl&3, Je remerolu enfin
les Gouvernementsosnadlen, lrlnndais et subdois,
qul ae sent h&Be do rQpondreB l’nppel lano6en vue
d’nocompllr druis 1% une auvrn bumnnltalre et

d’arr&er les effusions de sang et les aotes de
vtolenoe.
116. The deliberations this evening have produoed a
116. Lee d~lIb&rations de oe solr ont about1B la
draft reoolution-whloh will be put to the wte epentur6daotlond’un projet deldsolutlon - fl va, Jesuppose,
ally, I presume-that oanbe a very oonstruotlvedoou- btre mIs aux voix - qul peut avoir uneportbe oonsment if It Is interpreted properly. It Is not often that
truotlve 0’11ert Interprhtb oomme11oonvient et 131
I find myself in agreementwIthAmbassador
Rossldee, l’on sait en d6gagerla portde v6ritable. Je ne suls
but on one thing I do agree: that we must interpret
pas souventd’aooord aveo l’ambassadeurRossides,
mais oette fols je le suissur un polnt: o’est quenous
this draft resolution oorreotly. When I say that, I
have in mtnd partioularly thefirst operativeparagraph devons interprhter oette rdsolution oorreotement.
of the retiolution, whlohm&firms the Seourity Coun- En dInant oela, je pense tout partloullbrement au
oil’s oall “uponall Member States,in oonforntitywith
puragraphe 1 du disposltif, par lequel le Consell
%%affirme l’appel qu’il a adress h tous les Etats
their obligationsunder the Charter of the UnitedNations, to refrain from any aotion or threat of aotion Membrespour qu’lls s’abstiennent,oonform6mentB
likely to worsenthe situationin the sovereignRepublio leurs obllgatlonsaux termes de la Charte des Natlons
of Cyprus, or to endangerinternational paaoe”.The
Unles, de toute aotlon ou de toute menuced’aotlon
referenoe Is obvious. In our view, the referenoeis to
qui rlsquerait d’aggraver la situation donsla R6puthe neoessity for the Greek Cyprlot authorities on the
blique souveralnede Chypre ou de mettre en danger
island to refrain from any aotlon or threat of aotion la paix internationale”, Le sensen est Evident. Selon
likely to worsen the situation in Cyprus-and,
when
nous, oette disposition souligne la n6oessltbpour
I say that, I have in mind the preventionof bloodshed lee autorIt&sohypriotes greoquesdel’fle des’abstenir
and the perseoutlonof the mkish oommunityon the
de to& action ou menaoed’aotlon qul rlsquerait
island, I hope that it will be oonstrusd by all in that
dlaggraver la situation II Chypre et, par-l&, jlentends
sense,and not only ln the one sensewhiohhasbeen la n&oessIt&d’arr6ter les effusions de sang et
mentionedpreviously.
les pers&outionsoontre la oommunautt3turque de
lllle. J’espbre que le projet de r&solution sera interprbt6 par tous daneoe senaet non pas unlquement donsle senr qui a 6tb mentionn6.
116. Jlai jug6 nbssra~d’indiquer ltinterprbtation
116. I havedeemedit neoeesaryto mentiontheinterpretation whioh oan be given to oertain olauresof a qui peut he don& de oertaines dispositionsde
la rdsolutlonparoe quenousavonseu la malheureuse
resolutionbeoaurewe have hadanunfortunateexperienoewith the rerolution of 4 Maroh 1284.The seoond exp4rlenoe de la r&solution du 4 mars 1964. Le
opsrattve paragraphof that resolution, In whlohthe paragraphe 2 du disposltlf de oette r&solution, par
Counoil askedthe Governmentof Cyprus, %hioh has lequel le Consell de sbourit4 demandaltau Couvernementohyprlote, “qui est responsabledu malntien
the responslbillty
for the malntenanoe andrestorallon
of law and order, to take all additional measures et du r&ablLsement de llordre public, de prendre
neoerrary to stopviolenoe andbloodshedin Cyprusa, toutesles nouvellesmesuresn6oessaires
pour arr8ter
wao mlroonrtrued
in a very unfortunatemanner,with
lee aotes de violenoe et les effusion6 de sangh
the result that, instead of our moving nearer to the Chypre”, a 6t4 interpr&b de la tocon la plus regretrrstorallon
of law andorder, violenoeandbloodshed table, 01 bien qulau lieu d’obtenir progressivement
have in faot inoreued in Cypruo.
1srbtablissementde l’ordre on a assist68unereorudesoenoede la violenoe et des effusions de sangh
Chypre.
pretation and implemrntatlon
of this resolutlon,wb.toh,
amI have said, oan prove to be a oonstruotive doou-

117. J’espbrequetoutesles parties auront celaprdsent P l’erprlt et qu’elles sauront interprdter et
appllquer oorraotementoette r&solution, qul, oomme
Jel’al dlt, a une port&eoonstruotive.

113. Mr, FEDORENKO (Unionof Soviet Sooialirt Republlor) (translatedfrom Russian)t The SovietdelegaUon llctenad carefully to ths rtatemont in whtohthe
rrprrrmtative of Bracil, at the requert of the ooapOn#ora,introduced the draft resolution, The Soviet
dela atlon’r attitude towarda the rxplanatlon of the
pmv! aionr of the draft rrroluUon given rooomptantly
by the representativeof Braeil is one of understsnding.
The Soviet delegationlistonodwith antlsfaotionto the
etaturnout by Mr, llossides, tho repsesentntive
Of

113. M. FEDORENKO(Uniondes Rdpubliqueseooialistes sovi&iques) [tradult du NOW]:
La ddlbgation
rovi&ique a 6oout6 aveo attention le repr6sentant
du B&11, qul, au nom des auteurs, a pr6sent6IS
projrt de r&solution au Conaeil de r&ourlt&. El10 a
rulvi aveo bienveillanoe10srxplioatlonr qu’ll a donn&esaveo kauooup de oomp&enor sur ler diveroes
dlsposltlonsde oe pmjet. Par ailleurs, elle a entsndu
avec eattefnction In d6olnrotion de M. Rossid~>s,
le
repr6senttmt de Chypre,

117. I do hop that all partier oonoernedwill bear
thlr in mind and will proceedwith a oorreot lnter-

ment.

120. The Sov
thls draft rea
oorned-partic
againstany at
tion with reyr
Memberof ou
understandthe
the Soviet delc

121, Mr. SI
Frenoh): The
have shownhc
It is most rel
return to oala
shouldhave gc
oil resolution
only by a rea
which it hadSI

122. Howeve

examined,

it

responsibility
anyoneof the
oonriders its I
by others. Inc
vioious oimlc
stepfollows al
UOnof the sib
123. This is I
It oanonly beI:
whiohhavebee
therefore, the
oonoernedto I
a epirit of 0
NationsChart
action or any I
relations and(

124. Even bei
ableefforts w(
SeoretPry-Qen
situation, has
feelings and r
further effort1
methodrof ss
But, for the F
and the rerpo
volved must

future of Cyprr
of all Ita inha

order ia notre,
over right,

Cyprue,

110. La dblbgntlon

de 1Tlnlon eovi6tlque tlent h
soullgner pour eu. part qu’flucune ambigultb nbst poesible quunt h l~Interpr6tc~tIon h donner uu projet de
r6oolution
dont le Conseil est auiel. Etrmt do&
In sltuatlon ootuelle h Chypro, 00 projel 118 pout
nvoir qu’un fleul but, qukn 81311 eene: cleat un nvertlesement cnt6gorlque n bus coux qul, en vlolntion
de la rbolutlon
adoptbe le 4 mare pur le Coneell,
envisngorafent
des actions hostllee b l@gurd de

110. par its part, the soviet delegntlon oonEddero it
neaeeenry to state that there oan be only ono interpretation of the draft resolution before ua. In view
of the flituation tlint hns arisen in the Cypruo aron,
the draft resolution hns ae lte bnsio aim and idea the
lsoue of a firm wnrnlng to all who try9 in violaLiOn of
the resolution
udoptod by the Counoil on 4 Maroh,
to undertake hostile notions ngalnst CyprUo or to
infrlnge its sovereignty nnd territorinl
integrity.
24

125. It is it1
WI11 Vote in fa\
the representa
try and of 13
Moroooo.
126. Mr. Dli
h’enoh): My (
we ure netuIn
wtllo11

prevtIilY

Chypre et oheroheraienth porter atteinte h 88 aouverainetd et B sonintegrlte territoriale.
120. The Soviet delegation prooeede on the basis that
120. La delegationda lWn!on sovl&Iqueestlme que
this draft resolution is a serious warning to all oonoe projet de r&solutlon reprbsenteun avertissement
oorned-partioularly in thrtsltuation as It exists todays&ieux, surtout dans les clrconstances actuelles,
against any attempt at aggresslon and armed intervenpour tous ceux auxquelsIt s’adresse,pour tousoeux
tion with regard to the sovereign State of Cyprus, a
qui voudraient se livrer h des actes d’agraasionet
Member of our Organleation. It la in this sense that we
B des Interventions armbescentre 1’Etat souveraln
understand the draft resolution, It is In this sense that
de Chypre, Etat Membrede notre organisation.C’est
the Soviet delegation is ready to support it.
ainsi que nouscomprenonsoe pro]& de r&solution,
et c’est oomptetenu de oette lnterprbtatlon que la
dblbgatlon de 1Wnion sovl&ique est p&e B voter
en sa faveur.
121, M. SEYDOUX(Franoe): Les exposesquenous
121. Mr. SEYDOUX (Franoej (translated from
avons entendusoe soir ont dbmontrbB quel point
Frenoh): The statements we have heard this evening
la situation est prbocoupante.11 eat oertes t&s
have shown how disturbing the situation has beoome.
regrettable que les appels II l’apaisement, lano&s
It is most regrettable indeed that the appeals for tr
la semaine dernibre par le Conseil de s8ourit8,
return to oalm made last week by the Seourity Council
should have gone unheeded and that the Security Counn’aient pae W entenduset qu% oet dgard la r&solutlon adopt&epar le Consellle 4 marsn’ait 6th eulvie
oil resolution of 4 Maroh should have ken followed
only by a recrudesoenoe of the violenoe and threats
jusqutlol que par une reorudesoenoedes violenoes
ou des mennoesauxquelleselle viaait h mettre un
whioh it had sought to end.
terme.
122. De oette aggravation, 1Utude la plus attentive
122, However closely the available information is
des informationedisponiblesne permet pasd’imputer
examined, it is not possible to attribute exolueive
B tel ou tel dee groupesou doa parties en pr6renoe
responsibility for the aggravationof the eituation to
anyoneof the parties or group0oonoerned,sinoeeaoh ltexolusive respcneabilit8, ohaounoroyant pouvoir
oonsidersits ownaotionejustified by theaotionetaken trouver dane lea initiatives dee autres la Justifioatlon
des eienneeprcpres. En vbritb, on a llmpreaeion de
by others. Indeed, it is as if we oonfronteda kind of
vloious oirole in whioh one inoreasingly dangerous se trouver devant une eorte de oercle vioieux oh
stepfollows another,thus aooeleratingthe deterioradee mesuresde plus en plus dangereuaee
se suoob
tion of the situation,
dent, aoo816rantla dbtbrioration de la situation.
qu’il faut rompre. Cela
133. This is aohainofeventsthat mustbe broken, and 123. C’est oet enohafhement
it oanonly bebrokenbypromptly givlngup the methods
ne peut rCsulter que d’un abandonlmmbdiat des
whichhavebeenallowedto oomeinto use.This evening, mbthodesauxquelleson s’est la&s8 ent.rafnerB retherefore, the Counoilis makingafurther appealto all
oourlr. C’est donoII toue lee Int&res& quele Conaeil
oonoernedto restore promptly anatmosphereofoalm, de s&ourItb adreseeoe soir un nouvelappelafin que
a spirit of oonoiliation and reapeot for the United de tcus obt8son reviennedemalnau calme, Ii llesprlt
NationsCharter, and to refrain henoeforthfrom any de oonolliatlon, au respect de la Charte den Nations
actionor any etatementliable to embitter their mutual U&a, din que lee parties s’abstiennentdbsormais
relations andendangerthe peaoe,
de to& action et de toute dbcluration suroeptibler
d’envenlmer leurs relations mutuelleset de menaoer la paix.
124. Evenbefore our meetingthieeveningoommend- 124. Avant mbme notre r&mlon de ce roir, der
ableefforts were madeto this end,partloularly by the
efforts louablea so sont exerc6s dansce sons et,
Seoretary-Oeneral, who, in a diffioult and urgent notamment, oeux du Secr&nIre g&bra& qul, danr
situation, has done everything possibleto help paoify den olroonrtancesdblicateaet presssnteo,a tout mlr
feeding8and restore order,
At the appropriatetime,
en Buvre
pour contrlbuer Bl’apalrementder erprite
further efforts will have to be madeto find suitable et au ldtablissement de l’ordre. De nouveauxefforts
methodsof settling the basioproblemfaolngCyprus. reront ndoersairespour d6geger,
le Jour venu, ler
But, for the present, every one of the Qovernmentr formules propres P r6gler le problbmede fond qul
and the rerponeible leaderr of the oommunltieainae pose 0. C&we, Mail, pour le moment,ohaque
volved must realice-whatever their views on the gouvernement,ohaqueresponrableder oommunauUa
future of Cyprur maybe that itr future and the lnterertr
qui s’attmntent, dolt oomprendre,queller querelent
of all its inhabitant8will be la&in ly jeopardisedif
oe8 vueo mur l’awnir de Cbypre, que oet avenir et
order IOnotrestoredpromptly, if migRt were to prevail
lee intbr&s de tow oes habitants eeralent durableover right.
mont oompromissi, dnnsItlmm~dInt, l’ordre n%tnlt
pas rostour8, si la foroe venait h pr&faloir
aur ’
10 drolt.
126.

It is in this opirit

126. C’ast danscat oeprlt quo lnd618gcitlcnfranc;aise

that the Frenoh delegation

will vote in favour of the draft rosolutionpresentedby
the l’eprasentatlvcof Brazil on bohnlf of ills owu oountry and of Uollvla, the Ivory Coast, Norwny and
Moroooo.
126.
Mr. BPNHIMA
(Moroooo)
(translated
from
Fronoh): My delegation 1s hnppy to see that now that
We are nearbig tho and of OLWdebato,
the atmosphora
Whklh
pevails in lho Counoll Is dlfferunt from that in

votero cn fnveur
du projet
do r&olution
qui nous
n 6t6 soumls par le repr&mntnnt
du Brbsll
au nom

da son pays, do la Bolivia, de Iu C&e-d’Ivolrc, de
lu Norvbgeet du Maroo.
126. M. BENIIIMA (Maroo): Mn dblbgatlon so r6jouIt
du fait qu% la fin de oe dbbnt l’utmosph8re qul rbgne
RU Consell est dlff6ronte de celle dnnslu~@le nous

nvonsconimonc6notra dlscusslonetquolesdocuments

26

qui ont provoqu6 oette rdunion avaient or46e. Ces
dooumentsoomportaient, en fait, des Bl&nents qui
nous donnaient des apprbhenslonstr& sbrieuses
quant h l’espoir que madelegationnourrlssalt, aprbs
nvoir oollabor8 aux dbbatsantbrleurs sur ce problbme, de volr la r&olutlon adoptbepar le Consell
le 4 mars entlbrement appliqu8e, c&ant alnsi B
Chypre les condltlonsdepalx quele Consellescomptal:,
en prenunt 08s mesures: nous apprehendionsque
cette r&olutIon ne Kit devenuelettre morte et Inefficnoe.
127. Je me r@ouis que la ooop8rationau sein du
Consell ait permls de nouveauaux auteurs de la
dernlbre r0solutlon de pouvolr faire un nouveleffort
pour apporter B oette question un Blbmentpositlf
suppl6mentnireyul puisse aujourd’huifalfie baisser,
si je puls dire, la temperatureinternatlonalehpropos
d+uneorlse qul puraissait oet aprbs-mid1assezs&
rieuse et qui, B notre avis, tend depuisoette sbanoe
Ble devenir beauooupmains.
128. J+al bgalemententenduaveobeauooup
d+int&&
128. I also listened with great interest to the stateles interventions des representantsde Chypre, de
ments made by the representative of Cyprus, the
Turkish Ambassador and the repreeentatlve of the
la Turqule et de l+UnIonsovldtlqueet l+interpr&ation
tout h fait judioleuse qui a BtB donneepar lea uns
Soviet Union regarding the very oareful interpretation
et 1eE autres du projet de r&olutlon present6
all of them have given to the draft resolution submitted
par les oinq auteurs. I1 semble B ma dbl&gation
by the five sponsors. As one of the sponsors, my delegatlon feels that In order to disoharge its full re- pulsqu+elleest l+un des auteurs- qu’elle doit,
aussi blen pour assumer plelnementsa responsasponsibillty and in the interests of setting the reoord
straight, it should provide some further explanation,
bilite que pour manifester un SOLIO~
de probite intelleotuelle, ajouter uneexplioation.
129. Je pourrais &umer nctre attitude h l%gard
129. I might sum up our attitude regarding the interdu sens qu+ll faut donnerB ce projet de r4solution
pretation to be glven to this draft reeolutlon by oomen oomblnantles Interventions du representantde
bining the statements made by the representative of
Chypre et celles du representantde la Turquie. Le
Cyprus with those made by the representative of
Turkey. The mere fact that in thIe draft resolution we
simple fait qua dansoe projet nousr&ffIrmons la
r&solutlon du 4 mars slgnlfle que noun la aoneid&
reaffirm the rosolution of 4 Maroh means that we
regard all of the latter resolution--both its preamble
rons commetotalement valable, dane toue se8 8%
merits, aussi bien dans son prbambulequedansson
and its operative part-as still valid. When the Council
endeavoured during ite earlier disoueslons to help
dlspositlf. Lorsque le Conseil a fait des efforts,
restore peaoe and order in Cyprus, there was nothing
au oours de sea debate ant&rieurs, pour aider au
that eaid that the Counoil should exert its efforts
retour au calme et au r&abllssement de l’ordre
unaided; it was understood that the partiee direotly
B Chypre, il n+&alt pas dlt que seul le Conseild6oonoerned should elmllarly oo-operate in restoring
ploieralt des efforts: il 6talt soua-entenduque les
parties dlreotement lnttresr6es apporteralent la
peaoe and order.
m&me oollaboration au retour de la paix et au
r&ablissementde l’ordre.
130. Nous nouasommesr6Jouisde voir que, malgr6
130. We are pleasedto seethat, despitethe diHioult
rltuation, the Seoretary-Generalhasmanaged,through la difficult& de la sltuatlon. le Seor6taire &&al
the oo-operationandsenseof international reeponsl- eat arrlvB, graoe B la ooopiratlon et au seis de la
responrabilitb internatlonale de beauooupdIEtats
bility of many MemberStates,to establirhaninternaMembres, B mettro aur pled uneforce lnternationale
tional fame wbioh is arrembling for the purposeof
qui est en route pour attelndre l’objeotif eroompt(J,
oarrying out its areignedtack. we agree, h&ever,
that if therltuation is againtakinga turn for the worse, Nous reoonnaissonsoependantque, si la situation
tend de nouveauB la orim, oe n’est pasunlquement
it Ir doing IO not only beoaure there is an outride
pame qu’ll exlrte un Blhmentextdrieur qul pourralt
faotor that might brritimately oonntltute a threat to
valablementoonrtituer une menaoePlWbgr:tb et b
the integrity &d a&erelgnG of Cyprus but alno beoausethere is an equally explosive sltaatlon inside la souverainetede Chypre, male paroe qu+il y a, B
l+int&ieur, une situntlon bgnlomentoxploaive. Ln
the oountry. Moreover, the Security Council’sresolur6solutIon d.u Confleil
do El!3ouritb
en data clu4 mllra
tion of 4 Marob mentionstK)thlhescfuotors,referrilig
to the first faotor in operfltive paragraph1 andgoing rnppelle oea doux Blbments:ello fnit 6tnt du promler
nu pnrugrupho1 at mentionnele secondirnm6diateon to mention the sooonclfnotor In pnrngmph 2, in
ment nprbs, au pnrngraphe2, dnnslequol1sConsell
wblob it mnltus u elrong appealto the Oovornmentof
Cyprus to take addItIona measuresto restore peuoo udressa un nppol trbs o13rieuxnn Gouvernomantde
Chypro pour que co dernlor prenno do nouvelles
in Cyprus.
mesuresufln de rnmonerlo cnlnre h Chypro.
131. Wo nro oonvincotlthat today’s disousslonhns 131. Noussommescertnlns quo le debut d’aujourd’hul u 616extr!&nementposltif, nonsoulementpnroc
beenmoat constructive not only beonusait hntl t&m
plaou ut a tlnro whenwe ware In dnngerof witnosslng qu’il est Intervsnu h un momentoh nousrlsquiona
tl%a
tlnngereuso,lllais
n very clangorous
fluro-up, but ulso beontiseIt hasled d’u88Mel’ h 1111t3 tl&idg~lltiOll
26

which our discussion began, whioh hadbeenoreatedby
the dooumants that prompted this meeting. These doouments oontained some informati,>n lhat woaeianed very
serioue misgivings oonoernlng the fulfilment of the
hopes of my delegation, after taklng part in the earlier
dlsoussion on this questIon, that the Seourlty Counoil+s
last resolution would be fully implemented and would
thus bring about the pe?oeful oonditions in Cyprus whioh
the Counoll had in mind when It adopted these
measures, We were afraid that this resolution might
have bsoome a dead letter, devoid of any effeot.
127. I am glad that oo-operation among members of
the Counoil has onoe agaln enabled the sponsors of the
last resolution to make a further effort to bring in
another oonstruotive element that might now suooeed
in lowering the international temperature, so to speak,
with respeot to a crisis whloh thle afternoon seemed
quite serious but which, we feel, is beginnlng to be
muoh less so sinoe this meeting,

to a uew u
opportunity
oonoerneda
will take al
shoulderits
132. My de
this was a 0:
seriousrep
brief and th
genuinespix
the Counoil
be its first c
133. Mr. N
relief to mq
hasbeenabl
result of hle
peaoe-keep
” , , , should
tional peaoe
prevent a re
oontribute tc
andorder an

134. The NI
press their :
of Canada,:
respondedp
General to
Cyprus, ther
on internatic
We are furtl
we havethat
by other Ciov
approaohed
136. Norwa
the oo-span
permanentIT
to say Bolivi
of the draft
whiohwas ln
133. This d
view of my
oonoerned01
like to say, 1
by “in the or
of the Repub
and Qovernn
shedaa ame
do we bellevc
to bring abo
betweenvar
MemberStat

137. Weals
wholo-hearto
tt1otwo oporr
tho upproprlr
In the first 0

“1. Rotlff:
oollfol~nlity
of the Unil
01’

t1llwut

the

f4ovorol

L

llltorllationl

le la
Ctatr
nale
1pt6.
rtion
Dent
:ralt
et a
a* a
I Lfl
nnrEl
nler
.ateIfAl
It de
PlleS

paroe qu’il a pu dbgagerune nouvelle unanImit6au
Conseil et a permis dlentendre18sdbl6gationsdes
pays hdrebs6S
&firmer que leurs gouvernementa
reepeotlfs prendralent toutes mesuresn6cossalres
pour aider le Consell B assumersa responsrbilltb.
132. Ma d616gationest t&s heureuse d%tre en
mesure de constater que le d&bata 6tB court alors
que la crlse risqualt d’avolr deeprolongementstrbs
grnves, que les interventions qui ont &6 faltes
ont t6moign6d’un esprit, d’un d6eir reel de ooopbration avec le Conseil pour le maintien de l’ordre,
qul est le premier objeotlf h r&llser.
133. M. NIELSEN (NorvBge) [traduit de lt&~glals]:
Cbst un grand soulagemenjpour mongouverriemeit
d’apprendreque le Seorbtaire general a pu r6alIser
de; brogrbsatissi enoourogeant~
B la suitedeeefforts
inlassablesqu’il a d6ploy6s en vue de orher une
roroe des Nations Unles ohargee du maintlen de
le palx h Chypre, qui auralt pour fonotion“danalYnt&
r&t de la pr6servatlon de la paix et de la t&ourlt&
Internatlonales,de faire tout oe qul eatensonpouvolr
pour pr6venir toute reprise des combatset, selon
qrltil oonvlendra, de oontrlbuer au maintien et au
r&ablissement do l’ordre publio ainsi qu’au retour
h une situationnormale”.
134. The Norwegianauthorities further want to ex134. Le Clouvernementnorvbglon tlent h oxprlmer
press their respeot andgratitude to the Governments sa oonslddrationet sa reoonnaissanoe
aux Gouverneof Canada,Ireland and Sweden,which have all now ments oanadien, lrlandals et su&ioIs, gut tous ont
respondedpositively to the requestof the Seoretaryr6DOndU
B la demandedu Seor&alre f&&al de
General to join with the United Kingdomforoes In
slassooier aux foroes du Royaume-Uni-h Chyprs,
Cyprus, thereby makingthe peaoe-keeplngforoe
there
transformant oinsl la foroe de maintlen de la palx
an international Utited Nationspeace-keepingforoe.
on une
foroe lnternationale des NationsUnleu. Noun
We 8Fe further heartenedby the understandingQhioh sommesheureux de pensel que d’autres gouvernewo have that there may be further positive responses ments, (galement press&is par le Seor6talre
by other Governmentswh.tohhave also beensimilarly
g&n&al, envisagentde rdpondreew auosih sonappal.
approaohed
by the Seoretary-Qenernl.
136. Norway has the pleasure of againbeingoneof
136. La Norvbge a de nouveau le plaircr d%trd
the oo-sponsors,togetherwith four of the other non- l’auteur, aveo quatre autres membresnonpermanents
permanentmembersof the Seaurlty Counoll-that is
du Consell de sburlt6 - B savolr la Bollvie, lo
to say Bolivia, Brazil, the Ivory CoastandMorooooBrbsll, la C&e-dlIvoire et 1s Maroo -, du projet
of the drsft resolution before the Seourlty Counoll, de r6solutlon dont !O Conrail est rairl et qul a &tb
whlohwaslntroduoedby the repreeentativeof Braeil.
prbsent6par le reprhsentantdu Brbsil.
136. TN8 draft resolutionuoinoidesexaotly with the 136. Co projet de r&rolutlon r&pondrxaotement aux
view of my Government,My Governmentis deeply vues de mon gouvernement.Les (tinementa de la
concernedover the developmentsin the ares, I would r6glon pldoooupantgravementle Gouvernementnorlike to say, in two words, what myGovernmentmeans v&glen. Jo voudrals pr&oisrr, en dew mats, oe quo
by “in the area”. Wemeanthesituationin the krrltory
mon gouvernementsntend par 10s termes “de la
of the Republicof Cyprusitself. The Norwe@anpeople r6glon”. I1 penseL la sltuatlon sur le trrriblre de
and Governmentdo not believe ln violenoe andblood- la RBpubllquede Chypre elle-mgmc. Lo peupleet lo
shedas a meansof solvingproblemswlthln a State; nor
gouvernementnorvQlens ne orolant paa quola vlodowe believe ln Intervention from theoutsideln order
lsnos et loo offusions de sangpulsssntpermrttrs
to bring abouta oertain solutionto tragio differenoer de rhoudra
10sprobl)mes Int6rirurs d’un Etrt: fls
betweenvariour partr of the populationof any one no orolsnt pas non plus en l~lntsrvoatlon (trangbre
MemberState.
pour m&r0 fln aux dlvrrgenors trrglquer qui r&arent divers rocteurr dela populationde1‘unqueloonquo
drs Etats Membres.
137. Wealso fully subsorlbe-weare,inotherwords,
137. Nous sousorlvonsplelnement- nous sommes,
whole-heartedoo-sponsorsof thisdraft resolution--t0 en d’uutres tormos, ooauteursconvainousdu projot
the two oporutiveparagruphs,whlohwethink preocri~
de rdsolution - aux deux paragraphas du dlopoeltif,
the upproprintauotionby the Counoilnt tllis junoture, WA selon IlOUcI, diotent au Co lo11 la l&no de
Ill the first of t110111, t1m Seourity Counoilr
oonrlulto
In plus n~1l~‘ooprI6a.
Dansle paragrnpho1,
lo Conseilde dourit6:
“1. lleaffirms
it6 0011 upon ull Member Statoo, In
wR6affIrmo
lluppel qu’ll n adross h toue 10sEtats
---

ourfarce

cl~notlonqul rlsquarnlt d’aggruver la situation dans

ICI33
qui
kies
mm
Ir‘O-

sell
1’ a
Ftal:.
qua
-lefI du
la
!iort
sitlf
ser,
i;“e 0
moe
Br8t
1 de
tion
uns
ent6
,tion
r-it,
pla,te1CE
It $
;1 la
Yd6614son
brts,
r au
rdre
dblee
k la
r au
lgr4
Ihal

Ii0115

naio

to a uew unarimlty in the Counoil and afforded an
opportunity to hear the delegationsof the oountries
oonoerned affirm that their respeotlveGovernments
will take all the necessary stepsto help the Counoll
-shoulder
Its responsibility.
132. My delegationis very happyto seethat although
this was a orlsls that might haveproducedsomevery
seriousreperousslonselsewhere,the debatehasbeen
brief and the statementsmadehere have refleoted a
genuinespirit, a genuinedesire, of co-operationwith
the Counoilfor the maintenanoe
of order, whioh must
beIts first objeotlve.
133, Mr, NIELSEN (Norway):It Is a souroeof great
relief to my Governmentthat the Seoretary-General
hasbeenableto report suohpromisingprogressas a
result of his tireless efforts to aetupa UnitedNations
peaoe-keepingforoe in Cyprus the fun&ion of whioh
nI.. shouldbe, in the interest of preserving internatlonal peaoeand seourlty, to use its best efforts to
prevent a reourrenoeof fighting and, as neoessary,to
oontrlbute to the malntenanoeandrestoration of law
andorder anda return to normal oonditions”.

oonformlty with their obligntionn under the Charter
of tha United Nations, to rofrnln from any aotlon
or threut of aotion Ilk~ly to worsen the situntion in
the eoverelgn Ilopublio of Cyprus, or to endangel
IntolWltlonal p4Xioo.”

2’/

Membres pour qu’ils s~abstlonnont, oonCorm6ment
h leura obllgntions
aux tonnes de la Charto des
NfltiOnH
UnIea, de toutc aotlon ou do toute menaoo
lu H6publiqUe eouveralne de Chypre ou de niettre
en danger la puix Internationnlen.

Our interpretation of that paragraphinoludeewhat iu
olose to the heart of the representativeof Cyprur a8
well a8 what 18 oloeethe heart of the representative
of Turkey, We think that this operative paragraph
represents the sumtotal of the obeervationsmadeby
the two partIe oonoernedin regard to this matter, I
think It Important that we, as well aa the other oo.sponsore.,
make it olear lhat this ie our purposeIn
sponsoringthe draft resolution.
138. We also think that the seoondoperative paragraph 18 approprlate in requesting the SeoretaryGeneral “to presson with his efforts”.

Notre lnterpr6tatlon de ce DaraaraDher6Dondau
souol tant du representantde’Chy?Jrdque di reprb.
eentantde la Turqule. Cettedispositioneflt la synthbse
dos obEervatlon5faltes h ce sujet par les deux parties. Nous 8ommead’avis qu’ll lmporte quela d6I6gntlon norveglenne et les nutres auteurs du projet
pr6olsent olnirement la port6e de leurs Intentions.
138. NousestlmonsBgalementque le paragraphe2
du dlspoeltlf, par lequelle Consellprle le Seor6taIre
g6n6ral “de poursulvre actlvement se8 effOrtsn,
r6pondaux exlgenoesde la situation.
139, Pour conoluresur unenoteoptlmlete,J’exprime
l’espolr que oette s6anoedu Consell,justifl6e par des
olroonstanoesorltlquee, aura Dour resultat de Dermettre au SeorBtalre general htaoo616rerla oo&tltutlon de la forge deetin6e A malntenlr la palx A
Chypre et, oe f&ant, de or6er de8oondltlonspropres
au r6tabliseementde l’ordre, oe qul eat une oondltlon
pr6nlablepour quele m6dlateur,qul dolt 6tred6slgnd
pnr le Seor6talre g6n6ra1, pulese s’aoqultter de
aa thohe et ae oonsaorerh 1’6tudede8seUl8faoteurs
qui peuvent oondulre h une solution, h savolr les
aspootepolltiques de oette situationtraglque.

139. If I may olose on a positive note, we hopethat
this meeting of the Counoll, oalled under euoh
oritioal oiroumstanoea,will have aa Its end result
the poeslblllty and feasibility for the SeoretaryGeneral to further tnoreaeethe speedof eetabllehlng
the Peace-keepingForoe In Cyprus, thereby oreating
a eituatlon in whloh, we hope, tranquillity oan be
restored a8 a prerequisitefor thetaskof the mediator
who 1sto be appointedby the Seoretary-General,The
mediator will then be able to addrese himself to the
only aspeotsof the sltuatlonwhich oan lead to a eolutlonl namely, the political aepeotsof thistraglo sltuation.
140. M, HAJEK (Toh6ooslovaqule):Ayant vot6 en
140. Mr, HAJEK (Cceahorlovakia)(tranrlated from
French)I The Ceeohoslovakdelegation,whloh voted faveur de la r6solution adopt6e par le Coirsellle
4 mare, la d616gation
toh6ooelovaque
tlent A aoullgner
in favour of. the resolution of 4 Maroh, wiaheoto
qu’elle a vote surtout pour la partie de la r6eolution
emphaslzethat in 80 doing it was voting-mainlyfor
that part of the resolutionwhich reaffirms the obliga- qul rdaffirme les obligation& derl Etata Membres
d6ooqIantde la Charte, o’est-h-dlre 1~ partle qul
tions of Member States under the Charter, in other
d6olare que “188 Membres de 1~Organlsatlontl’abewords the part whioh says that ‘All Membersehall
refrain
in their International relation8 from the tlenncnt, dans leure relatlone lnternatlonales. de
threat or use of foroe againstthe terrltorinl Integrity
reoourlr II la menaceou R l’emplol de la foroe;solt
pollor polltloal lndependenoe
of any State, or in any c%her oontre l’lnt6grit6 territoriale ou lVnd6pendanoe
mannerInooneietentwith the Purposesof the United tlque de tout Etat, solt de toute autre manibrelnNatione” andwhloh,in applioatlonof theReprinoiplee, compatible aveo lea Buta des Nations Unles”, et
oalle upon all Member States to adopt an attltude qul, en applloatlonde oea prlnolpea, lnvlte toue les
based on respeot for the sovereignty, independence Etats Membres II adopter une attitude a’lneplrant
du reapeot de la aouveralnet6,de l’lnd6pendanoe
et
andterritorial Integrity of the Hepublloof Cyprus.
de lYnt6grlt6 terrltorlale de la RBpubllquedeChypre.

141. Ma d616gatlonaonsldbre cette partle oomme
la partle clef de la r6eolutlon du 4 mars. Samine
en oauvre constltue, pensons-noue,la condition lndispeneablepour que lea autres mesuresoontenues
danala r6aolutlon du 4 mare solentefficaoeset fruotueuseeet pulsaent justifier lea eapolra qul ont 6t6
exprim6e lors de sonadoption.
142. This poritlon, wNohthe Czeohorlovakdelegation 142. Cette posltlon, quo la d616gatlontoh6oorlovaquea d6fenduede fa?onoonstante,a 6t6 plelnement
haI oonrlstently rupported, has been fully justIfled and
oonfirrned In today18meeting. The Seourlty Counoll justlfl6e et oonfirm6e par la r6anoe d’aujourdlhul.
Le Conrell de r6ourlt6 6talt appel6 P oonrld6rer
had the ta&c of oonrlderlng a very aeriour anddanet dan ereuae oaurdepar
roua rituatlon broughtaboutby direot threata to the une eltuatlon trbr grave
We oannotoverlook one of the desmenaoeadireotes oontre la R%publiquedeChypre.
r rpubllo of Cyprud.
dooumentrbeforeus,dooumentS/Bti96,whloh,together Nous ne pouvonr pas paoser IIOUL~
rllenoe le doouwith its annex, o.zmstltuteaa flagrant violntlon of the ment S/6606, gut, avec aon annexe, ae trouve entre
1105 tnnlns
et qul constltue
una violation flngl,ante
o!Jilgntlonsandprlnolplos montlouudin tho resolution
ot do5 prinolpes
contenus d-%3 In
of 4 Maroh. In Its ranlly nrrogant tonu, this dooumellt do5 obllgntIon5
161rornlnlcloontof the wortlt prooodontsof the past,
r6solutlon
du 4 mars.
Par son ton v~rlt~blen~ent
ce document
rnppelle
les plres pr4c6dents,
aomeof wblobhave lxmlr montlonodby tho~*~pI*esenta- arrogmt,
Jont oortulns ont 6tb 6voc~116u
par la repr&ontcult
tive of Cyprus.
do Chypre.
143. SI nous exnnilnotle
lea ruisono
nvnn&es
poul
! 43.
If we exnn~lne
the runtlona
lnvolced to &sttiy
the
1~5 ineimoes
oonteuuef4
dun5 co document
threuts oontulnodIn Lllisdooument,rind11woooneldur justifier
ot 01 nou5 estlmoila clue co8 rnlsons ne 5onlpa5
that theser~n50118
nre not bn5odo~~faots,oti
roulltloe,
fond&s 8~11tlas felts, 5ur desr6nlit65, nou5ne pouwe oannol
but oonm to the following
oo~~l~slo~~:
this
15 m nttuinpt lo flnd u prrrtext for ooitirontlng the von5 pa5 abutlr h une conclut3ionaulre quela eul141. My delegationregarde tNe an the key part of
the resolution of 4 March. Ita ImpIementaUon,we
beIleve, IS ersential If the other mtiaaureaprovided
for in that rerolution are to be effeotlve and fruitful
and are to fulfil the hopesthatwerevoloed at the time
It wa#adopted.

United
ocrmple
wording

144. T
sltuatlo
011ahol
resoluti

It la In t
gallonII
delegatl
and NOI
reaoluti

146. M
Frenoh)
Seoreta
fortunat
peaoe.
148. I
the oou
asslgne
heavy t
merely
the exp,
eentatlv
on our
whioh I
druft re
141.

w

Seoreta
4 Mar01
States,I
Nations,
graph 1
to vote.

148. M
Spanleh
quertlon
deourity

149. Of
explaina
llituatior
present
baokgro
ofthln

d

160.

AI

oxplanal
tlver hc

olear th
In the hl
wblob a
pen00,
a0t1011

tt

the

hem

ti1o

two

oolultry’
161. UC
Moroooc
ndoptocl
preeent
qolleor!

and
au
Peprb

fnthbse
IX parA d&Bprojet
Iltions.

Taphe 2
CBtatre
rort8”,
‘kprime
‘par des
le yeroonstlpaix B
)ropres
,ndition

i4signb

tter de
bgy;

rot4 en
lW30ille
tuligner
lolution
embres
rtie qui
s ‘abslea, de

be. soit

8 poliP&we inesn,
et
toua les

repirant
,ance et
Chypre.

oomme
ga mine
Lion inlntenuer
pt fruoont bt4
i4oomloIine ment
urd’hui.
~~tdQrer
,#e par
,ClQQr0.
,e doou-

pe entre
~agw1to

d.‘IQ Ill
.blemont
c6cIonts,
6selltallt

iof

pour

ocument
~SOlll pm
~ 110 pou3 1R sul-

Nations
with
a fait aooomyii that would be
oompletc:ycontrary to the meaning,the spirit andthe
wordingof the resolutionof 4 March und the Chnrter.

vante: noue noua trouvons en preeenoedela recheroha
d*unprbtexte pour mettre 1’Organisattonde8Nations
Unies devant un fait accompli qul se trouverait en
oomplbte oontradlotlon avec le sens, avec l’eeprlt
et avec le texte de la r&solution du 4 mars ausai
bien qu’avecceux de la Charte.
144. C’est pourquol notre d616gatlon,conaid6rant
oette eltuatlon t&s gruve, crolt n6ceaaaireque 1s
Conseil de s6curlt6 entreprenneune &Ion approprlbe pour d6fendre so. propre r&olutlon, pour la
rbaffirmer et pour In f&e respecter, C’est dane
oe sens- et unlquementdans ce aens- que notre
d6Ibgntlonlnterprbte le projet de r8solutlon~pr6sent6
par les d616gatIohsde In Bollvle, du BrtWl, de la
C&e-d’Ivoire, du Maroo et de la NorvBge, et c’est
pourquolelle votora en favour de ce projet.
146. M. USHER(C&e-d’Ivoire): Ma df316gatlon
voudrait slmplementremeroier le SeorBtaire g&n&al
pour tous lee efforts qu’il a d6ploy8e. Ces efforts
eont, fort heureusement,oouronnesde euoo~eet,
par oonebquent,une fool8de plus, sauverontla palx.
146. Je voudraie Bgalement remeroier les gouvernamontset lea nationsquiont aooept6d’saoomplir,
malgr6 toutes leo ohargee que oela oomporte, la
mIssIon que 1s Con&l de sbourite leur a oonfi6e.
Ma d&ldgrttionvoudrait eeulementsouligner qu’elle
est en parfaite identit6 de vuea aveo toutes lee explications qul ont 6t6 fournicd par notre oollbgue, le
representantdu BrBsll, qui a present6 Ie projet de
r&3olution en notre nom. Les explioationa qu’il a
donneessont oelles qui ont guide la C&e-d’Ivoire
et Vent inoltbe h ooparrainer oeprojet do r8eolution.
147. Nous estimons que eeule doit intervenir B
Chypre la Force qui a 6t6 mice sur pied par le
SecrBtalre genera1et qul resulte de notre r&olution
du 4 mare 1964. Tous Ies autres Elate, toutee Ies
autres forces, tous lee Etate Membree
de I’Organieation de8 Nation8 Unies dolvent respeoterrig0Ureusement le paragrophe1 du projet de rhrolution
dur lequelnotit3nounappr8tonsB voter.
148. M, VELABDE (Bollvie) (traduit de l’espagnol]:
Je voudralsfaire une breve d6clarationrur laquestion

United

144. That is why my delegation, conslderlngthis
situationvery serious, hasfelt that the SecurityCounoil shouldtake appropriate steps to uphold its own
resolution,to reaffirm It and to seethat it 18observed,
It is In thie sense,andonly in this sense,that our delegallon lnterpl et8 the draft reeolutlon sponsored
by the
delegationsof Bolivia, Brazil, Ivory Coast, Moroooo
and Norway, and It will therefore vote for the draft
reeolution.
146. Mr. USHER (Ivory Coast) (translated from
Frenoh): My delegationwouldsimply like to thankthe
Seoretary-Qeneralfor all his efforts. They are, moat
fortunately, suooeedingand onoe again will savethe
peace.
146. I shouldalso like to thank the Governmentsand
the countrieswhiohhave agreedto carry out the task
assignedto themby the SeourityCounoil,in spiti of the
heavy burdens it will entail. My delegationwould
merely like to say that It ie in full agreementwith all
the explanationsgiven by our colleague,the repreeentatlveof Brazil, wholntroduoedthedraft resolution
on our behalf. The reasonshe has given are those
whioh prompted the Ivory Coast to oo-sponsorthis
draft resolution.
We believe
that only the Foroe oreated
by the
Seoretary-Oeneral a8 a result of our reeolutIon of
4 Maroh 1964 shouldintervene in Cyprus. All other
States,all other foroes and all Membersof the United
Nations, muat eorupulouelyabideby operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolutionon whiohwe are about
to vote.
147.

146. Mr. VELARDE (Bolivia) (Wanelated from
Spanieh):I wieh to make a brief rrtatementon thie
quertlonwhiohbar onoe againbeenbroughtbeforethe
deourity Counoil.

qui oooupe

149. On 27 February the representative of Bolivia
explained my C&vernmenttsposition on the Cyprus
altuation with the greateat poreible olarity. On the
present ocoaolon,I shall not refer to the Netorion
baokgroundor the legal faotorr whiohlie at the root
of this delioate quertion.

de e6curlt6.

149. Le 27 f6vrier dornier, le repr&mtant de la
Bollvie a exposede la manike la plueolaire poarible
Ia position de mon gouvernementau rujet de la altuation
h Chypre. Je nereviendral don0par maintenant
aur les faitr hirtoriquer nl aur lea motifs juridiquer
qul aont ?I l’originr du problbme d6lIoat dent noua
sommesrai&.
110. En oe qul oonoernetouter lea ~olaratlonr et
interpr&ationr
auxqurllru a do&
lieu la rltuation
h Chypre, je oroir qu’il eat de mon devolr de prboleer que ma dbl&gationestlme qu’au stade aotuel
de I’hietoira du tynre humain 11 n’y a ~1~splaoo

160. A8 regardr the interpretative explanationsor
explanatoryhtsrpretdionr ta whiohmmereprerentatlves have rdmwd, I oonaider it my duty to make
01earthat my delegation’sview is that at this rtap
In the history of mankindthcro is noroom for attitudes
whloh are not busedon II deepnnd sinoorodesire for
penoe. My delegntionwould therefore oondemn any

pour

doe nttitudos qul ne sernlont pas fondbee aur
d&h proh~tl et sincbre de pnlx. Mn d616gntion
oondnmnero
dona toute nction qul pcurlalt faire
peser flur 1Tle de Ciypre, ou flur l’une ou l’nutro
des communnutbs qui coexistent duns oe pays, la
monucc d’une intervention nrmbe.
161.. Lfl I3olivle, clui, comme la Urbsil, la Cbted%foire, le Mnroc et lu Norvbge, &nit coauteur du
un

notion that might be oqulvulont to holding a eword over
the heud of tho l~olx~bllc of Cypruo or over either of
the two oommunltles
which together mnke ul, the

oountry’tl population.
161. I)olivin, together with Brazil, the Ivory Conat,
Moroooo rind Norwny, oo-apcnsored
the resolution
adopted by the Security Counoil on 4 Maroh. In the
prosent onse, the ~olivln~~ delegutlon
Is likewiss
oo-

prOjot

spcnsoringthe draft reaolullon EIOubly introduced
28
%=.

le Conseil

de

r680llltl00

upprouv6 par la Cons011le

4 mnrs, est nujcurd’hui
nueel coauteur
du projet
de
rkiolution
dent lo Consell eat stlisl et qul a Bt6 l:t%-

P

and recommended
by the representative
of Braeil,
and is oonfident that it will be adopted unanimouely.
My delegation is convinced that none of the problems
oonfronting
the international
oommunity
today is
insoluble, All that we have seen and done on this
occasion in the Seourity Counoil goes to prove that
faot.
163. I willingly forgo the interpretation
of my etatement into English and Frenoh, if there is no objeotion
on the part of the English and Frenoh-speaking
representatives,
163. Mr, BITSIOS (Greeoe) (translatedfrom
F.?enoh).
On behalf of my Government, I should like to thank the
Seourity Council for having responded so promptly to
the appeal of the Government of Cyprus by oalling a
halt-by
means of the draft resolution it is about to
adopt-to
any risky undertakings that might disturb
the peaoe in Cyprus, around Cyprus and outside of
cyprue.
154. I should also like to reiterate the assuranoes I
have already given the Council that theGreekGovernment ie determined to lend the Seoretary-General
its
full support in ‘his efforts to Implement the Seourity
Counoil resolution of 4 Maroh. In keeping with this
polloy, my Government has authorised me to inform
the Seoretary-General
this afternoon that its oontrlbution to the expense8 of the multinational
Foroe will
amount to the aum of half a million dollars.
155, Before oonoludltlg, may I thank the Governments
that have already announoed their willingness to provide contingents for the multinational
Foroe or to
oontrlbute to the expenses of the Foroe.
156. The PRESIDENT: The Counllil will now vote on
the five-Power draft resolution [S/6801].
A vote

was taken

by show

of bands,

t: Nono.

A&tainfnp:

None.

The draft

resolution

was adopted

eent6 aveo tant de oomp&enoe par le repr6sentnnt
du Br6sil. Ma ddl&gatlon est oonvalncue que oe projet
sera adopt& B llunanimit8.
Elle oroit ainobrement
qu’nucun problbme
affectant actuellement
la collectivit6 Internatlonale
nlest insoluble, et nous venons
d’en avoir la preuve aujourd’hui
au Consell de
s6curit6.
162. SI les representants
de iungues francaise et
anglaise n’y voient pas d’lnoonv6nIent,
]a renoncerni
h l’Interpr&atIon
cona6cdtlve
dana CBS
deux languoa.
163. M. BITSIOS (Greoe): Je tiens, au nom de mon
gouvernement,
11 remercler
le Conaeil de sbourltb
d’avoir Apondu immbdiatement
h l’appel du Gouvernement de Chypre en venant, par la r6solutIon qu’il
est sur le point de voter, barrer la voie B des aventures qul pourraient rompre la palx B Chypre, autour
de Chypre et au-de18 de Chypre.
164. Je tiens auasi B renouveler
les aseurancea
que J’ai ddjh donrhea
au Conseil,
h savoir que le
Gouvernement
groo est d&ermine
B aooorder au
SeorBtaIre gMra1
tout son appul dans les efforts
quQ1 dbploie pour ltapplioation
de la r&solution du
4 mars. Conform&nent h oette politique, mon gouvernement mla autorise h annonoer oet aprbs-midi
au
Seorhaire
ghhal
que sa oontribution aux d6penses
de la foroe multinationale
s%lWera hundemi-million
de dollars,
166. Permettez-moi,
avant de terminer, de remeroier lea gouvernements
qui se sont deja d6clar6s
pr&s B partbiper,
en fournlssant des contingents,
h la force multinationale
et B ceux qui se sont d&
olarbs p&ta h contribuer aw d6penses de oette foroe.
156. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais): J’invite
lea membres du Conseil h se prononoer aur le projet
de r&solution des oinq puissanoes [S/6601].
II est ptw§dd

Ln favour:
Bolivia, Braeil, Chlna, Czechoslovakia,
Franoe, Ivory Coast, Morcooo, Norway,Unionof Soviet
Soclollet Republlos, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United State8 of Amerioa.
Agafnr

-

unanimously.

157. The PRESIDENT: I give the floor to the representative of Cyprur.
118. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I wish to thank you,
Mr. Prerkbnt,
and the members of the Seourity Counoil for your oonrtruotive
oontrlbutlon
tonight to the
problem of Cyprus and for your unanimous adoptionof
the draft resolution, I belleve that this is a great step
forward for the Seourity Counoil.
168. I wish purtloularly
to express the thanks of my
Government and the people of Cyprus to the SeoreturyGetvmtl for his very oons truotlvo work in Cy.p,rus III
oonnexion with the problem and for hIsdIligent efforts
in this regard.
160. I wish also tooxpress the falthof my Government
and Ihe people of Cyprus in the United Nntlons as an
Organization
for peuoe and to ussurc the Orgunizntlon

au vote

$ main

lev6e.

pour: Bolivie, Br&Iil, Chine, C&e-dWoire,
Etats-Unle
d’Am&ique,
Fsanoe, Maroo, Norvbge,
Royaume-Uni
de Grande-Bretagne
et d’Irlande du
Nord, ToUooslovaqule,
Union des R6publiques sociullstes eovi&Iques,
Votent oontre: N&ant.
Votent

S’abstfennenl:

Nhnt.

A Punanfmfld,

le

projet

de rdsolution

eat

adopt8.

157. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais): Je donne
la parole au reprbsentant de Chypre.
lS8. M, ROSSIDES (Chypre) [traduit de l~anglala]:
Je tlens P voua remeroler,
Monrieur le PrWdent,
ainsi que tour lee membrer du Cone611 de r6ourit4,
de la oontributlon
fort utile que vous avez apport6s
oe solr B la solution du problbme de Chypre an adoptant cet1.e r6solutIr,n h l~~menImlt6. Je crols que le
Con3011 cle sBcurIt6 a, co falsunt, marqud uii progrbs
coneId6roble.
lGD> Je tiens, tout purtIcullbromen1,
h exprlmol’ la
reconnnIssance de man gouvernomont et de la pcpuliltton do Cll]lpre au SecrQtuIra g6nGrnl pour le z&lo
dont ti a fnlt preuve et le.4 r<lsultats qu’il a obtenus.
160. Je tlenfi bgalemon+ A oxprlmet’ la foi do man
gouvernemenl
.A de lu populntlon do Chypre dane
1’OrganlsntIon cles N&ions Untes et dans son ceuvre

of OUI
our ac
tary-C

---~.-~~

--

c

our dedloationto Its work, And a ain I wouldvoioe
our admirationandrespeotfor theed arts of the Seoretary-General on behalfof world peaoe.
of

rhentant

‘00 projet
obrement
; la colus venons

de

maeI1

The meetfrg

ruse

at 11.5p.m.

ncaise et
a renonIan8 tea
m de mon
s4curite
I Gouverition qu’ll
des aven:e,

autour

3mrancea

>ir quele
torder au
3s efforts
,lution du
In gouvers-mid1 au
dbpenses
Ii-million
le remer-

d4olar4s
ntingents,
B sont deette force.
I: J’invlte
: le projet

-dWoire,
Norvbge,

rlande
ti
me eooiu-

s t adopt&
: Je donnt

1‘anglais]:
President,
I e&wItb,

G apportde
3 en a&p-

h3 que le
In progrbs
.primal* la
0 la popuIUl’ le &lo
n

oblonus.

sl

do

man

ypre dnns
3on

cmvre

31

pour le maintlbn de la paix, et B asaurer 1’0rganb
eatlon de notre fldblit6. Enfin, je veux redlre touts
lladmiratlon et tout lo respect que noue insplrent
lea efforts d6ploy6spar le Seordtatre gdndral pour
la causede la palx.

WHERE
TO BUY
UNITED
NATIONS
PUBLICATIONS
ADRESSES 00 LES PUBLICATIONS
DE L’ONU SONT EN VENTE

NORTH
AMERICA/
AMtRlQUC
DU NOR0
