Resolutions adopted without reference to a Committee

Deplores the continued disregard by the Union. of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the present Hungarian
regime of the General Assembly resolutions concerning
the situation in Hungary.
1087th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.

1742 (XVI). The situation in Angola
The General Assembly,
Having considered the situation in Angola,
Recalling its resolution 1603 (XV) of 20 April 1961
and the Security Council res,olution of 9 June 1961,13
Having examined the report of the Sub-Committee
on the situation in Angola appointed under resolution
1603 (XV), 14
Deploring the lack of co-operation and assistance by
Portugal in the full and effective discharge of the SubCommittee's task as called for in the aforementioned
resolutions,
Noting with deep regret Portugal's refusal to recognize Angola as a Non-Self-Governing Territory and its
failure to take measures to implement General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 entitled
"Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples",
Convinced that the continued refusal of Portugal to
recognize the legitimate aspirations of the Angolan
people to self-determination and independence constitutes a permanent source of international friction and
threatens international peace and security,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the work of the
Sub-Committee on the situation in Angola and commends to the Portuguese Government, for urgent consideration and effective implementation, the observations, findings and conclusions set out in the Sub-Committee's report;
u Official Records of the Security Council, Sixteenth Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1961, document S/4835.
u Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
Supplement No. 16 (A/4978 and Corr.2).

67

2. Solemnly reaffirms the inalienable right of the
Angolan people to self-determination and independence;
3. Deeply deprecates the repressive measures and
armed action against the people of Angola and the
denial to them of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and calls upon the Portuguese authorities to
desist forthwith from repressive measures against the
people of Angola ;
4. Appeals to the Government of Portugal to release
immediately all Angolan political prisoners wherever
they may be held;
5. Urges the Government of Portugal to undertake,
without further delay, extensive political, economic and
social reforms and measures, and in particular to set
up freely elected and representative politi:al institutions
with a view to transfer of power to the people of
Angola;
6. Decides to continue the Sub-Committee on the
situation in Angola appointed under General Assembly
resolution 1603 (XV) ;
(a) To continue the performance of its tasks;
( b) To study ways and means to secure the implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the Security Council and to the General
Assembly;
7. Requests Member States to use their influence
to secure the compliance of Portugal with the present
resolution;
8. Requests all States Members of the United Nations and members of the specialized agencies to deny
Portugal any support and assistance which may be used
by it for the suppression of the people of Angola;
9. Requests the Government of Portugal to submit
a report to the General Assembly at its seventeenth
session on the measures it has undertaken in the implementation of the present resolution;
10. Recommends the Security Council, in the light
of the Council's resolution of 9 June 1961 and of the
present resolution, to keep the matter under constant
· review.
1102nd plenary meeting,
30 January 1962.
