United Nations

S/PV.6042

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6042nd meeting
Friday, 12 December 2008, 3.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jurica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Croatia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata
Mr. Dabbashi
Ms. Jácome
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (S/2008/760)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-64451 (E)

*0864451*

S/PV.6042

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic
and the subregion
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (S/2008/760)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Central African Republic and
Chad, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provision of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poukré-Kono
(Central African Republic) and Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) took seats at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Victor Da Silva
Angelo, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Angelo to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/760, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad.

2

At this meeting the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Victor Da Silva Angelo, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad. I now give the floor to Mr. Angelo.
Mr. Angelo: Thank you for the opportunity to
brief the Council on the Secretary-General’s report of
4 December 2008 on Chad and the Central African
Republic, contained in document S/2008/760. I regret
the late submission of this report, which was a result of
the need to ensure that the Governments of both Chad
and the Central African Republic were fully consulted
on the proposed United Nations force. The report
contains a refined plan and concept of operations for
the proposed force and reflects an extensive process of
consultation with the relevant parties.
Following my last briefing on 19 September, the
Council, in resolution 1834 (2008), stated its intention
to authorize the deployment of a United Nations
military force to succeed the European Union-led
military force (EUFOR) in Chad and the Central
African Republic and requested an update on the
planning and preparations for such a transfer of
authority. For this purpose, a Technical Assessment
Mission visited Chad and the Central African Republic
in October and, subsequently, the United Nations held
extensive discussions with both Governments, troopcontributing countries and EUFOR.
The Chadian government initially expressed
reluctance to accept a United Nations force of 6,000
troops, stating that the security situation had improved
in recent months and that such a force would place an
excessive burden on the environment. High-level
consultations were held in New York and in the field.
On 29 November, during a meeting with the SecretaryGeneral in Doha, President Déby gave his consent to
the deployment of a force of 4,900 troops in eastern
Chad. To provide for a force of 4,900, feasible
reductions were identified, including helicopter support
troops, signal units, special forces, reconnaissance
units and logistical elements. This will reduce the
logistical support and enablers to a minimum. Any
further adjustments in the force would seriously impact
its ability to implement the mandate.
In relation to the specific request by the Council
that the United Nations establish a military presence in
the northeastern region of the Central African
Republic, the report presents three options. Should the

08-64451

S/PV.6042

Security Council desire to establish a permanent
military presence in northeastern Central African
Republic, the force would need to have a more visible
and wider ranging presence than that of EUFOR and it
would also have to possess the capability to undertake
regular patrols to Sam Oundja, 200 km south of Birao,
where an important refugee camp is located.
In the meantime, the Secretariat has been actively
engaged in the force generation process to ensure that
there is no security vacuum at the end of EUFOR’s
mandate. So far, 16 nations have indicated their
willingness to positively consider contributing to a
force under the auspices of the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), but their firm commitment is
contingent on assurances that other troop-contributing
countries would provide enablers, such as the medical
level II hospital. In order to ensure the smoothest
possible transition, commitments from EUFOR
contributors to re-hat, even for a transitional period,
need to be confirmed in the coming days.
Beyond the re-hatting of troops already on the
ground, MINURCAT will require strong support from
Member States with regard to force generation,
including equipment and enablers. Given the fluid
security situation, challenging geography and climate,
the United Nations force must be highly mobile. I
encourage all Member States to provide the necessary
troops and support elements as soon as possible.
To succeed in the implementation of its mandate,
the United Nations force must also have full freedom
of movement. Prior to its deployment, the status-offorces agreement between the United Nations and the
Governments of Chad and the Central African Republic
should be concluded, in addition to a memorandum of
understanding in relation to infrastructure and the
transfer and use of EUFOR sites.

on electoral reform. Progress in the implementation of
the Sirte Agreement of 25 October 2007 between the
Government of Chad and the main rebel groups has
been limited. Both Chadian armed forces and rebel
groups have reportedly strengthened their positions on
either side of the border in recent months.
The regular meetings of the Contact Group
established under the Dakar Agreement of March 2008
and the recent resumption of diplomatic relations
between Chad and the Sudan are encouraging.
MINURCAT will continue to support the Contact
Group, as the normalization of relations between the
two countries is critical for improved security in that
situation.
I wish to add that today my colleagues in the
Sudan — the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan — have been contacted
by senior Government officials, and they were told that
the Government of the Sudan has identified a column
of members of the Justice and Equality Movement with
a large number of vehicles. We do not have
confirmation of that information from the Sudanese
Government, but we will certainly be very worried if
that information is confirmed, because we really
believe that the relations between Chad and the Sudan
should normalize as part of the security and
stabilization in the region.
On the humanitarian front, Chad continues to face
a serious humanitarian crisis. Furthermore, reports of
militant activity in the camps, including the
recruitment of child soldiers, are very disturbing. So
too is the ongoing prevalence of attacks and security
incidents against humanitarian workers and the civilian
populations.

Following the meeting between the SecretaryGeneral and President Deby in Doha, a team of senior
technical experts will travel to the region next week to
further the consultations with national authorities on
legal and administrative arrangements. In the meantime,
MINURCAT has already engaged the appropriate
authorities on the substance of those arrangements.

The Mission has continued to work with Chadian
authorities to facilitate the training and deployment of
the Détachement Intégré de Sécurité (DIS), following
its official establishment in late September. The target
of training 850 DIS officers should be achieved in
January 2009. The deployment of the DIS is ongoing
despite significant logistical constraints.

The situation in Chad remains fragile. The
domestic political process, within the agreement of
13 August, has known some progress with the
submission to the National Assembly of the draft bills

As of today, the MINURCAT managed trust fund
has received a little bit more than $19 million in donor
contributions, of the estimated $23 million required to
support the DIS in its first year of operations. The trust

08-64451

3

S/PV.6042

fund is being depleted faster than expected and we are
working very closely with the Government and with
Headquarters to make sure that the trust fund can be
replenished as soon as possible. We may have some
time at the beginning of next year to call an
international donors conference. In the meantime, it is
important that donors continue to provide support to
the trust fund.
I am also pleased to report the excellent
cooperation with the Governments of Chad and the
Central African Republic, with EUFOR, the United
Nations country team and also the humanitarian
community. MINURCAT will continue to collaborate
and consult extensively with all relevant partners in the
implementation of its mandate.
Let me conclude by saying that MINURCAT is
committed to help create the security conditions
conducive to a voluntary, secure and sustainable return
of refugees and displaced persons. It is nevertheless
important to stress that stability in Chad is also
dependent on the serious engagement of everyone in
Chad — the Government and opposition leaders — in a
democratic dialogue towards political inclusiveness
and good governance. Working in collaboration with
the international community, the United Nations stands
ready to assist the parties in the peaceful settlement of
their differences.
The President: I thank Mr. Angelo for his
briefing.
I now give floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Poukré-Kono (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): I would like to thank you, Sir, for
giving me the opportunity to take the floor and explain
the position of the Government of the Central African
Republic on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/760), which we believe is of major and
decisive importance to the future of our country. But
first of all, I wish to congratulate the Republic of
Croatia and you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December 2008.
We welcome the report before us, which deals
with the extension of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), its
military component and the transfer of authority from
the European Union-led military force (EUFOR),

4

whose mandate will end soon, to a United Nations
military component.
We wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of MINURCAT,
Mr. Victor Angelo, for his useful and helpful
presentation of the report. However, the report has
prompted my delegation to ask a few questions, which,
if permitted, we would like to voice now.
Are the defense and security forces of the Central
African Republic sufficiently battle-tested to be able to
ensure safety and security in the north-eastern part of
the country? The situation in that region is unclear, so
should the civilians and refugees from other countries
who are there just be abandoned? The recent
withdrawal of humanitarian workers because of a lack
of security was heartbreaking. However, can bad
weather conditions prevent troops from continuing to
move around in a time of war? Are those signs that
people are tired of the Central African problem?
The security issue in the Central African Republic
is relevant and topical today. There is a very complex
crisis in the subregion, in particular in Darfur. There
are people who are forced to flee because of violence;
there is poverty and trafficking of illicit weapons. The
armed forces are unable to control bandits or to impose
order. Those are all issues that must be addressed over
time.
As Council members are aware, the Central
African Republic is trying to emerge from two decades
of political and military upheaval that thwarted any
attempts at development. The inclusive political
dialogue began on 8 December and demonstrates that
the people and Government want to turn the page of
history. That is a significant step forward and cannot be
ignored. But the Central African Republic is still too
fragile for it to attempt to resolve all of its sovereign
responsibilities. It needs the support of the
international community, and we appreciate the efforts
that have been made.
The United Nations technical assessment mission
completed its report and has offered its assessment. We
welcome the excellent report. But we are left
wondering, because there is no reference to the
exchanges with the authorities of the Central African
Republic except for a reference to the confirmed desire
to have a United Nations presence in the north-eastern
part of the country. Council members should read

08-64451

S/PV.6042

between the lines with regard to discussions with the
country.
My delegation has another question about the
numbers in the three options proposed for military
presence in the north-eastern region of the Central
African Republic. We have the impression that those
conclusions are not the strongest.
The region being discussed today is it must be
noted, a sensitive area, which is part of a triangle that
includes borders of Chad, the Sudan and the Central
African Republic. It is the trade route, via Port Sudan,
to reach the Red Sea. It is also a zone rich in mineral
resources with abundant fauna, but this animal life has
been decimated by poachers over the past two decades
of crisis because there has not been a powerfully
equipped army in place.
With the Darfur crisis, refugees are pouring in
because of rebellions and the reception of internally
displaced persons. What used to be a haven of peace is
in total upheaval today. Consequently, human rights
have been affected and the environment has been
devastated.
Humanitarian workers — whom we praise for
their bravery and willingness to work in difficult and
dangerous conditions — are always welcome. At this
point, we believe that stabilization in that part of the
Central African Republic has not yet really begun. The
State is still trying to begin reforming the security
sector. That very long and complex process requires
the political will of the Government, which is now
evidence, and adequate resources, in addition to the
$4 million received from the Peacebuilding Fund. This
apparent stability is the result of the presence of
EUFOR, since the Central African State has not really
re-established its authority in the area.
The persistent instability that we would like to
eradicate for good in the subregion also hampers goodneighbourly relations. It is time for concerted action
with support from the United Nations to lead to the
re-establishment of law and order. We welcome the
MINURCAT exit strategy proposed in the report,
which is perfectly in keeping with the reform process
for the security sector. As has been said by an eminent
diplomat, a close link should be created between
security sector reform and MINURCAT.
We want to continue cooperating closely with the
United Nations system, its humanitarian personnel and

08-64451

associated humanitarian personnel. Out of a desire for
continuity and because we do not want to leave any
legal vacuum, and, given the fragility of the
institutions in the country, the Government of the
Central African Republic is therefore requesting that an
operational military unit of about 500 troops be kept in
the consolidated Birao area for humanitarian, political
and economic reasons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chad.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, thank you for this opportunity to
contribute my Government’s observations on the
contents of the report under consideration (S/2008/760).
First of all, I would like to welcome the briefing
on the report of the Secretary-General given to us by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Angelo, and also for this opportunity to make my
observations on the report.
Our experience with the European Union-led
military force (EUFOR) offers us many valuable
lessons that can inspire us in the design of the new
force to ensure an effective implementation of the
original mandate, which strikes us as being both good
and clear, given that the international presence in
eastern Chad is not a classic peacekeeping operation,
as we have often been reiterated.
In this regard, in the context of the fruitful
ongoing consultations that will continue to take place
in the future between the competent Chadian
authorities and the team of the Secretary-General, we
believe that we are not far from arriving at definitive
shared conclusions that will enable the immediate
planning of that force with a view to an effective
transfer of authority on 15 March 2009 between
EUFOR and the new force. At the same time, of
course, we underscore our support for the request made
by our Central African brothers and neighbours, as
stated by their representative, for the renewal and
strengthening of the presence of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) in the North-East of their country.
Furthermore, allow me to reiterate my
Government’s position whereby, in order to guarantee
the lasting effects of a United Nations presence in
eastern Chad, there are no grounds for giving it a
political mandate, given that the political questions

5

S/PV.6042

related to the situation in eastern Chad are being
addressed in frameworks with which we are well
acquainted. Here, too, our position aims simply to
ensure heightened efficiency so that the ongoing
mediations are not uselessly complicated or
duplicative. However, we welcome the fact that the
United Nations is supporting this process and will be
involved in it.
With regard to the deployment of the
Détachement Intégré de Sécurité (DIS), the 850
planned personnel are late in being deployed, given the
slowness and limited capacity of the United Nations
centre responsible for their early training. We do have a
sufficient unit of police officers and gendarmes to offer
to MINURCAT. At the same time, we have
recommended the increase of the level of the DIS to
1,700 troops. We reiterate our desire that the financing
of the DIS should come from the United Nations
budget. In its absence, however, we appeal to the
international community for its contributions to the
Trust Fund.
We agree with those who are of the view that no
military force can sustainably guarantee security if the
political context underlying the original insecurity does
not change. Let us not forget, however, that this force
must serve the law, that is, the democratic rule of law
that is being established within Chad, and that it must
be stronger than the illegal groups that are being
maintained from abroad. That means that the
establishment of the rule of law and democracy that we
hope to consolidate within Chad will necessarily
require stability and peace in the country to thwart the
obscure strategies of armed groups.
For us, the source of our insecurity comes from
the East of our country, which is destabilized by the
effects of the crisis in Darfur: Sudanese refugees,
displaced Chadians who are victims of Janjaweed
attacks, repercussions in eastern Chad of the
intercommunity conflicts in Darfur, the exploitation of
these conflicts by politicians to establish and use
armies to overthrow democratic national institutions,
widespread cross-border banditry, and so on.
Without wishing to poison the relationships with
our Sudanese neighbours and brothers, we must state
nevertheless that we do not understand the
observations that certain parties have made in seeking
to equate the aggressor and the victim, and to engage in
a bizarre dialectic that seeks to justify the causes by the

6

consequences. Refugee camps, displaced persons
camps, forced recruitment, including of child soldiers,
trafficking in weaponry, violations of human rights in
the area and impunity are all clearly the consequences
of the Darfur crisis. We would have favoured moving
the camps or a true neutralization of the area, while
assuming the responsibility of securing our own
border. That is the truth of the matter. In Chad, there is
no political resolve to favour insecurity or impunity.
We do not have sufficient capacity to address the
magnitude of the challenges we face in the field. The
international community is called on to help us to
strengthen our capacity, although clearly not at any
price.
Without a doubt, settling the crisis in Darfur will
be the fundamental political solution the situation in
eastern Chad. We shall spare no effort, if so required,
to enable a successful outcome to the negotiations to
achieve peace in Darfur. No Sudanese rebel movement
in Darfur has received or will receive Chad’s support
unless it is in the service of peace. The rebels may
enjoy of local support owing to the intracommunitarian border war, but that is not the
responsibility of the Chadian Government.
To strengthen national cohesion, the Chadian
armed groups must renounce the use of force and must
return to the country, in full respect of Syrte Agreement
of 25 October 2007, rather than refuting the Agreement
on the pretext that it has expired or by inventing an
alibi in order to continue their subversive operations
against the interests of their country.
Additionally and above all, establishing a lasting
peace in Chad will require the strengthening of the
democratic rule of law in the country through a
genuine implementation of the provisions of the
political agreement of 13 August 2007. In spite of the
inevitable criticism on the part of the opposition, the
Chadian Government believes that the process is still
headed in the right direction and is committed to seeing
the process through to its conclusion in the form of
free, transparent elections.
While we are discussing replacing EUFOR with a
MINURCAT military component, I would like to
convey
my
country’s
the
gratitude
and
acknowledgement to the European Union, which has
answered our expectations, as well as those of
humanitarian workers, seeking to protect people
exposed to the prevailing insecurity in eastern Chad.

08-64451

S/PV.6042

In particular, we would like to thank France, who
initiated this rescue operation and serves as its
principle component. We would like to underscore that,
in contrast to allegations launched by some against
France, which is a long-standing friend of my country,
this operation is not seeking to support a regime, but
rather to help a country and its people remain standing
and survive in view of a security and humanitarian
catastrophe that threatens peace and security in the
subregion.
We also wish to commend humanitarian workers
who, through their activities, risk their lives on a daily
basis for the sake of vulnerable people.
Finally, it would be remiss to conclude without
repeating the ongoing readiness of the Chadian
Government to cooperate with the United Nations with
a view to the preparation for the replacement of
EUFOR by a military component of MINURCAT.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Angelo, for his presentation of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2008/760).
I would also like to express particular gratitude to
the representatives of the Central African Republic and
of Chad for their statements. Statements from countries
from the concerned regions add useful elements that
members of the Council should take into account, as is
the case here.
My country supports the concept of the
operations outlined by the Secretary-General in his last
two reports. That is, for a military operation of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) to replace the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) at
the expiry of its mandate.
We
agree
with
the
Secretary-General’s
assessment that this force should include a highly
mobile and responsive capacity, including a strong air
component. Along with other members of this Council,
my country has supported the establishment of a
United Nations military component and we would like
to thank the Secretary-General for the submission of
three options in his report.
Taking into account the repeated requests of the
Government of the Central African Republic to this
Council, and the broad recognition that EUFOR’s
presence has contributed to improving the security

08-64451

situation in its zones of operation, my country has
listened very closely to what was said by the
representative of the Central African Republic. In
going through the Secretary-General’s report we tended
to favour the second option, and without a doubt his
words have confirmed our beliefs. We hope that the
Council and the Special Representative will have a
fruitful discussion on the viability and effectiveness of
these options.
In regard to the first of these options, we should
consider whether this might lead to a most unwelcome
security vacuum at this point in time. On other
occasions, my country has also underscored the
importance for this Council to address the root causes
of conflicts and not only the consequences or
symptoms of these armed conflicts.
As a result, we wish to agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s report on MINURCAT of 12 September
(S/2008/601), in which it was stated, in paragraph 83,
that
“the expansion of MINURCAT to include a
military component would only be effective if, in
addition to its present police, rule of law, human
rights and civil affairs mandate, the Mission were
mandated to support Chadian stakeholders in
addressing underlying causes of insecurity
relevant to the safe and voluntary return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.”
In this regard, we welcome the information
contained in this latest report of the Secretary-General
considering the activities undertaken by MINURCAT
in order to support the Chadian authorities in regard to
the judiciary and prisons in terms of the training and
deployment of the Détachement Intégré de Sécurité, as
well as their joint work with the Government of Chad
and with civil society in preventing sexual violence.
In particular, we are greatly interested in
MINURCAT’s work in promoting reconciliation and
dialogue on a local level, as was the case in Kerfi. We
would like to seek additional information from the
Special Representative concerning these efforts and the
lessons learned from that process.
We believe that this form of support activities
could be further strengthened and for this reason, we
support the recommendations for additional tasks for
the Mission outlined in paragraph 83 of the report
dated 12 September which recommends, first of all,

7

S/PV.6042

“(a) support to national and local
authorities in resolving local tensions to enhance
the environment for internally displaced persons;
“(b) support the Government’s efforts to
end impunity for crimes against civilians and
humanitarian workers;
“(c) at the regional level, continue to play a
role as a observer along with the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in the
contact group that was established in the 13 March
Dakar Accord to monitor its implementation and
assist, as necessary, the Governments of Chad and
the Sudan in building good, neighbourly
relations.” (S/2008/601, para. 83)
We believe that through these undertakings and
efforts, it would be possible to meet the benchmarks
set for MINURCAT’s withdrawal as listed by the
Secretary-General in section IX of this latest report.
On the regional situation, once again, my country
would like to emphasize the importance of this context
and would like to congratulate the Government of
Libya and the Contact Group for their important efforts
in seeking to improve relations between Chad and the
Sudan.
We welcome the news of the exchange of
Ambassadors between these two countries and hope to
see a successful implementation of the deployment of a
peace and security force along the border between
these two countries as agreed.
Finally, once again, we must condemn the attacks
and the harassment of humanitarian workers in eastern
Chad, behaviour which is wholly unacceptable,
particularly in view of the lives of the men, women and
children whose lives depend on this assistance. We
hope that the deployment of the second MINURCAT
force will provide hope and relief to these persons.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank Special Representative
Angelo for his briefing. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Chad and the Central
African Republic. I believe their statements offered
important positive information about the activities and
the results of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCAT) and the European
Union-led military force (EUFOR).

8

My comments will focus on four points. First, the
civilians in North-East Central African Republic and
eastern Chad are still in a very vulnerable situation.
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, who recently visited the region,
spoke to us about this last week. The Darfur crisis
continues to have humanitarian and security
consequences in the region, many civilians still need
international assistance in order to survive.
Like the representative of Chad, we welcome the
work of humanitarian workers on the ground and urge
all parties to scrupulously respect their security and
their freedom of movement. Naturally, we condemn the
banditry to which they continue to be subject. We are
also very disturbed by information that cites armed
groups recruiting in refugee and internally displaced
persons camps, and we once again call for the respect
for the civilian and humanitarian nature of the camps.
Secondly, we agree with the Secretary-General’s
assessment of the positive results of EUFOR in Chad
and the Central African Republic. That operation, in
keeping with its mandate, has helped to improve the
security conditions in which humanitarian assistance is
provided. Mr. Holmes also stressed to the Council that
the international presence had helped to stabilize the
security situation, to reassure vulnerable civilian groups
and to improve security for humanitarian workers. Of
course, not all of problems are resolved — far from it —
and this is certainly no time for the international
community to relax its efforts. Nevertheless, we would
stress in particular the initially encouraging return of
some internally displaced persons in Chad, which was
precisely one goal of the European Union and United
Nations missions. EUFOR, the European Chad-Central
African Republic mission, the largest military operation
of the European Union to date, is thus another important
example of how the European Union can support United
Nations action.
Thirdly, we stress the importance of the role of
MINURCAT and the Détachment Intégré de Sécurité
(DIS) reiterate our full support for the work of the
Special Representative, and welcome cooperation
between the Chad authorities, the United Nations and
the European Union on the ground, as did the Special
Representative himself. We welcome the initial
deployment of the DIS, which was somewhat delayed
at first. We hope that it will be fully deployed very
soon and command Mr. Angelo’s personal commitment
in this context. The multidimensional presence created

08-64451

S/PV.6042

by resolution 1778 (2007) offers a novel structure in
which one part cannot succeed without the other.

ensure a smooth transition from EUFOR
MINURCAT on 15 March 2009, as scheduled.

Fourthly, we would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his latest report to the Council on followup to EUFOR once its mandate expires.

Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): I, too, would
like to thank Special Representative Angelo for
presenting the Secretary-General’s report on the
transition from the European Union-led military force
(EUFOR) to the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). At the same
time, I would like to express my appreciation for the
statements made by the Permanent Representatives of
the Central African Republic and Chad.

In September, the Council expressed its intention
to deploy a military component to take over from
EUFOR in Chad and the Central African Republic. We
welcome the agreement arrived at between the
Secretary-General and President Idriss Déby on the
number of troops to be deployed in eastern Chad to
provide an efficient and effective replacement for
EUFOR and to ensure improved geographic coverage
so as to better protect refugees and displaced and
vulnerable persons. John Holmes himself stressed the
importance of this aspect of the situation last week.
As for the Central African Republic dimension of
the operation, it is also essential to have a credible
military presence in the north-eastern part of the
country so that, at the end of EUFOR’s mandate, there
is no recurrence of the security vacuum of two years
ago, which contributed to the destabilization of the
region. It is because the European Union is present in
Birao that the humanitarian and security situation
stabilized somewhat, despite recent evidence of the
precariousness of the situation.
In this context, we believe that the first option on
the Central African Republic offered in the report might
be insufficient. We therefore support a broader option
allowing the deployment of a deterrent force in Birao
that could also cover the surrounding areas. We stand
ready to discuss the modalities of such a deployment.
I reiterate the importance of United Nations
readiness to take over at the end of the European Union
mission on 15 March 2009. From the very beginning of
EUFOR, the European Union has said that this would
be a transitional operation ending on 15 March 2009.
That date approaches; we must prepare for it carefully.
The European Union and the European contributors to
EUFOR in particular are committed to ensuring a
smooth transition. We urge the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts to that end and invite potential
troop contributors to join in discussions on this topic.
On the basis of these observations, the French
delegation will, over the next few days, circulate a
draft resolution to members of the Council. It is our
hope that the Council will be able to adopt it swiftly to

08-64451

to

The picture emerging from the SecretaryGeneral’s report is indeed a mixed one. Instability
continues to prevail in the eastern provinces of Chad,
although it is mainly due to banditry rather than to the
activity of the armed opposition movements. On the
other hand, progress in Sudan-Chad relations, as
evidenced by the exchange of ambassadors as well as
by further steps towards the establishment of a joint
monitoring force along the border in the framework of
the African Contact Group, are encouraging signs of
possible further improvement in the security situation.
From what the Permanent Representatives of the
Central African Republic and Chad have said today, as
well as from what the non-governmental organizations
reminded us last week, it would seem important to
continue to provide a security framework in the eastern
part of Chad to ensure protection of the displaced and
refugee population and to allow for the safe delivery of
humanitarian assistance. The transition from EUFOR
to a United Nations operation will serve this objective,
and we are ready to start negotiations on a draft
resolution to this end.
At the same time, it has also been underlined that
it is essential that the root causes of instability in Chad
be addressed. My country supports the political process
based on the 13 August agreement between the
Government and the opposition, as well as the Sirte
agreement between the Government and the armed
opposition movement. As for the number of troops, we
appreciate the update in planning made by the
Secretariat in the substantial reduction of the mission’s
size. We wonder whether additional cuts can be
envisaged in consultation with the Government, taking
into account the effectiveness of the mission, of course,
as well as the overall sustainability of peacekeeping in
Africa and the amounts of troops from other crisis
situations.

9

S/PV.6042

The Security Council, we believe, should apply
fair criteria in managing the limited resources at our
disposal. In this context, I would also like to draw the
attention of the Council once again to the situation in
Somalia and the need to urgently find a way to support
the African Union Mission to Somalia in the future.
For the same reason, we do not see a substantial
difference between the overall situation in eastern
Chad and the one in the Central African Republic. It
would therefore seem logical that, if we are going to
replace the European Union-led military force
(EUFOR) in Chad, we would do the same in the
Central African Republic. Besides, we need to take into
account the request of President Bozizé to maintain
international troops in the north-eastern part of the
country. His efforts to pursue national reconciliation
and the political dialogue — which is proceeding well
in Bangui, as we know — should also be rewarded, as
should his cooperation with the United Nations.

10

I take this opportunity to confirm Italy’s
readiness to keep the hospital in Abéché for the time
necessary to ensure a smooth transition.
Finally, I would like to commend the exemplary
collaboration that the United Nations and the European
Union have once again established in the maintenance
of peace and security. Chad and the Central African
Republic are important examples of our ability to
maximize our impact and ensure coherence between
different actors and different instruments.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I should now like to invite Council
members to informal consultations on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

08-64451
