S/PRST/2014/7

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 May 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7169th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 May 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, meeting at the occasion of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), reaffirms that proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their means of delivery
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
“The Security Council remains gravely concerned by the threat of
terrorism, and the risk that non-state actors may acquire, develop, traffic in or
use nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons and their means of delivery.
“The Security Council, recognizing the urgent need for all States to take
additional effective measures to prevent the prolifera tion of nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their means of delivery, reaffirms that States shall
take effective measures to prevent non-state actors from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery and to establish domestic co ntrols
to prevent their proliferation. The Security Council calls upon all States to step
up their efforts to implement resolution 1540, focusing on areas where
measures taken may be strengthened, with a view to achieving full
implementation of the resolution by 2021.
“The Security Council commends the contributions of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and recalling resolution 1977
(2011) which extended the mandate of the Committee for ten years, reaffirms
its continued support for the Committee.
“The Security Council directs the Committee to monitor implementation
of the resolution and urges all States to inform the Commi ttee regularly on
measures they have taken or intend to take to implement the resolution. In
particular, the Security Council calls upon all States that have not yet
presented their first reports on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) to
do so without delay, in line with the Committee’s objective of achieving
universal reporting.
“The Security Council recommends the Committee to consider
developing a strategy towards full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and incorporating such strategy in the Committee’s Comprehensive Review on
14-32404 (E)

070514

*1432404*

S/PRST/2014/7

the status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which is to be
submitted to the Security Council before December 2016.
“The Security Council recalls its decision that Member States shall
inform immediately the Security Council of any violation of resolution 1540
(2004), including acquisition by non-State actors of chemical weapons, their
means of delivery and related materials in order to take necessary measures.
“The Security Council recognizes that many States continue to require
assistance in implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and stresses the need of
enhanced assistance in this area. The Security Council encourages and
supports national, regional and sub-regional capacity building events as a
means to support the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
“The Security Council reiterates the need to continue to enhance ongoing
cooperation among the Committee and relevant Committees as necessa ry.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of countering nuclear,
chemical and biological threats in the context of resolution 1540 (2004). In
this regard, the Security Council reaffirms the necessity to prevent non-State
actors access to, or assistance and financing for nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, related materials and their means of delivery. The Security
Council emphasizes the need for the Committee to coordinate its
non-proliferation work with other international, regional and sub -regional
organizations.
“The Security Council notes the outcome of The Hague Nuclear Security
Summit Communique of March 2014 recognizing the significant contribution
made by the United Nations to strengthening nuclear security, including the
work undertaken by the 1540 Committee.
“The Security Council encourages the Committee, at its discretion, to
draw on relevant expertise, including civil society, industry and the private
sector, with, as appropriate, their States’ consent.”

2/2

14-32404
