United Nations

322nd

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
JPedne,day, 18 December 1950, at 10 :45 a.m.

FIFTH SESSION
FZuahin, Meadow, New York

Official Records

••

CONTENTS
Order of business .....•...... ,. ...•..........•..•••••••

p •••••

111

••••

Page
,a. 627

Question of South West Africa. Advisory o::>inion of the International Court of
Justice: reports of the Fourth Committee (A/1643) and the Fifth
Committee (A/1662) (concluded)
627
1

)

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

••

International control of atomic energy (continued) ••..•••••••••••••...•. 632

President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEzAM (Iran).
Ol·der of business
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): As
a result of conversations which I held this morning
with a large number of delegations, I have come to
the conclusion that the General Assembly wishes to
suspend the debate on the question of the control of
atomic energy and now resume the discussion of the
question of South West Africa.
Question of South West Africa. Advisory opinion
of the Internation~l Court of Justice; reports
of the Fourth Committee (A/I643) and the
Fifth Committee (A/1662) (concluded)
[Age.l1daitem 35]
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): If
there is no objection, I shall put to the vote the draft
resolutions before us on the question of South West
Africa.
3. The report of the Fourth Committee [A/1643]
contains two draft resolutions, numbered I ~,tV'~ II respectively. We also have before us a new i'Thft resolttion submitted by th~ delegations of Brazil, ftllmark,
Peru, Syria, Thailand and the United States [A/1681J.
As I explained yesterday [321st meeting], that text lS
intended to replace draft resolution I if that draft is
not adopted. The USSR delegation has submitted an
amendtrient [A/1661] to draft resolution
4. I first put to the vote draft resolution I submitted
by the Fourth Committ~e.
5. Mr. SOLDATOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I request 8\ vote
paragraph by paragraph.
6. The PRESIDENT (translalld from Ff"mch): We
shall therefore vote on draft resolution I paragraph by
paragraph.

n.

.

The first recital 'was adopted by 15 'Votes to 5, with
15 abstentions.
.
7. The PRESIDENT (translated from. French): I
call upon the representative of the Unite~ States on a
point of order.

8. Mr. COOPER (United States of America) : I rise
on a.point of order or perhaps a point of inquiry. Before
the General Assembly is draft resolution I, which was
approved in the Fourth Committee. It was the under..
standing of several d~legations that the draft resolution
which was the result of negotiations carried on yester..
day was offerf.d as a substitute for draft resolution I.
It will also be remembered that several amendments
were offered to the substitute upon which agreement
was reac:hed.

9. I make the inquiry as to whether or not it would
be proper first to vote upon the amendments to the substitute draft resolution and then to vote upon the $ub...
stitute draft resolution as amended.
10. The PRESIDENT (translated from Fr,ncld:
The Fourth Comtnittee has submitted two draft 1'esolu..
tions to the General Assembly. It is true that in the
meantime some delegations have endeavoured t\)reach
a compromise and have submitted a new draft resolution; but I must point out that that draft has not come
to t18 from the Fourth Committee. I am obliged to put
to the vot~ first the draft resolution submitted by the

Committee. Delegatio.ns which wish the Genera! Assembly to adopt the compromise draft resolution might
perhaps-I do not wish to influence them in any wayvote against the draft resolution stl,bmitted by the Fourth
Committee; I think that is the best tbmg they can do.
11. In brief, I mUSt fitstput to the vote the draft res0lution submitted by the Fourth Conuni,..tee; then, before putting to the vote t.he compromise draft reaolu...

627
A/PV.322

628 ,

General Assembly-Fifth S.,.8ion-Plenary Meetings

"

tiou,. I sball ask the Assembly to \rote on the amend..
ments to that draft. That will" make our work easier.
The second recital was rejected by 15 flotes to 13,

with 21 abstentions.
The third recital was rejected by 20 flot,s to 14, urith
13 abstentions.
"
.
The fourth awl Jqtk 7'Bcitals were rejected by 18
votes tQ 1'$ with 18 abst\'ntions.
.The si~th rl~c#;;E 'UJ(U rejected by 20 votes to 14,
.'lmth 14 abstent'M'ns.
The sevr?Ji!ih recital w«.s rejected by 18 voteJ to' 15,
with 12 abstentions.
..
Paragraph 1 oj the operative part was rejected by
22 vot~s to 18, with 9 ab.'ttentions.
Paragraph 2 of the operative part was rejected by
22 'l.lotes tQ 18, wzth 8 abstentions.
Ptlrauraph 3 aj the operative part was rejected by
23 v(jf(?$ to 19, with 5 ~Jbsttntiom
12. Mr. SOLDATOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): I request a separate vote 011 sub-paragraph
(c) of paragraph 4.
.
Sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) oj paragraph 4 oj the
operative part were rejected by 25 votes to 19, with 5
abstentions.
SUb-paragraph (c) of paragraph 4 of the. operative
part was rejected by 24 votes to 15, with 9 abstentions.
Paragraph 5 of the operative part was rejected by 23
'Votes to 20, .with 5 abstentions.
Paragraph 6 oj the operative part was rejected by 22
'Votes to 19, with 5 abstentions.
13. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
do not intend to put draft resolution I to the vote as a
whole, because only one of its paragraphs has been
. adopted, and that paragraph is tIot in the operative part.
14. Pr1.,ce Wan WAITHAYAKON (Thailand): On
behalf of the co-sponsors of the jo~nt c:1raft resolution
[A/1681], I wish to announce that the amendments
submitted by Cuba [A/1688] are a~cepted.
15. 1 should clso like to propose a slight change of
wording in paragraph 4 of th\~ operative part of the
joint draft resolution. No change of substance is involved, but only a change in. style. The beginning of
that paragraph shofudbe reworded as follows : "Author..
izes the Committee, as an intE.'rim. measure, pending
the completion of its task referred to in paragraph' 3,
and as far as possible in ac~ordance with the procedure
of the f()~mer Mandates SYElt~m, t4.' examine the report
on the administration of tbe Territory of South West

Afriea ••

}11

" " •.

16. The PRESIDENT (trandotea from French):
After that explanation, you wi11 all ha.~~ understoOd
that the st>Onsors of the joint draft. r(~solution accept
the amend.~ents submitted by b1e de~egation of Cuba;
we can also consider that they accept the slight draftiJl1~
change suggested by the represei1tative of "rhailand. But
before putting to the vote the draft resoluti()J1 thus
amendea,· I shell call upon the representative of the"
Union of South Africa on a point of order.
1. This amendment is complenlentary to tb"

amendment sub·

mit~ed by the representative of 'I11ailand at t\Je. 321st meeting.

17. Mr. JOOSTE (Union of South Africa) : I should
like to clarify the position of the delegation of the U ni(~n
of South Africa in regard to the draft resolution which
apparently is now up for consideration. The President
ruled [321st meeting] that we might explain our votes
onlv after voting on this draft resolution, and my delegation naturally bowed to his ruling, however much it
might have regr~tteQj1 it.
.
18. There has been some talk of this being a com..
promise draft resolution, and I wish to say that that
term may bf..~ susceptible of some misunderstanding. I
rise merely to make it perfectly clear that the South
African delegation is not a party to any co~promise in
respect of this matter. The parties to the discussion lead..
lng up to the new draft resolution were, as far &S we
are aware, some of the Member States which sponsored
draft resolution I, as approved by the Fourth Commit..
tee, and some of the sponsors of the draft resolution
submitted by the United States and seven other nations.
We did not take part in those discussions, and in fact
only learned of· the terms of the new draft now before
the General Assembly a short while before it wa~ of..
fidally cL ~ulated. It is a compromise,· therefor:e, between a more extreme and a" It.:ss extreme draft resolu..
tion, and a compromise to whic.'1. we are in no ~ense a
party. I propose to give the reasons why my G"legation
will vote against this new draft n~3t\lution after. the vat..
in~ is concluded, in acco,~dance w~th the President's
ruling.
'
19. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
shall put to the vute the joint draft resolution [A/1681],
together with the amendments submitted by the Cuban
delegation [A/1688].
20. I must remind you that following a discussion
which took place yesterday [321st meeting] on paragraph 3 of the operative part of this draft resolutiona naragraph which deals with the setting up: of a corn..
mlttee of five - Denmark will replacl the United
Kingdom.

21. Mt. JOOSTE (Union of South Africa) ~ The
delegation of the Union of South Africa requests that
the operative part should be put to the "{ote paragraph
by paragraph, and by show of hande, and that the draft
resolution as a whole should be p.,~ to ttie vote by
roll-call.

22. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frefich):
We shall therefore proceen in the ttl1mnet sUltgested
by the delegation of th\e Union of South Africa;.

23. First I shall put the preamble to ti~e ~raft r~solu­
tion to the vote.· I shall thell put the individual Data·
graphs of the operative part to the vote."
'

The preamble was adopted b~ 43 votes to 6, with 5
abstentions.
, Pdragraph 1 of the. operative part W(iS adopted
4!3 votes to 6, with 7 abstentions.
"
Paragraph.2 of the operative part was adopted by
38 ,!'otes to 6, with 8 abstentions.
Paragraph 3 of the operative pare WfJS adoPt8d
43 votes to 6, with 6 abstentictJs.
. "
Paragraph 4 of the operative POITt was adopted by
39 votes to 6" with 7 abstentions.

b,

b,

322nd Meeting-IS ~ 19-50

It

24. The PRESIDENT (transmtl1d fromPrlnCh): I
now put the joint draft resolution to the vote as a
whole. A roll...cali vote has been reque~ted,.
A vote was taken by roll;.call.
The Union of South Africa having bet1n drawn by
lot by thrJ ,P'l'esident; was call;J upon to flot, first.
. In favour.' United Kingdom of, Great Britain and
N or~~ern Ireland, United States of &'1lerita~ Uru~y~
Vene.zuela, Yemen, Yugosl~via, A.fghanistan, Argentina,
Brazll, Burma, ~~ada, ~hile,. China, Costa Rica~Cuba,
D~nmark, Dommleatl Republic, EcW!-~or, Egypt, EthiOpIa, F!'ance,' Greece, Gl 1atemala, HaIti, Honduras, I~e­
land t India, Indonesia,· Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon,
Liberia, Mexico, Netberlands, Nt>rway, Pakistan,. Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Saudi Arabia~ Sweden, Syria,
Thailand, Turkey.
Against: Union of South Africa, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, By:elorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Ukrainian SO'det SOCla1~t
Republic.
.
Abstai'!ling ::Australia, Be!gium,Bolivia, Colombia,
New Ze~ '"'d.
.
The draft resolution was adopted by 45 1/0tl' to .S,
with 5 abstentions.
.
25. Mr. JOOSTE (Union of South Africa): At the
outset of the debate,~ the leader of the South African
Qe1eg;J.tion expressed the. hope. that in this matter. an
attempt ..would. be made by ·the Organization to find
po~nts of ·agreeme~t .i~stc:ad of points .of difference,. to
Untte ~~d not tO~lvlde, In the face of. the grave cn$IS
at the moment facmgthe world.
26. Progressively, we must confess, Qurbopes have
deteriorated and our e..1C:pectations have all but been
. shattered. It seems asH there were a spirit preva1~t
among. certain Member States, which unfortunately
they have succeeded in indoctrinating in others, to
eschew the way of com' -:ltation and. agreement order
to teach an amicable s01ution, and to prefer teride
rough~hod over the fundamentals of intemational cooperation and the sensibilities of a fellow Member.
27. Instead of creating t~e machinery to . ensure the
calm and objective consideration of theproblern of the
international position of South West Africa in the light
of the a<J.,iso.ryopinion of the International Court of
Justice aDd otherreleva,nt factors, thiscomptonU8e resolutiol'l plt\cdcally closes the door to this method o~
approach. Ins.teaJ of keeping the door invitingly open,
it is only siilghtly ajar at. the moment, and the opening
has narrow~.d as the debate has pr~essed. The present
comprqxnise resplutiol1 is ~further .IUU$ttS.UQn of .this.
28. It is signifi<:ih't that there was no. attempt to in..
trod,t1ce a compromise text until it was clear, from the
voting in the Fourth Committee, that draft resoluti~!!c I:
which was based on teA:-s submitted by the deJegatif'tls
of India and other6.. would nf,:>t commattd' a .two-thirds
majority in t~e General Asseulbly. Then, and only then,
.the attempt to combi:-:.e d-t'.utresolution I as a.pproved
by· the Comttlittee with a jCliint draft resolution sub..,
mitted tp the Committer: by the United States ano.
seven other nations [A/C.4/1.. .124/Rev.l and Corr.1]
f

in

2 For the discussion on this subj1ect in the Fourth Committee.

see Official Rlco,ds of· th, G",eral.A..tll1lWi;y, Pi/lh SII,rion,

Pourth CotHfflitl,e, l00th to 199th meetings itle1usive.

629

was initiated•. The result was the draft resolution whieh
has now been adopted by the General Assembly. ..
29. How was this compl'orraj~e clfect~? It was effected, in the first place, by 8.pb.stitu.ting the SUbstance.
.
of the· preamble of draft resoiution I mrthat of the
joint draft resolution submitted by the United States
and seven other Powers. The preamble of the latter
draft was a full, objective and complete statement of all
the questions put to the Internation~ Court of Justice,
together witb the replies of the Court•.In its plac:e there
is now a preamble which is a one-sided, partial and incompl~te recapitulation of the Court's advisory opinion.
30. . In. the secondflace,. an ad!Unona.l ~ph
[A/168l, para.gra/Jh 4 . was added to the cpera.tive. part.
of the eight-Power diaft., providing for the establishment unilaterally of machinery for the examination of
reports and petitions before the next session of the General Assembly~. bya body established. for a different
·purpose q,nd entrusted with this extraneous task without
·consultation. with the, Union of South Africa. This
provision can surely. not be rec.oncll.ed with the
.. rec~
....
tion, .in the immediately preceding paragraph [A/1681 t
paragraph 3] .0£ the pnnclple of conferring with the
'Union of .South Africaconcenting measures n~
to implement the advisory opinion of the Intemation.al
.
.
·Court of Jt.tstice.
31. In the third place, the principle that the members .
of the s~ial committee should serve in an individual
capacity wasdi.scarded in favour of the prin~ph; that
they sbm,11dserve as representatives of S~tes. ~
32. I need not discuss here the legal implications. and
defects of this nf:W resolution. This, we say, is an illustration of how the development has been pro~
sively it:J. the direction of closing the door to a friendly
solution, based on the full and free discussion of the
prool~m in all its aspects.
33. The South African delegati'~n still stands by what _
was said by our leader in h,t$. opening intenention,' .
namely, that the. South Africa:r(\ Government would:eive
the most careful consideration to any resolution which
might emanate from the General Assembly. But he atao
dre;,w attention to the natural corollary to that sta:teJ.11etlt,
nainely, that my government's d..edsion would be largd.y
influenced by the nature of that resolution.
34. I have no desire to anticipate that decision~ but had
I .been. permitted to declare our vote before the vote
was taken, I should ha~e entreated the General Assembly in all seriousness and sincerity to J??nder carefully the draft resolution placed before It, with ~cu1ar
reference 7to, first, the new facts disCovered 'Since the
·1· ...0f tt.
. ti·
. _.
Lt-.. ftU!" " It .
deuvery
...uea_Vlsery
op:tt110n
on 11
'&''&'Jw.J'~..JV;--faeti·
of"",hichthe International Court of. Justice had no
kno.wledge at the time; secondly.·., the admitted datirer.. to
South . .fri~, .which. is .adtnini.sterig.g S.outh West
Africa· a,.q ·an integral portion' of the Union of SOuth
Africa, of havicg itsownintema.l ~liciec·ttiticlled
under the cloak of critici, .' of the adtniniatte.tion of
Sou.th West Africa. and ~us in violation of Article 2,
P(lr~ph 7 of th~ 9hartet, and, ~hirdly~ the genuiae
deSIre .o.f South AfrIca to. have this long OUtstan.·dint:
matter settled and to achieve this by way of unfettere((
consultation in a spirit of realism.
A.

........
a.s~ Intlt'nDlUmal #tJ'~ of· Scvth Wilt A./riccJ,.. .t4.d~
OPinion: I.CJ. Re/Jo1'ls 19~ PIle 128.
.

630

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

3S. As the re~olution which has just been adopted
failed to take any of these facts into consideration, my
delegation was obliged to vote against it.

36. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
would remind you that speaking time is limited to seven
minutes, although speakers are not required to speak
for seven minutes.

37. Mr. RYCKMANS (Belgium) (translated from
French).' Belgium hopes and trusts that South West
Africa will continue to be administered in the spirit of
the Mandate. It hopes and trusts that the Union of
South Africa will negotiate with the United Nations so
that the population may continue to enjoy protection
similar to that accorded to it under the previous system,
by the Permanent Mandates Commission.
38.

The Belgian delegation abstained from voting because, in the first place, the preamble to the resolution
does not mention the chief question which was put to
the International Court of Justice, namely, whether the
Union of South Africa is or is not bound to place
South West Africa under trusteeship. The General
Assembly accepts the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice. I take it, therefore, that all
those who voted in favour of the resolution have accepted the decision-the opinion of that Court in that
respect also.
The other reason why the Belgian delegation ab~
stained from voting was that under this resolution the
General Assembly decides unilaterally, and prior to the
opening of the negotiations provided for in the same
text, that a committee which it has established without
consulting the Union of South Africa should examine
the reports and petitions that may be submitted.

39.

40.

Mr. RAO (India) : In view of the several alterations made in the draft of the first resolution which has
just been adopted by the General Assembly, my delegation considers it necessary to make a brief statement in
explanation of India's vote.
41. The original draft resolution, as the text emerged
from the Fourth Committee, was in the view of my
delegation a reasonable, modest and wisely conceived
proposal. Unfortunately it did not receive a measure
of support sufficient to ensure its adoption by the General Assembly. My delegation therefore supported the
draft resolution in its revised form, although it would
have preferred the text as it stood in the report of the
Fourth Committee. My delegation accepted the amendments now incorporated in the resolution, in a spirit of
compromise, and it did so, in the main, for two reasons.

42. In the first place, there is no real difference of
opinion in the United Nations on the desirability of accepting the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice, nor is there any difference of opinion on the
.desirability of the Government of the Union of South
Africa implementing that opinion without delay.
43. Secondly, my delegation has in mind, notwithstanding the statement just made by the representative
of the Union of South Africa, the assurance which the
representative of that government gave to the Fourth
Committee that his govemment would give the most
careful consideration to any resolutions that might be
adopted by the General Assembly.

¥

y de1egat~on therefore expresses the hope that
the WIdely held vIew of the Fourth Committee in favour
of the implementation of the opinion of the International
Court of Justice should not be obscured by any dif~erences ov~r. the most practical methods of implementmg that 0plmon.
45. There have been several concessions in the amendments now incorporated in the resolution which we have
just adopted. The authors of the alternative draft resolution [A/1657] which was withdrawn yesterday in
favour of the amended revised draft, were keen on the
appointment of a negotiating committee. Many of us in
the Fourth Committee were apprehensive that a negotiating committee would mean an interval of another
year, during which the inhabitants of South West Africa
would continue to be denied the benefits of an arrangement whereby administration reports and petitions were
examined by the United Nations, or some organ created
by it.
46. The compromise now accepted meets our objection
half way. The negotiating committee will, as an interim
measure, perform these functions in addition to conducting negotiations with the Union of South Africa on the
procedural measures necessary for implementing the
opinion of the International Court of Justice.
47. My delegation was impressed by the point of view
of the representative of the United Kingdom, who said
in the Fourth Committee, that it was envisaged that
there should be negotiations with the Union Government, not on the substance of the Court's opinion but on
the procedure for implementing it, not on whether reports or petitions should be submitted but on how they
should be handled by the United Nations.
48. That is what the General Assembly expects the
negotiating committee to do through the adoption of
this resolution. The next session of the General Assembly will, we hope, have the report of the negotiating
committee before it on three main topics: on the administration reports of the Government of the Union
of South Africa for the years 1947 to 1950; secondly,
petitions from the territory of South West Africa, and,
thirdly, the procedure to be followed in the future.
49. So far as the future is concerned, let me say a
word. The second draft resolution, which is yet to be
adopted, reiterates previous resolutions inviting the
Government of the Union of South Africa to place
South West Africa under the International Trusteeship
System. It also stresses what has been pointed out by
the International Court of Justice, namely, that the
nonnal way of modifying the international status of
South West Africa would be to place it under the
Trusteeship System. My delegation is confident ~he
General Assembly will adopt the second draft re~~lution
as it has done the first, without any real opposItion or
dissent.
50. The problem of South West Africa ~as been. before
us ever since the United Nations came 1I1to exIstence,
and for four years the General A~sembly.h~s sought
a solution. Today we have the adVIsory op1l11On~f the
International Court of Justice, endorsmg. practIcally
everything contained in the various resolutIOns of the
General Assembly on the subject.
SI. Finally, let me say a word about the observati?ns
made by the representative of the Unio~ of South Afn~
The debates this year have been admIttedly free fro

44.

expressions of inc

we have our gra
woo come from A
consequences of t
allention of the U
il/las done for t1
/eI me say very hi
01 the statement :
resentative of the
Africa. If the do
General Assembl)
rile members hav(
flsolution is proof
11, Lord OGMC
maKe ashort statl
fOsiHon of the U
~ressed on anum
~rtee, It was brie
~, In our view,
~uestion of South
clearly set out thl
01 Justice, accepte(
Nations was conce
of South Africa H
we considered tha
wards the implem
lor this purpose "
mittee should be se
ilie Government of
ijs~ment of a systt
rlose as possible
lfandate.
~. We supportec
Fourth Committee
~oich in our opini
mg out the Court's
III opportunity to
voted against the
~roposed because
~Iement the Court
)l. We have had
tton, in the nature
01 the various dra
~ lee, which has me
k11lt~ough we are
110 our view pro
,ill nnplementatt'on of
J!/ances We voted

~>1 I

"l~' I wish to pia
:fi Kmgdom Govern
!1Iution introd11 ce
I~e. seven co-spon
w~lch We have ju
~ined in paragra
oeld to prej udge
!ub~ission of rep
iI Will so prejud
lYe hope it will n
~! out the full opi
Inls resolution w
QI t~e opinion an
~e should theref
Ye given, to s
uoduced
and I•t IS
.
ilia
J
t the United

'I

322Ikd~M:eetiQ.g-13 December 1950
--------,---,-------_---:=-------""'---_.
. _-------_._-_..

expressions of in~l11ation and bitterness. Nevertheless,
we have our grave misgivings, especially those of us
who cor-ne from .As~a, in regard to .th~ problem and the
consequences of this problem continuIng to engage the
attention of the United Nations in the manner in whif~h
it has. done for the last. four years. Those. misgivi1\t{s,
let me say very briefly, have not diminished as a resUlt
of the. statement made a .few minutes ago by the teJr
resentative of the Government of the Union of South
Africa. If th~ door is being banged, it is not by the
General Assembly,. and .the overwhelming vote which
the melt\bers have just recordt:d in favour of the draft
.
resolution is prCtof of m)? ;J,Ssertiono
52. Lord OGlfORE (Ut:1ited Kk,gdom):' I desire to
make a. sh.ort statement in expla.natklil of my vote. The
position of the United Kingdom 6(\lvernrnent was ex..
pressed on a number of occasions Irt the Fourth Cnm..
mittee. It was briefly this.
53. In our view, the resoltttion to be q.dopted on the
question of South 'YJVest Africa should be one which
clearly set out t.1}e opinion of the International Court
of Justice, accepted it in its entirety so far as the United .
Nations was concerned, and recommended to the Union
{'f South Africa that it should follow-suit. In addition,
we con~idered that there should be a positive step tow~rds the implementation 6f the Court's opinion, and
for this purpose were arocious that. a negotiating COInmittee should be set up to work out, in consultation with
the Govetnment of the Union of South Africa, the establishment of a system of supervision' which would be as
close as possible to that obtaining under the old
Mandate.
.
54. We supported<l. draft. resolution introduced in the
Fourth Coti1..-nittee by Denmark and seven other States,
which in our opinion provided the best' method of carrying out the Court's view. Unfortunately, we did not have
an opportunity to vote on that draft resolution. We
voted against the other draft resolutions which were
proposed because we felt that they did not in fact im..·
plement the Court's decision as we should have desired.
55. We have had before us today another draft resolution, in the nature of a compromise between the framers
of the various draft resolutions in the Fourth Committee, )Yhk~has met with general agreement and which,
although we are not in €ntire agreement with it, does,
in our view, provide the b~st available basis tor the
ir,'lpleOlentation of the Court's opinion. In these circumstances we voted for the draft resolution as a whole.
56. I wish to place on record, however, that the United
Kingdom Government considers the original draft resolution introduced in the Committee by Denmark and
the sevenco"sponsors as_preferable-to-the resolution on
which we have just voted because the pre;visionscon..
tained in par3.b7faphs 2 and 4 of the latter text may be
held to prejudge to some extent the procedure for the
submission of reports and petitions. I do not say that
it will so prejudge the procedure, but it may do so.
We hope !t will not. Tbe original draft resolution also
set out the full opinion of the Court objectively, whereas
this resolution which we have. adopt~d selects a part
of the opinion and does not record the w!lole opinion.
We sbould therefore have preferred, for t'he reasons I
have gi"en~ to' see the original draft resolution introduced, and it is for this reason, an~ this reaStln alone,
that the United Kingdom delegation abstained from

voting on paragt'ilph~l 2 and 4 of the· reso~tltion which
has just been adopted.
57. In conclusion, may I say that my government most
sincerely hopes th~t the· negotiating com1nittee will be
able to work out a soltttion ~£ this veJ(,ed and diffiCtili
problem, acceptable to both the General ~.=anbly and
to the Government of the Union of South Afdca.
58. The PRESIDENT (translated from FmJch,):
We come now to draft resolution 11. Th,e Soviet Union
has submitted an amendm~t [Al1661]. to that draft,
providing for the addition of the fonowing pa.'agraph
after.paragraph 1 of the operativ" part:
.
1'2. N oles that the action of the 'Onion of South
Africa in· adopting a law on the incorporationot'
South West" Africa in h'le Union of South Africa
. constitutes a violation of the Charter of the United
. Nations."
The present paragra.ph 2. would thus become para..
graph J.
59. J put that ame1ildment to the vote. A roll..caU 'Vote
has been requested.

A vote was taket.~ by roll-call.
Urug1J.IaY, having been drawn by lot by the President,'
was called upon to 'Vote first.
". in jlwour:.YugosJavia, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
R.~public, Czechoslovakia, Guatett'~la, Indonesia, Po..
land, Uk?ainian Soviet Socialist R~public, U man of'
Soviet Soci~llist Republics. .
Against: . '1enezuela,. Australia, Belgium, Bolivia,
Canada, ChI1~~, Costa' Rica, France, Greece, Honduras,
Iceland, Isrp;~l, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey~
Uf!.io~ .of South Africa, United: KinJdom' of. Great
Br~tam and Northern Ireland, Untted States of
America.
Abstaining: Uruguay, Yemen, Afghanistan, Argen...
tina, Brazil, Burma, China, Colombia, Cuba, Denmark,
Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, India,. Iran, Iraq, Lebanon,
Liberia, Mexico; Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Syria.
The amendment was rejected by 24 votes to 8" with
22 abstentions.
.
60. The PRESIDENT (t,.~nslated from French): I
shall now put draft resolution If. to the vote as a whole.
A roll-call vote has been requested.
.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
The Union of South Africa, having been drawn by lot
by the President, was called upon to vote first.
In fa;uour: Union of Soviet Socialist Reptiblics;United States of America, Uruguay, Vene.zue1a, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Brazil, Burma, B:ve1orussian Soviet
Socialist Republic, China, Cuba, CzeChoslovakia, Ecua..
dor, Egypt, Guatemala,. Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia,
India, Ir~q, Lebanon,Liberia, Mexico, Pakistan, Para..
guay, Ph.Uip-pine~l, Poland, S~;udi Arabia, Syria, U1min..
ian Soviet Soeia~ist RepabUc.
Against: Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Australia, iJe1gium, .
Canada, Ethiopia, Greece, ~etherJands; Peru, Sweden.
Abstaining: Yemen, Argentina; Bolivia, Cbile, eo..
lornbia, Costa Riett, Denmark, France, Iceland, .lranl ·

Im-----------_

... _---_---:::--_~--------~-----------;----Isr~el, New ,Zeal~4, Nicar~l3.., Norway, Thaiialld,
by a .r efusal. to. co.-operat.e even.... in s.tudying the. problem,
Turkey..
by an attitude, in short, against which no argument, no
TIuI .traft r4,~Gll;dion 'W(J,$' adopted by 30 'tmt'$ to 10, attempt at pe,rsuasionfno demonstration of the .most
sincere desire to'arr~ve at a ..solution has be~n able to
with la abst,fI(4m}flS.
"
.
prevail.
.

Mr. JOO~;TE' (Union of South Africa): The
67~ .However, since. the Commission onConventicmal
South' African delegation voted apinstthetext of the
Armarnentsatld' the Atomic Energy Cotntnission·have
resolution' which has just been' adopted, both in the
both been reproached for failing to ·show ~·true underFourth Committee and here. in the General Assembly.
standing
of the sptcial subj~s with :which they are con...
We have .aiready given ()ur reason~ for voting against
eerned
because
they have notdea1t With· them as a whole,
it in the Committee,. and I ·wish to repeat tbem ·here.
with the result that their outlook has been distorted,
62.· Tbtf effect
the resolt.\tion is to invite South
and because that rlivisionof labour has hittdered the
· Africa to submit a trusteeship· agreement in regard to
accomplishmei.it of their' task instead of facilitating it,
South West Africa. That invitation lwsbeen extended
wc. shall make yet another concession to our critics. We
to us on· different occasions in the past at:.d we have atshall do so 'because wer10 not want it to be said that
waJs categorically declined it.· Nothing mls happened
the failure of the efforts of the United' Nations to settle
in the meantime to cause South Mrica to reconsider its
aquestioll which, from the point of view' of the immeattitude; on th~ contrary, much has happened to condiate as well as of the more distant future, is certainly
· oolidate and strengthen it. In any case,. .we accept
the most serious question now facing the international
prevIous resolutions on this matter as a standing inv:tacommunity, was caused by the refusal of the majority
tion until they are withdrawn, open ior acceptance at
of the Members' to listen to the objections of s()me
any time should we be so inclined. There thus seems
among t~em concerning. a matter ·of procedure.
to be no justification for any repetition, particularly
68, HO\\l,eveJ;, it is quite obvious that we cannotex,p~ct
when it is borne in mind that, apart from. any invitation,
that· ·this meJ;'~, alteration in our procedure will bring
· the way is always open to the Union of South Africa
about.
the succ~ss which .has escaped, us for so long.
, to enter into such an agreement if it so desires.
In fact, we believe that if our ~orts had been met by.. a,
63. South Africa has consistently maintained that it is
goodwill equal to our own, the manner of dealing with
under no obligation, legal or moral, to enter into such , the problen:i-whether we' had taken it as a wh()~ or
an agreement. I need say nothing with ~espect .to . the . piecemeal-would have b~en of small importance. We
legal objection, but with regard' to any alleged moral
know only too well that we can expect nothing from any
· d"ojection, I may merely recall that from tlte very bechange in the organization of our work if there is not a
ginning, and on every possible occasion, We have specifichange of another kind, a change of principle, a radical
cally reserved our position in regard to South. West
change of attitude on the part of certain of our colleagues
Africa with the' express' object of avoiding even the
with' regard to this formidable undertaking which now
sen:ablance ofa moral obligation. In those circumstances,
concerns tneir fate as well as ours, the destiny of this
it seemed to my delegation that no good purpose could
generation and of succeeding oneS.
be served by a resolution of this nature and we therefore
69. We are .prepared.to meet ,our critics' objections
voted against it.
and to give theIU this further proof of our devotion to
the' cause ()f peace-a. peace deliv.ered from the most
International control of atomic energy (~on.
terrible
of threats. And we appeal . to them, too, to
. tinued)
demonstrate their sincerity by returning to the bodies
engaged in the. study of'these' problem~~. They left; those
[Agenda i~em 26]
bOdies, deliberately,·a year rago,e without any reason that
64. Mr. LACOSTE (France) (translattd from
could be considered valid, given the tremendous issues
French): France has jointed with Australia, Canada,
involved, and they hav~ been awaited there ever since.
Ecuador, the Netherlands, Turkey, the United King..
If the :Assembly accepts the suggestion of the sponsors
dom and the United States in submitting to the Asof the pTesent draft,. the. two commissions will shortly
sembly the new draft resolution on the international
be combined; that should satisfy the wishes of our incontrol of atomic energy [A/1668 and Corr.l] which
defatigable opponents, who will find their long vacated
was distributed to the Assembly yesterday. .'
places waiting for them. Once mote, we appeal to them
to join us in a resolute stand ~o ove~come ~hat is cer..
65. The French Government thought it advisable to
tainly the. greatest of all the dlffi~~les··. whiCh. fa~e . us;
suggest to the General Assembly, in concert with the
we appe~ to them to show that their determtnatlon to
Powers ~o which I have just referred, a new method
succeed
IS equal to our own.
.
oi approaching the problem because it felt,liketbe other
goven'11uents which have sponsored this draft resolution,
70. Mr•. HOFFMEISTER (C2:echoslovakia): The
that where atopic of such capital importance was. conmenace of war is, inseparably related to the menace of the
~n!~d, no. possibility must. be neglected, .no effort
atomic bomb. The atomic bomb .hangs above· the heads
spared, no chance. st"orned of 'reaching a solution which
of the peoples of the' world, suspended, unfortunately,.
would be acceptable to all----or even of making a slight
only by the thin. thread of the political incompetence
step forward, however small, towards an agreement: . of those who would. use it irre~ponsibly, ~nd firs~, in a
among the principal States concerned.
.
fit of madness caused by their overwhelming deSire for
conquest.
i 66. To tell the truth, .strong faith
persevering
. courage are needed to pursue such an effort, when for
71.. One()f tlteprerequisites for peace ~ong the p.eofour years all attempts have failed, one after the ,other,
pIes Of the worllfis the.knowledge that this menace,has
because they have lieen met by obstinaey, by negation, been eliminatfd. that there is no such bomb any more. :

· 61.

of

and

I

S22nd Meeting-IS Deeember 1950
The prohibition and destruction of the atomic bomb,
therefore, would be one of the first steps of mankind
towards peace. He who really desires peace must de·
mand the prohibition and destruction of atomic bombs.

72. The United States, which is attempting to ·avert
an 1:conomic crisis and the consequent downfall of the

powerful monopolist system through feverish reanna..
ment, already knows today that it cannot break the
liberation movement of the peoples and that it cannot
bring progress and development to a .stop and conquer
the world for itself without a war. What other purposes
are the weapons of aggression which it is producing to
serve? And what will happen once the Umted States is
armed or (~ven "super-armed" to the teeth? It wi11be
difficult to call it off for another time.

73. There is still time today to change this programme

and to prf~pare for peace instead of war. But the first
condition is to give up investments amounting to many
billions and to destroy the atomic bomb. This is a Faustlike problem.

74. At a Press conference on 30 November 1950, President Truman said, according to a United Press report
from Washington, that the United States had had under
consideration the use of the atomic bomb against the
Chinese ccmmrnists in connexion with the war in
Korea. And going from bad to worse, he stat\..-d, during
the Sa.n;le Press conference, that he would send a request to the Congress for enormous new appropriations
and for the expansion of the nation's atomic bomb production, and for large-scale expansion of the armed
forces.

75. The following day, in the morning. issue of The
New Y (),-k Times of 1 December,· we could read this:
"His words in a news conference rang with challenge to
communist China and Russia."
76. I' shall now quote one passage from this conference
for the verbatim record because of the historical importance of this testimony:
Question: "Mr. President, I wonder if we could
retrace that reference to the atomic bomb ?Did we
understand you clearly that the use of the atomic
bomb is under active consideration?"
Ans'wer: "It always had been, it was one of our
weapons".
This reported fact thu~ forms the most serious working
paper for our discussions.
.

77.

May I now be allowed to bring in some additional
quotations as relevantly as I can. Miss Anne O'Hare
McCormick ·wrote in the New York Times of 2 December 1950, under the headline HDetonations of a
word out of season", as follows:
"If the atomic bomb had been dropped, it could
hardly have produced ~ greater sensation than the
President's reference to it in his Press conf~rence .•.
~'The world-wide repercussions following the men"
tion of this ultimate weapon proves not only how horrifying it is but how unwilling the war-sick nations of
the West are to face the dreadful implications ..•".
78. Mr, Howard K. Smitll, in a cable of 4 December
from London, published in The Natiott:· of 9 December,
desc:--ibed .the dramatic scene in the British House of

633

Commons, the epicentre of the discontent growing in
all parts of Europe. I shall read it:
"The ¥ouse happened to be in the mid~e of a foreign affairs debate when Truman made hiS sta!ement
on the atomic bomb. A Labour member of Parliament
rose in the midst of the debate to read it out. Members
flooded into the corridors and held hurried conferences. A Labourite drafted &. letter·to Attlee de..
manding that .British troops be withdrawn from
K()rea if the bomb were used, and within two hours
it was signed by 150 Labour· members of.Parliament.
. Anthony Eden is said to have offered his m,orat· sup"
port to the rebels. Inside the House, R.· A. Butler
called to the government benches: (The voice of
Britain must be heard with greater ap.thori~ • • •
This country must exert its influence to aVOid war
with China.' And he repeated the. pro~sa1,nmde by
many others in the debate, that Attlee himself should
go to see Truman. With his own party in revolt and
the opposition onslaught gathering momentum,
Attlee hastened from the chamber, .called an erner...
gency Cabinet meeting, and made his decision to go."
79. Miss FredaKirchwey wrote in The Nation of
9 December 1950:
"If Mr. Truman's cas-nal brandishing of the atomic
bomb was intended to reassure the faint of heart,
its effeCt must have astonished him. Horror overtook
anxiety .and hf:lped crystallize opi~ion.•Government
. leaders. in west\~rn Euro~e conferred,.~blnetsmet •.•
and Mr. Attlee came to Washington to tell the· President that Europe opposed war with China •..
'"The unhappy aSsignment of Britain's. Prime
Minister was to talk plainlyahout such ticklish matters as General MacArthur's leadership,. Mr. Tru... .
man's assertion that he alone can order the use of the
atomic bOmb, American intervention in Formosa, the
,powers assumed by Syngman Rhee, the effect of re..
fusing Peking a seat in the United ,Nations.'Europe's
feeling about these policies is as strong today as the
~ontrary emotions in .Washington."
80. Mr. Truman's statement -this was the British
Peace Committee's reaction - moved the whole British
people to anger; the committee emphasized the urgency
of the need for the British people to insist that the
United Kingdom Government should break from its
subservience to United States policy.
81. 'The Times of London wrote that the question
asked of the President and his reply touched upon the
"
most sensitive fears and doubts of this age.
82. The assembly may remember the day of the President's annpun.c~ment and its impression on the minds
of the representatives in the lounge of Lake Success.
Most of the representatives were saying, to put it mildly,
that it would be politically disastrous.
83. At last, the C011t11tUnique of the talks between President 1'rUtnan and ?vIr. Attlee came. It dealt with the
atomic menace at the very end, in 11 \7ery short
paragra.ph :
,
"The President stated that it was his hope that
world conditions. would never call for the use of the
atomic bomb/'
Still the impression in this Assembly remained that this
'Yas a rather poor retreat and this phrase could be added

to the Ust of considerable disagreements upon specific
courses of action.
84. The McMahon Act provides that the atomic bomb
may- not be used by the military forces of the United
States unless the President ~\') decides and instructs the
Atomic -Energy Commission to release this weapon, of
which it is given sole custody. Thus the fate of war and
peace, as demonstrated by- recent events, rests in the
hands of those who decide on the foreign policy and the
domestic policy of the United States, policies which are
interdependent. May I remind the Assembly of a dispatch published in -The Times of London, which reads
as follows: " , " "
.
"There has been a tendency for Washington "to
make pronouncements without consultation, leaving
its allies with little alternative but to agree. . . The
Administration . has taken decisions based less on
rigbtness
. of. policy
d - than
,. to" keep Republicans in a cooperative moo -. . • .
85. We have known for a long time that the United
States subjects its rather emotional foreign policy to
the requirements of its internal policy. This in its turn
leads finally to regrettable regimentation of this Assembly to make it _comply with the internal policy of the
United States. That the policy of the United States is
neither wise nor far-seeing has been confirmed by recent
.
events. .

86. The Washington columnist, Bruce Catton, wrote
as long ago as November 1949 that the United States
now represented terror-·the force which would burn
all citi~sand destroy civilians by the scores n£ thousands.
The bomb, 1J.e wrote, was the keystone of the security
arch of the United States, whose foreign policy rested
on it.
-87. There was a phrase in The plew Yo-rk Times editorial of 2 December 1950 which struck me as a rather
outspoken admission. It was : ((Moreover, it is within
our power-alone among all the democratic countriesto precipitate or to"accept a world war."
88., It is clear that it is the United States which is the

mafJl obstacle to the realization of the overwhelming
<ks~re of the peoples of the world to see the atomic

weapon lrohibited and the United States stockpiles
desttoye .
89. The United States, with the bomb of atomic aggression hidden up its sleeve, has hypnotized the majority with the -might of dollars into. accepting and adopting the resolution on united action for peace [302na
meeting]. How many hypocrisies are _hidden in that
resolution? Where does it speak of theprbhibition of the
atomic bomb ? Why, even this great Assembly did not
prohibit the use of the atomic bomb under the flag of
the United Nations!

90. The United States has convinced us that it does
not desire peace. It is probably true that it does not
want a war right now, this very day. But the moment
will come when impatience will overcome premeditated
action. Meanwhile the Americanized allies have had
opportunities to convince -themselves of the fact that the
great aid and assistance which was promised is not only
not in the least altruistic, and that it is not even so
great or so powerful as the United States wanted them
to believe.

91. The USSR, on the other hand, has convinced us
that it does want peace. It has proved this through its

I

concrete and constructive proposals that in no way
infringe on·the sovereignty either of the -great or of the
small. The Soviet Union realistically and logically considered the question of peace from its very basis. It
demanded and continues to demand with great consistence the prohibition of atomic weapons.
"
92. In its draft declaration on the removal of the threat
of a new war £,d the strengthening of peace and
security among nations [279th meeting], the USSR,
referring to the Stockholm Appeal an9 regarding the
use of atomic weapons and other means of mass destruc~
tion of human beings as the most heinous international
crime against humanity, and basing that attitude on the
unanimously adopted General Assembly resolutions 1
(1) and 41 (1) of 1946 on the need for prohibiting the
use of atomic -energy for military purposes, proposed
that the General Assembly, recognizing that the use of
the atomic weapons as a weapon of mass destruction
of human beings is contradictory to international conscienc(' and honour and incompatible with membership
of the United Nations, should declare that the use of
atomic weapons should be unconditionally prohibited
and that a strict system of international control spould
be instituted to ensure the exact and unconditional
ob~ervance of that prohibition. It further proposed that
the General Assembly.' should declare that the first
government to _use the atomic weapon, or any other
means for the mass destruction of human beings, against
any country, would thereby commit a crime against~
humanity and should be regarded as a war criminal.
93~

That proposal was truly worthy of the greatest
Power in the world, but it was not aecepted.

94. The Soviet Union made use of every opportunity
to put that basic demand for. the maintenance of peacebefore the United Nations. It did so again [309th
meetit~g ] during the discussion on the twenty-year
programme for achieving peace through the United
Nations proposed by the Secretary-Gt;neral. The Soviet
Union, in paragraph 2 (c) of i,ts draft resolution
[A/1525 and CQrr.1} stressed the fact tbat in its view
it was essential that in further developjng that programme, provision should be made therein for the
unconditional- prohibition of atomic weapons. and other
weapons for the mass extermination of people and the
institution of control to ensure the observance of that
prohibition. That proposal was also rejected.

95. How did the American majority react to all these
proposals? The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Vishinsky, expressed this clearly in
his speech on 2 November 1950 in· the General Assembly
[301st meeting] when he said:
((We must now have been seeking for some five
years to ensure that a decision to outlaw the atomic
bomb-the use of the atomic bomb-is taken simultaneously with a decision to organize internationaf
control which will ensure that this decision is carried
out, but no· one agrees with us. They say 'no', and
invent all k1nds of pettifogging formulre in order toby-pass this straightforward proposal that the atomic'
weapon should be unconditionally prohibited and that
strict and effective international control O\1C; the
execution of that prohibition should be- instituted

322nd Meeting-IS ")jecentbe... 1950
~imultaneousty. We submitted amendments in the

First' Committee. We said: 'You say this and this in
your draft resolution. We agree with this, we are
prepared to support it, but we demand that the
atomic weapon should be prohibited also.' But you ClO
not. want this. That is the basis of the dispu'te
between us."
96. Instead of adopting a decision on which the world
could build. up hope~ of peace, the General Assenlk11y
adopted [308th meet~ng] an amorphous resolution entitled "Peace through deeds" which, as Mr. SiroJ<y,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Czechoslovakia and head of the Czechoslovak
delegation said on 20 November [312th meeting],
4'virtually buries the question .of disarmament and the
reduction of armed forces, as well as the question of
the prohibition of the atomic weapon, and at the same
time establishes a further legal basis for armed intervention in the domestic affairs of States".
'97. '".:'his summer, when I waS visiting the peace
meetings in the villages in the Czechoslovak mountains,
or in .the countryside close to Prague,.I heard a simple
citizen, not a communist, not a writer, nor a politician,
"just a man from the village, say something that, at that
time, seemed over-simplified to me. He said: "The
'United States is opposed to the prohibition of the
atomic bomb because ,it ~ants to use this weapon".
98. After President Truman's statement, after the
continual and consistent refusal of the United S~tes to
agree to the prohibition of the atomic bomb and atomic
weapons,· and after witnessing all the evasive tactics of
the representative of the United States, I understand
that every thinking person can describe the .policy of
the American ruling circles only in this waY:l in those
.
words. "
99. Yes, the new conquerors, who today are proud of
the hecatombs of the peaceful towns and villages, of the
peaceful population of Korea, of the ruins left behind
by the American airmen, no longer confine themselves
to threats,. but are willing to use the atomic bomb at a
given moment in order to speed up the" attainment of
their objectives.
100. Today we no longer hear merely the empty words
~f blo~thi~sty senators; at a time when policy-making
1S passmg mto the hands of generals, the world must
reali:Ge that the United States has entrusted the wa~ng
of an aggressive war in the PaCific to the same man ~ho
has on" 'e before made use of· the atowuc bomb in that
very?' ea.
.101. One of the characteristics of United States policy
is a self-satisfied overestimation of the United States,
.a nd a no less self-satisfied underestimation of the Soviet
Union. In internal policy, the industrial and financial
>Circles consider the notorious American slogan "bigger
:and better" so effective and so essential that even those
who determine the· United States foreign policy have
succumbed to this propaganda. And we do not even
mention certain military leaders who have succumbed
to the mania forever bigger glory.
102. After the cold shower which this self-satisfied
general attitude underwent when, on 23 September
1949, President Truman announced that the United
States had lost its monopoly of the atomic bomb, the
United States was left with only one consolation-that
i

it was in advance of the USSR as .liar as atomic bombs
were conce..·ded. That an occasional shower is quite
healthy for the imperialists has become apparent from.
recent events this year. But we do not intend to overestimate those events, nor do we unde~estirnate them.
We do not underestimate the fact that the United States
still holds that kinetic danger to world peace, to human
work and happiness.
103. The United S'tates is counting on the fact that at
the beginning l}! ~ny eventual conflict it would have a.
greater stockpile of atomic weapons than the Soviet
Union and would therefore be superior in this respect.
We kno"N' that the USSR does not seek to Tiave such a
monstron~ sUpt:,irlrity, nor to have greater stocks of
atomic weapons, for the Soviet Union continually
proposes that all stocks should be destroyed immediately
and that the production of atOlnic weapons should be
prohibited everywhere. By these measures it desires to
save the world from an eventual crisis of irresponsibility
during which, in a· fit ·of overconfidence, the American
owner of this stockp!1e might use it ter start a holocaust.
104~ This "question of superiority in the event of a
qualitative change from the. cold war into a hot one is
certainly also one of the characteristics of the American
habit of overestimation. It is also characteristic of the
overestimation of the value of the, atomic bomb in
general, for we know today that the atomic bomb is not
going to decide "the result of a ;war. '
105. The old" trick of the promoters of the slogan .
"control first, prohibition later" is in contradiraion with
the common understanding of logic. Vve have first to
prohibit the weapon, and tlun, or slimultaneously, to
have control so that the prohibition ils carriedont. The
immoral inverse conception cannot hide any other
intention than to postpone the prohibition toa date
when the mass production and the stockpil~ of bombs
would. reach a point when an atomic war could be
started without taking into account any opposition· to
the use of the atomic bomb. We have te act now, because
the day· may come when ·arms aceumulated in the
arsenals will start to shoot and explode by themselves.
The arms, as other goods, are destined for consumption.
The businesslike American approach towards production is in natural contradiction with the manufacturing
of bombs with the intention not to drop them.
10?}'he United States still counts on~tomic energy
prImarIly as on a weapon only. Its attitude towards a
peaceful development of atomic energy is negative, even
though the United States Cotnmissionon Atomic
Energy deClared on 23 November 1950 that it would at
last publish the secrets of production of atomic energy
so far as low power and nuclear reactors were coni.
cerned.
107~ This stubborn demand for the control of atomic
energy by a commission dominated by the United States
is, in our eyes, a necessary condition·ior the maintenance
of the monopoly of American industry~". This further
was a cir(:Uttlstance which put the eontrolof atomic
energy into the hands of American trusts. Today this
fact can in.no way help development, but on the contrary
can only hinder development andeft'ect a dispen~..like
distribution of an energy which, if it were fully utilized,
would represent a direct threat to such sources of power
of the. Ainericanruling circles.as coal and. petro1.1he
Amencans do not wan..t a.nd willnot permit the use 'of
atomic energy for peaceful pu~es.

686
•

I

108. Senator Connally. I~ing at a hearinr on the
atomic energy bill, held iDa ~etr.mittee charjed with.
the supervision ofUrJted State. PQueyon atomic
energy, l'eferred to the pO$sible use of. atomic energy
for constructive pumoses in .the iollowlng term.:
"Certainly power is secondary or 'thirdary' or 'fourthary'
to me. I dov..', think the power is of. any great eon$e..
quence:at the moment .•• "•• Senator MilllKin left us in
no doubt that the civilian utilization of atomic en.,rgy
was to ·be sacrificed in the intere.at of atomic weapons.
H#) said ~ "We need not push forward in those field~.
I suggest,. as long as the imperative overridingcon~
sideration has to do with tlie energy "8 a mlntal')'
weapon, for medicine is cover~d in a more adequate
fashIon by existing remedies~ The same use that has
been sug~ested in the way of power is covered at the
present tIme by, let Us say, a less efficient meth:>d.
Could we; not lock the whole thing up, if security
required it,! for a year or two years, without damaging
our peace-time life in. any material re$pect ?UIS
109. It is clear that Blackett's warning voice w,s not
listened to. The United Stat«~s· is not interested in the
utilization of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, but
exclusively for purposes of war.
110. Today,it is the monopolies that have been
charged with the utilization of atomic energy for war
p~ses. Billions of doll~rs are flowi!lg into the pockets
of those who are producmg destruction. The Congress
of the United States will certainly, in this· ease, adopt
with a bi-partisan majority the poticy. of raising the
pr~uction of atomic bombs and of greatly· ··extending
theIr
.. """st<>cks.
.
111. This. attitude is so clear that considerations about
the control of atomic energy voiced by the United
Nations are becoming entirely untimely and inappropriate in American n~1ing circles.
112. The New Yorrk Herald Tribune magazine, This
Week, of 13 Novemb~r 1949, describing the human
qu~ll.ities of one cif. the top five atomic commissioners,
.?1~ofeS$or Henry· de Wolf Smyth, author of the well
blOwn StIf,yth· Repo't.t, wrote: HTheinformation he
gave . . • made people everywhere realize that atomic
energy. ~s the. power ~o change the world." We agree
that thiS IS true. AtomiC energy may change a booming
capital into a h~p of bricks-or a dry sandy desert into
a fertile farmland. It depends on who uses it and for
what purpose it is used.
.
113. In its issue of 21 November 1949, Mr. Henry
Luce's Life· magazine quoted the speech of the Deputy
Prime Minister of the. Soviet Umon, Mr. GeorJl M.
Malenkov, delivered last year at the October Revmution
celebration in the Bolshoi Theatre in lV!oscow. Mr.
Malenkov' bad said that "in the hands of the Soviet
people", atomic: energy "can be and must be a mighty
Instrument .of technical progress on a scale never
witnessed befo.re, an instrltment for the further rapid
development of.'the; .productive forces of our country".
114. On 6 November 1950, on the eve of the thirtythird anniv,er,sary of the great October Revolution, the
Deputy· Chairri1an·· of the Council of .Ministers of the

..*Quoted from the records of fue hearing" betore the S~l
c:omuuttee on Atomic Energy of the United States Senate, 79th

Comttess, 1st session, hearlrig of 14 December 1945.
'lbid.~ 2.ud se!ision,hearing of 14 Februry 1946.

USSR, Mar$halof the Soviet Union Nikolai Bulganin,
spoke as follows on the question of atomic enerlY.:
"Important new steps have been taken to accompltsh
the task set Soviet scientists by Comrade Stalin-the
task not only of overtaking but surpassing i.n the very
near future the achievements of science abroad. Our
scientists have followed up the discovery of the secret
of atomic energy with many other important works and
discoveries contributing to technical progress and the
fulfilment and over-fulfilment of our national economic
p1ans/~
,
115. Perhaps one day the self-satisfied supermen who
believe in the self-sufficiency of the American civilization
will1earn to understand that the Soviet Union is working with atomic energy and considers it as a moving
force of planned industrial production and as a fuel, as
was stated here last year: and again yesterday by the
Minister· for' Foreign' Affairs of the USSR, Mr.
.
Vyshinsky.
116. But in the Soviet Union the free development of
atomic energy is not hindered by the obstructions and
plots of n'lot1opolycapital and imperialism. Monopo!y
capital naturally tries to prevent the utilization of atomic
energy· for peat/eful purposes, for this would threatcrt the
petrol, coal, ·oil, railroad, airline and shipping monopolies. Imperialism is obstructing the peaceful utilization
of atomic enel"¥y beca.u~e it· itself uses up this energy
for the prOd\lctton of aggressive weapons. In order that
monopoly capital should not suffer any losses in this,
the imperialist managers have entrus~~d the tasks of
war production to the mCl:Iopoiy trusts.
117. But peace is not in the hands of a few individuals
who decide on the use of the atomic bomb. Nor is the
atomic threat so terrible that it could frighten i:h~ great
masses of the peoples who. desire peace, or to paralyse
by fear the will of the pepples for peace.
118. The United States policy makes another fat~ful
mistake. The United States has underestimated and
still ttnderestimates the strength of the Soviet Union
and of the People's Republic o~ China, and in the same
way it underestimates the strength and determination
of the peoples ol the world.
119. How embarrassing did it seem when the representative of 'Sweden rejected [309th meeting] the
honour conferred upon the capital of his country
through' tlte. designaHon of the ~c~ ap~al as the
Stockholm Appeal! Marshal Bulganm, m his November
speech, said the following about this force of peace
which is many times stronger than any atomic bomb:
~(rhe Soviet people stand for peace and resolutely
uphold the caUSe of peace. Reflecting the will of the
people, the Supreme·Soviet of the USSR, in June of
this year, supported the Stockholm Appeal of the
permanent committee of the World Congress of the
Partisans of Peace. This appeal has been signed by
115 million Soviet dtizens-the entire adult population of our country. In this way th~ SQviet people
clearly show that they desire peace and that they will
fight for a "lasting peace. MUttons of peoples of other
countries have taken up the fight for peace. The
Stockholm Appeal .has obtained the support and
signatures of over 204 millio~ people in China. In
Poland, ~zechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary
and Albania, over 50 million people have signed it. In

_-_........-

2_9_50_.,

32_2_n_d_M_~1ng-13 Deeember

Japan and in Korea, in Britain and in Argentina and

in other countries, about 50 ~i11ion hav/; dOlle so. In
Italy Hi million and in the United StI\tes two and
one..haif million people have signed tht;; appeal. To
date ahout 500 million persons have signed the Stock..
holm· Appeal. They represent a tremendous force and
a warnmg to the instigators of a new war. Thf.\
;Reoples fighting for peace are sure of the victory of
. their just cause. They will not allow the plans of the
warmongers to succeed."
120. On the one hand we see the atomic warmongers
and on the other the unity of millions. We have been
witnesses of the fact that t!:.~ States whose representatives in the Third Commit~~t wi~hed to make us believe
that they were the defenders of f.reedom of speech and
of assembly, because they were af,raid of the strength
and the significance of the peace movement, made
impossible the holding of the ;?eace Congress in
Sheffield.
121. The United Kingdom refused visas to persons
known as international authorities in arts and science
such as Pietro Nenni, Kuo Mo-~(), Pierre Cot, Pablo
Neruda, Dmitri Shostakovich, i.h~ Metropolitan Nikolai,
Anna Seghners, Arnold Zweig, Yves Farge, General
Jara, A. Fadeyev, Ilya Ebrenburg, d'Astier de la
Vigerie, Father Plojahr, Tita Ruffo and Einaudi. But
the defe!"ders of the atomic horror are even afraid of
the simple people. Veronica Duskievicova, a peasant
woman from eastern Slovakia, seems to represent a
danger for the United Kingdom because she wants
peace. When she was told that she had been refused a
visa she said: "Why are they afraid of me, who am just
a simple woman, not a member of any party-of me, a
mother of two children who wants peace for them?"
122. In vain are the atomic conquerors trying to fight
against the ever-growing peace movement. The mobilization of the peoples for r eace greatly surpasses the
imagination of the would-be world dominators who, in
their slave-drivers' arrogance, have become used to
underestimating the working people.
123. The Second WorId Congress of the Partisans of
Peace, concluded in Warsaw on November 22nd, issued
a manifesto to the world where we read with emotion
and respect the words:
"On behalf of 500 million responsible people who
signed the Stockholm Appeal, we call for the prohibition of atomic weapons and for the general reduction
of arms. The strict control of a general disarmament
and the destruction of atomic weapons is technically
possible. All that is needed is a firm will."
124. The peoples will enforce their will so that the
atomic menace will be tom from the hands of those who
are the greatest enemies of the people.
125. The question of who is holding the atomic bomb
becomes ever more serious as United. States p«?licy
deteriorates and slips along the shaky surface of an
economy that has been and is going through many. crises
on the road of fascism. Let us hide the painful fact that
America, which once was ]efferson's and Lincoln's
America, is today changing internally and using its
influence for a general fascisation of the western world.
But even in Latin America, United States policy stands
like a bad Parca at the cradle of every reactionary coup.

'

631

126. Uni,ted .States, aid to Spain and mon,ey given to
Franco's Falange are the saddest proofs of the impotence of Atnerican democracy.. In Germany, United
States commissioners support' right...wing elements and
the most reactionary politician9. Together with the
Germans, they have played the farce of· denazification
alld ,are now liberating the a~sassins of American and
Allied soldiers, and permitting the reorganization of
former SS-men into various clubs and anti-Semitic
associations. It is natural that they need puppets for
such fascist adventures. They have not drawn the line
at using such und~gnified and 1J~im figures as Chiang
Kai-shek, Bao Dai or Syngman. Rhee. It is only natural
that they are even willing to pay Tita for his services.
And, the God-fearing majorit;r of the American people
watch' passively while their government, the government
of an erstwhile free-thinking America, is reaching agree..
ments with the Vatican, with th!a blessing of the great
Protestant John Foster Dulles.
127. Since the death of President Roosevelt), we see
that anti-communist hysteria has become a matter of
loyalty. Congress, seeing that the working class~ 'With
the weapon of strikes in its b..ands and with fe<tr1ess
fighters for human rights :ttnong its ranks, is becoming
the main bastion of resistance to fascism, votes the
Taft-Hartley law. By organizing trials entirely in contradiction to the principles of the Declaration of rnde..
pendence, the Bill of Rights and the United States
Constitution, Congress is liquidating freedom of conviction and violating the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Increasingly anti-progressive legislation is being introduced, the acme of· 'Which
is that shameful expression of nazism, the law ~n'"
sored by McCarran, Wood, Munf~~, Ferguson, Nixon
and Kilgore. It took twoyear$ b!'''..>re these pearls of
pro-fascist paragraphs were strun~ onto the rope with
which the AmeIican Statue of LIberty was strangled.
American demo(:rats quake in terror at the idea that
their names, their very movements, every letter, every
tapped telephone call, and visits of personal friends are
entered into Mr. Edgar Hoover's huge card file.
128. It has not been and it is not our intention to
interfere in the internal affairs of any country. But if
we are to assess the world situation rightly at a time so
full of tension, at a time when fascism is advancing and
its methods reviving, if we are to measure the danger
caused by the fact that the atomic: weapon lies in the
hands of those who are losing the feeling for respon..
sibiIityJ then we must first and· foremost take note of the
internal conditions paving the 'Way to the fasclsation of
the United States and through it of the west(!rn world.
For it is clear that the UnitM States, seized by xnegalomania, is rapidly moving toward fascism and that it is
carrying its subservient allies with it into this ravine of
disruption-of civil war, terrorisnt and reaction.
129. Such an aggresssive and ruthless weapon as the
atomic bomb in the hands, of a blinded group of selfsatisfied military or financial adventurers increases the
danger for the world. People all over the world realize
that, a criminal or a fascist who first drops an atomic
bomb anywhere in the world at the command of a higher
criminal or fascist general will be the one to bear the
responsibility for the destruttion and ruin of the towns
of even his own country. This is a terrible responsibility.
and the world realizes once again tllat fascisation leads
countries to irresponsibility. The United States has

688
•

G~eral Aalelnhly-Flfth Seeuon-Plenary Meetingl

,

effectively taken over an important part of the sad 132. The other draf.t resolution be£.or.e this A.s.setnb.lAY
heritage of nui Germany and fascist Italy. 11tat is the
is the proposal made by the Soviet Union [A/1(76)
sad fact. But it is a fact and the world realizes that it
requesting the Assembly to instruct the United. Nations
has reasons to fear 'it.
Atomic Energy Comr.nission to resume its workimme130. There is still time but not too much of it. The diately-I stress the word "immediately"-and this
stands· in obvious contrast to the draft resolution introUnited Nations is not aa yet a branch office of the State
duced
by the United States and its associates.
Department or t:he Pentagon. The United Nations
133. We want peace immediately. do we not? The
Genera! Assembly has to decide today where to go from
responsibility rests upon us today,' The Czechoslovak
here. It might 'be a historical decision.
delegation has already chosen its way, the way of the
131. One drrlit resolution invites us to embark on long
immediate
safeguarding of peace. The Czechoslovak
delaying tac~~itcs, giving sufficient time to the atomic
delegation wilt vote for the USSR draft resolution, and
factoricls to pile up the stock of bombs. We are invited
it invites all the delegations to vote with it for the peac::e
to decide to establish a committee to consider a report
and
happiness of the peoples of the world.
.
to the next session and so on. I think that this is ,going
a little bit too far. The sponsors of. this draft resolution
should not overestimate the weariness and patience of
this Assembly and should not underestimate the intelThe meeting roslJ at 1.5 p.m
ligence of its members.

,,

Printed in U.S.A.

A-40464-1'4arch 1951-3,600
