V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Notes that the Government of Chad has expressed its
appreciation of the activities undertaken by the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator in Chad and requests the
Co-ordinator to continue his emergency relief activities in
Chad;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Chad;
(b) To keep the situation in Chad under constant review
and to report to the Economic and Social Council at its
second regular session of 1983 on the status of the assistance
provided for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Chad;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Chad and the progress made in organizing and executing
the special programme of economic assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
J09th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/156.

Special economic assistance to Guinea-Bissau

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/95 of 5 December 1980, in
which it reiterated its appeal to the international community
to provide continuous financial, material and technical assistance to Guinea-Bissau to help it overcome its financial
and economic difficulties and to permit the implementation
of the projects and programmes recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report of 21 August 198066 submitted in response to General Assembly resolution 34/ l 2 l
of 14 December 1979,
Recalling also its resolution 36/217 of 17 December 1981,
Recalling further its resolution 3339 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, in which it invited Member States to provide
economic assistance to the then newly independent State of
Guinea-Bissau, and its resolutions 32/100 of 13 December
1977 and 33/124 of 19 December 1978, in which it, inter
alia, expressed deep concern at the serious economic situation in Guinea-Bissau and appealed to the international
community to provide financial and economic assistance to
that country,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of
15 October 1982, 67 to which was annexed the report of the
mission which he sent to Guinea-Bissau in response to General Assembly resolution 36/217,
Recalling that Guinea-Bissau is one of the least developed
countries,
Noting with concern that Guinea-Bissau continues to be
beset by a wide range of economic and financial difficulties,
Noting that Guinea-Bissau will continue to be dependent
in the years to come, for its public capital expenditure, on
external sources of financing,
Also noting with concern the chronic deficit in the balance
of payments of Guinea-Bissau, the substantial increase in
its loans and the inordinately low level of its foreignexchange reserves,
Noting that Guinea-Bissau is experiencing difficulties,
aggravated by irregular rainfall, in its agricultural production and that it needs emergency food aid,
Noting that the Government of Guinea-Bissau, in view
of the seriousness of the economic situation, decided to
66

67

A/35/343.
A/37/137.

127

implement an economic and financial stabilization programme, the main purpose of which is to remedy the economic situation,
Noting further that the Government of Guinea-Bissau is
preparing a first four-year development plan 1983/1986 and
proposes to hold a round table of donors during the first
half of 1983,
Bearing in mind the results of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, particularly the
Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the
Least Developed Countries, 68
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to GuineaBissau;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-Genera.167
and draws the attention of the international community to
the requirements for assistance for the projects and programmes identified therein;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those States and organizations that have provided assistance to Guinea-Bissau
in response to appeals by the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General;
4. Calls upon Member States and the international organizations concerned to be generous in granting GuineaBissau the food aid it needs;
5. Renews its urgent appeal to Member States, regional
and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
bodies to continue providing financial, material and technical assistance to Guinea-Bissau to help it overcome its
economic and financial difficulties and to permit the implementation of the projects and programmes identified in the
annex to the report of the Secretary-General;
6. Appeals to the international community to contribute
to the special account established at United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/100, for the purpose of
facilitating the channelling of contributions to Guinea-Bissau;
7. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their governing bodies,
for their consideration, the special needs of Guinea-Bissau
and to report the decisions of those bodies to the SecretaryGeneral by 15 July 1983;
8. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other bodies of the United Nations system to report periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps they have
taken and the resources they have made available to assist
Guinea-Bissau;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Guinea-Bissau;
(b) To keep the situation in Guinea-Bissau under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States,
the specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1983, of the status
of the special programme of economic assistance for GuineaBissau;
•• Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 198/ (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82.1.8). part one. sect. A.

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

128

(c) To arrange for a review of the results of the round
table of donors scheduled to be held during the first half of
1983, and of the progress made in organizing and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for
Guinea-Bissau in time for the matter to be considered by
the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37 /157.

Assistance to Nicaragua69

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/8 of 25 October 1979, 35/84
of 5 December 1980 and 36/213 of 17 December 1981
concerning assistance for the reconstruction of Nicaragua,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Nicaragua, 70
Bearing in mind that the floods of May 1982 caused grave
damage to the infrastructure of Nicaragua, reducing its productive capacity and worsening the situation existing before
that date, as reflected in the report of the Economic Commission for Latin America entitled "Nicaragua: the May
1982 floods and their repercussions on the economic and
social development of the country'' ,71
Also bearing in mind that Nicaragua suffered, from June
to September 1982, an intense drought which seriously affected the agricultural and livestock sectors, the country's
most important economic activities,
Considering Economic and Social Council decision 1982/
168 of 29 July 1982, in which the Council decided to endorse
resolution 419 (PLEN.15) on international assistance to alleviate the economic and social problems faced by Nicaragua as a result of the May 1982 floods, 72 which was
adopted by the Committee of the Whole of the Economic
Commission for Latin America at its fifteenth special session, held in New York on 22 and 23 July 1982, and to
recommend that the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session also endorse the resolution,
Considering also resolution 982 adopted by the Seventeenth Regional Conference for Latin America of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, held
at Managua from 30 August to 10.September 1982, in which
the Conference recommended to the World Food Programme and to the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations that special measures of assistance to
Nicaragua should be adopted,
Considering further that, despite the efforts of the Government and people gf Nicaragua, the economic situation
of the country has not become normalized, and requires the
assistance of the international community,
l . Endorses Economic and Social Council decision 1982/
168;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding assistance to Nicaragua;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those States and organizations which have provided assistance to Nicaragua;
4. Renews with urgency its call to all States and the
bodies of the United Nations system to continue and to
increase their assistance to Nicaragua;

69

See also sect. X.B.4, decision 371433_
A/37/135.
71
E/CEPAUG.1206-E/CEPAL/MEX/1982/R.21Rev. l.
72
See A/C. 2/3 7/L. 9.
70

5. Recommends that Nicaragua should continue to receive treatment that will be appropriate to the special needs
of the country;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37 /158.

Assistance for the development of Sierra Leone

The General Assembly,
Having heard the statement made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone before the General Assembly on 29 September 1982, 73 in which he described the
serious economic situation facing Sierra Leone,
Deeply concerned about the weak and underdeveloped
state of the economic and social infrastructure of Sierra
Leone and the lack of capital resources, which constitute
serious obstacles to the economic and social development
of the country and to the raising of the living standards of
the population,
Also concerned about the weak growth rate experienced
by the economy during the five-year period of the first National Development Plan and the decline in real terms of
per capita gross domestic product during that period,
Noting that the country's mining industry has encountered
serious difficulties and that the manufacturing industries are
highly dependent on foreign exchange for the import of
almost all of the materials consumed,
Further concerned about the critical unemployment problem which prevails in Sierra Leone,
Taking note of the recommendation made by the Committee for Development Planning at its eighteenth session
that Sierra Leone should be included in the list of the least
developed countries74 and of the endorsement of that recommendation by the Economic and Social Council in its
resolution 1982/41 of 27 July 1982,
Bearing in mind its resolution 37/133 of 17 December
1982, in which it decided to include Sierra Leone in the list
of least developed countries,
1. Strongly recommends urgent international action to
assist the Government of Sierra Leone in its efforts to
strengthen the country's infrastructure, to develop more fully
the country's natural and human resources and to accelerate
economic growth and the social advancement of its people;
2. Urgently appeals to all States and international development and financial institutions to contribute generously, through bilateral or multilateral channels, to the
economic and social development of Sierra Leone;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to organize an international programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Sierra Leone to enable the Government to
overcome the severe obstacles which stand in the way of
the country's economic and social development;
4. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Food
73
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session.
Plenary Meetings, 20th meeting, paras. 134-185.
74
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 19H2. Supple
ment No. 5 (E/1982/15), para. 103.
