S/PV.8717

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8717th meeting

Tuesday, 11 February 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Goffin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-03420 (E)
*2003420*

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Israel to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the President of
the Observer State of Palestine to participate in the
meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, and I request the Protocol Officer
to escort him to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Observer
State of Palestine, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: Let me start by welcoming
His Excellency President Mahmoud Abbas of the State
of Palestine and the members of his delegation.
I address the Council today with a deep sense of
concern as we witness growing tensions and instability
around the globe, particularly in the Middle East.
Tensions and risks in the Gulf have risen to troubling
2/24

11/02/2020

levels. And after seeing some promising developments
last year, today we are witnessing dangerous
re-escalations of the conflicts in Yemen, Syria and
even Libya. This volatile context only underscores the
need for a political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, which has lasted for far too long, and which
remains crucial to sustainable peace in the Middle East.
I reiterate my full personal commitment and the
commitment of the United Nations to supporting the
parties in their efforts to achieve a two-State solution.
As I stated recently, the position of the United
Nations in this regard has been defined throughout the
years by resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, by which the Secretariat is bound.
The United Nations remains committed to
supporting Palestinians and Israelis in resolving the
conflict on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements
and realizing the vision of two States — Israel and
Palestine — living side by side in peace and security
within recognized borders, on the basis of the pre1967 lines.
This is a time for dialogue, for reconciliation and
for reason. I urge Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
demonstrate the will necessary to advance the goal
of a just and lasting peace, which the international
community must support.
Rest assured of the full commitment of the United
Nations to a just and comprehensive peace between
Palestinians and Israelis based on our shared multilateral
framework, set by United Nations resolutions and
international law.
The United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process and my Personal
Representative, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, is here to brief
the Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: On 28 January, the United
States presented its vision for peace between Israelis
and Palestinians, which it proposed as the basis for
negotiations between the parties.
The Palestinian Government has rejected
the proposal. The League of Arab States and the
20-03420

11/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Organization of Islamic Cooperation also released
statements rejecting the proposal, saying that it did
not meet the minimum rights and aspirations of
the Palestinian people. The European Union High
Representative said that the proposal departs from
“internationally agreed parameters”. A number of
African Union member States also rejected the proposal
during their recent summit.
Meanwhile, senior figures in Israel’s Government
have welcomed the proposal, saying that they would
be willing to use it as the basis for direct negotiations.
Some Member States have expressed their hope that the
release of the vision would be an opportunity to bring
the parties back to the negotiating table, in the interest
of advancing a two-State solution.
The United Nations policy on the issue is defined
by the relevant United Nations resolutions, international
law and bilateral agreements.
In the days since the proposal was unveiled, we
have, unfortunately, witnessed some sporadic violent
incidents throughout the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, and in and around Gaza. Further
escalation or provocations would be a concerning
development. They could complicate the situation
on the ground and would serve only those who seek
to radicalize people and undermine efforts to achieve
peace. Today all must show restraint and clearly and
unequivocally condemn violence whenever it occurs.

S/PV. 8717

Just as unilateral steps will not resolve the conflict,
those who reject the proposal should not turn to
violence. That would be the worst possible response
at this sensitive moment. Instead, what is needed
today is political leadership and serious reflection on
what needs to be done to bring the parties back to the
negotiating table.
I hope that the Council will join the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a negotiated solution to the conflict
and constructive engagement between the parties.
The United Nations has long supported a two-State
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict on the basis
of United Nations resolutions, international law and
prior agreements.
Today, however, it is not enough to just reaffirm
our positions. Today is the time to hear proposals on
how to move the process forward and find our way back
to a mutually agreed mediation framework that ensures
that meaningful negotiations can restart.
While it is hard to envision a comprehensive
agreement between the parties under the current
circumstances, let me strongly underline that we
must avoid continued entrenchment in the status quo.
Continuing on the current trajectory, described in the
2016 Middle East Quartet report (see S/2016/595),
would only push Palestinians and Israelis further apart,
deepen the occupation and imperil the future viability
of the two-State solution.

Following the release of the United States proposal,
senior Israeli officials vowed to unilaterally annex
large portions of the West Bank, including all Israeli
settlements and the Jordan Valley. The United States
has announced that it will establish a joint committee
with Israel to produce a more detailed version of the
conceptual maps included in the proposal, which would
in turn allow it to recognize an Israeli decision to apply
its laws in specified areas in the West Bank.

The United Nations remains deeply committed
to working with Israelis and Palestinians and with
our international and regional partners to realize the
objective of a lasting and just peace.

The Secretary-General has consistently spoken out
against unilateral steps and plans for annexation. Such
steps, including the possible annexation of territory
in the West Bank or similar moves, would have a
devastating impact on the prospects for a two-State
solution. They would close the door to negotiations,
have negative repercussions across the region and
severely undermine opportunities for normalization
and regional peace.

There is no other road to achieve this goal, except
through negotiations. There is no other framework
except the one that Israelis and Palestinians together
agree on, a framework based on the relevant United
Nations resolutions, international law and bilateral
agreements. In the absence of a credible path back
to negotiations, we all face a heightened risk of
violence — violence that will drag both peoples and the
region into a spiral of escalation with no end in sight.

As the Secretary-General has said, that goal can
be achieved only through realizing the vision of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security on the basis of the pre-1967 lines, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States.

20-034203/24

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I now call on President Abbas.
President Abbas (spoke in Arabic): I have come to
the Security Council on behalf of 13 million Palestinians
to call for a just peace and nothing more. I have come here
today to reaffirm the Palestinian position in rejection of
the Israeli-United States deal. Our position is supported
by the outcomes of meetings held by the League of Arab
States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
African Union, which all concluded that the deal must
be rejected in totality, in addition to statements issued
by the European Union, Russia, China, Japan and
other countries around the world. I cite in particular
the statements of the Secretary-General, who has
reaffirmed the international terms of reference and the
relevant resolutions of international legitimacy.
The broad rejection of this deal is the result of its
unilateral positions and the fact that it flagrantly violates
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative.
It annuls the legitimacy of the Palestinians’ rights to
self-determination, freedom and independence in their
own State. It legitimizes illegality, settlements and the
confiscation and annexation of Palestinian territories.
I reaffirm that this deal or any part thereof cannot be
considered an international reference for negotiations.
This deal is a proactive Israeli-United States
arrangement with a view to liquidating the Palestinian
question. We have rejected it because it removes East
Jerusalem from Palestinian sovereignty. That alone is
enough for us to reject it. This deal confines our people
and homeland in residential fragmented areas and leaves
them without any control over the land, air and sea. It
would put an end to the Palestinian refugees. It would
definitely eliminate all bases for the peace process. It
is tantamount to a rejection of all signed agreements
based on the establishment of two States along the 1967
borders. This deal will not bring peace or stability to
the region, and therefore we will not accept it. We will
confront its application on the ground.
I have before me a summary of the project that has
been presented to us. The map shows the State that they
would give us. It is like Swiss cheese. What Council
member would accept such a State? This deal dictates
its own terms and the entrenchment of occupation,
annexation by military force and the strengthening of
the obsolete apartheid regime that has now returned
to Palestine. The deal rewards occupation instead of
4/24

11/02/2020

holding Israel accountable for all the crimes perpetrated
against our people and our land for decades.
In that regard, I would like to thank countries,
regional and international organizations, parliaments
and members of the Security Council for helping
us defend the international consensus based on
international legitimacy and relevant United Nations
resolutions We also thank Israelis — yes, Israelis — who
have also rejected this deal in different ways, and those
who stood with us in the House of Representatives and
the Senate of the United States. We also thank American
organizations and free people who have rejected this
deal. We value their commitments and positions in
support of peace and upholding international legitimacy.
Some 300 Israeli officers have rejected the deal in
this document — 300 Israeli officers who have fought
for their country and now confirm that they are fighting
for what is just. We also welcome Israeli demonstrators
who have taken to the streets of Tel Aviv to reject this
deal. I have here a letter signed by 107 members of
the United States Congress and another signed by 12
members of the United States Senate, including some
presidential candidates. They all reject this deal.
We salute the Palestinian, Arab and Islamic peoples
and all those who champion peace around the world
and who have taken to the streets by the thousands
and hundreds of thousands in the West Bank and in
Gaza. Although it is freezing there, they are taking to
the streets by the hundreds of thousands to say “no” to
this deal. Some are saying that it is a just deal and that
only Abu Mazen and two or three of his supporters are
rejecting the deal, but it is not like that. Hundreds of
thousands of people are taking to the streets to say “no”
to this deal. Tens of thousands around the world are
saying “no” to this deal.
Some people insist that this deal is a just one. It
is not. I have come to the Security Council today to
say that peace between the two Israeli and Palestinian
peoples is still possible and achievable. I have come
here to build an international partnership to achieve
a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. We are still
committed to that peace as a strategic choice. This deal
is not an international partnership. It has come from
one State, with the support of another, to be imposed
on the world and on international legitimacy, which is
represented by hundreds of United Nations resolutions
and dozens of Security Council resolutions. We reject
this deal.
20-03420

11/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I wonder why there is determination to draft this
United States-Israeli plan alone, given that we have
been engaged in dialogue with the United States
Administration in 2017, and we have spoken about
all the final-status issues. President Trump and I had
a long discussion. We have spoken many times about
international legitimacy and the vision of the twoState solution, and he agreed with me and said that he
would announce that. We also talked about the 1967
borders, Jerusalem, security and other issues, which we
discussed in Oslo. I was happy to discuss those issues
with him at the time.
However, I was surprised afterwards when the
office of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
in Washington, D.C., was closed, and they declared
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. How is that possible?
He transferred his Embassy, and called on other countries
around the world to do the same. Moreover, he stopped
sending us aid, which amounted to $840 million. He
also stopped sending assistance to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. I do not know who gave him that abhorrent
advice. I know that President Trump is not like that.
The President Trump I have met is not like that. I do not
know from where he got this behaviour.
I would like to recall before the Security Council
that we held the Madrid Peace Conference, the
Washington, D.C., negotiations, the Oslo Accord
and the Annapolis Peace Conference, on the basis of
resolutions of international legitimacy that called
for negotiations on all final-status issues, including
Jerusalem. We should negotiate over Jerusalem. We
cannot dictate that Jerusalem is to be given to the State
of Israel. No, Jerusalem is occupied land. Who has the
right to give it as a gift to one State or another? We
are appealing before the Security Council today, which
has the highest legitimacy in the world, and we are
committed to all Council resolutions.
We also have been committed to implementing all
agreements with Israel. We have behaved responsibly,
which is why the world has respected us. Some 140
countries have recognized the State of Palestine. We
have become a part of the international system. We
became an Observer State in the General Assembly,
although we were unable to become a full Member
because of the veto. We have joined more than 120
international treaties and organizations. Last year the
Observer State of Palestine became the Chair of the

S/PV. 8717

Group of 77 and China, which includes 135 countries.
We do therefore exist.
We have continued to build up our national
institutions based on the rule of law and international
parameters for a modern and democratic State that
supports transparency, accountability and combating
corruption. We are among the most important countries
that are combating corruption. I call on the Security
Council to send a fact-finding mission to Palestine to
observe our efforts to combat corruption and to see that
this emerging State, under the yoke of the occupation,
is free from corruption. Anyone who claims that our
State is corrupt has only to come and visit and see
for themselves.
We have empowered women and youth. We have
worked on spreading the culture of peace among our
Palestinian people. We always call for peace. We reject
wars, violence and terrorism, and we fight violence
and terrorism around the world. We have signed 83
protocols with 83 countries to fight terrorism, and one
of them is with the United States of America, as well as
with Canada, Russia and Japan, among other countries.
We are fighting terrorism. We are not terrorists, and we
will remain committed to combating terrorism.
We have held elections three times. We believe in
democracy. The last time that we called for elections
Israel rejected our request. Why? Because we cannot
hold elections in Jerusalem, although we held elections
in 1996, 2005 and 2006 in Jerusalem. Now we cannot.
A decision has now been taken that Jerusalem is united
and is the capital of the State of Israel. However, that
will not happen. East Jerusalem is ours, and West
Jerusalem is theirs. Nothing can prevent cooperation
between both States and both capitals.
Some say that we have wasted opportunities for
peace. But that is not true. Abba Eban, the brilliant
genius, said one day that Palestinians never miss an
opportunity to miss an opportunity. We never waste
opportunities. Recently, some are repeating those
words. Which opportunity have we have lost? Do not
utter such stupid slogans. We have accepted all United
Nations resolutions, from resolution 242 (1967) to
resolution 2334 (2016), which amount to 87 resolutions.
We became an active member of the international
community. In 1993, we signed the Oslo Accord, with
all its details and provisions. We recognized Israel and
Israel recognized us. We recognized Israel in Oslo.
Yasser Arafat said “I recognize the right of Israel to

20-034205/24

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

exist”. Yitzhak Rabin also said, and put it in writing, that
he recognized the PLO as the legitimate representative
of the Palestinian people. We have recognized one other.
What opportunity for peace did we therefore waste?
We responded to the efforts of the United States
Administration, international initiatives and all calls
for dialogue and negotiations. However, we were never
offered the bare minimum of justice in accordance with
international legitimacy. The current Government of the
Israeli occupation is undermining international efforts.
We have seriously seized every opportunity because
peace is in the interest of our people and the peoples
around the world, and this document shows that.
Several countries, including Russia, Japan, Belgium
and the Netherlands, invited us to hold a dialogue with
Mr. Netanyahu on their territory. While we responded
positively to each of those invitations, Mr. Netanyahu
never did. I went to Moscow three times, and he did
not make an appearance. Therefore, who is rejecting
peace here?
I therefore cannot help but wonder about the
opportunities we have wasted, as Abba Eban said
and as others repeated. Successive occupying Israeli
Governments and settlers have sought to destroy
all chances for peace. They have accelerated their
settlement activities and built settlements — with
impunity — throughout the West Bank and all other
territories occupied since 1967. They have changed the
characteristics of the occupied city of Jerusalem and
continued to attack Islamic and Christian holy sites,
confiscate land and wage war and siege on our people
in the Gaza Strip, armed, unfortunately, with the strong
support of the United States Administration.
The United States has issued a number of decisions
that violate international law and have not been accepted
by the world and a large number of members of the
current United States House of Representatives and
many peace organizations, including American Jewish
organizations. House of Representatives resolution 326
by rejects the policy of the President and the Secretary
of State of the United States on settlements. That was a
decision by the House of Representatives — we are not
inventing facts or lying to anyone.
I also reiterate that we reject all attempts to link
economic assistance to a political solution. They said
there will be economic aid — forget about the political
solution. They went to Bahrain and Warsaw and said that
they will give us $50 billion, without bothering with a
6/24

11/02/2020

political solution. We reject that. The political solution
must come first, and then, if the United States wishes to
provide economic assistance, it will be most welcome.
However, we cannot accept an economic solution
before a political one. We thank all countries that are
currently providing us with assistance — without
preconditions — so that we can build our Palestinian
institutions and an independent State.
At this difficult time, and before it is too late, I
address President Donald Trump by saying that the
proposed plan by the United States cannot achieve peace
and security because it has abolished international
legitimacy. Who can abolish international legitimacy?
Who can abolish the international legitimacy of the
highest platform in the world? President Donald Trump
has managed to do so. The United States plan eliminated
all the resolutions of the international legitimacy
and denied the international legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people, while placing East Jerusalem
outside Palestinian sovereignty. This plan will not be
applicable because it fails to meet the aspirations of the
two-State solution, Israel and Palestine, which would
be sovereign and independent,
Believe me, if peace can be achieved between us
and the Israeli people, it will be the best form of peace
that nurtures the most beautiful relations between our
two States, Palestine and Israel. But we need to be
given an opportunity to achieve that peace. I know that
the peace plan is 180 pages long, and that not everyone
is willing to read it all. Therefore, we have decided to
provide a 20-page summary that is easier to read, as it
is unnecessary to read the remaining parts.
I hope that President Trump will be fair and
just and support the implementation of resolutions
of international legitimacy in order to create an
opportunity to achieve a genuine peace between the
Palestinians and Israelis. An imposed peace will not
work and cannot last. Let us achieve peace by working
together, as we began to do in Oslo, without the
interference of any other party — I repeat, without the
interference of any other party — and even without the
knowledge of any other country. I challenge anybody
who says that he knew about it. We signed a transition
agreement and were ready to uphold it for five years
until a final solution was reached. But they killed
Yitzhak Rabin. Why did they kill Rabin? May God rest
his soul in peace.
20-03420

11/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

From this Chamber, I call upon the Middle
East Quartet, represented by the United States, the
Russian Federation, the European Union and the
United Nations, including the members of the Security
Council, to hold an international conference for peace
in order to implement resolutions of international
legitimacy, in particular resolution 2334 (2016). Yet I
say all resolutions. Pick and choose any resolution and
I am ready to accept and implement it. But no single
resolution is implemented? Eighty-seven resolutions
are not implemented. Where to go? If resolutions of
the Security Council, the highest platform in the world,
are not implemented, where to go? To whom shall
I complain?
We call for the implementation of all Security
Council resolutions, the two-State solution and the
Arab Peace Initiative, which we stress as is part of
international legitimacy, resolution 1515 (2003). We
are not proposing anything new. An international
mechanism must be established based on the
international Quartet to sponsor negotiations between
the two sides. Any other country could join the Quartet,
but frankly, we cannot accept the United States as the
sole mediator. We welcome it within the Quartet, but
we will not accept it alone. We tried that once, and we
cannot do it again.
I call on the entire international community to put
pressure on the occupying Israeli Government to cease
its occupation practices and its continuous decisions
to annex our territories, or even territories under
dispute over which Israel has no right to annex. It will
destroy any chance for peace. At this historic time, I
would like to again extend my hand towards achieving
peace before we miss this last opportunity. I hope to
find a genuine partner in Israel, like Mr. Rabin or any
other person who believes in peace, in order to achieve
genuine peace for current and future generations of the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples and other peoples of the
world. Let us live together.
Our Palestinian people can no longer tolerate the
occupation of our country. The situation could implode
at any moment. To prevent that, we need renewed hope.
I ask the Council to not take that hope away from
us — hope for our people and all other peoples of the
region for freedom, independence and peace. There is
hope that the free world will champion our rights, so do
not take away our people’s hope.

S/PV. 8717

I would like to show a map to Council members.
This map shows Palestine as it stood in 1917, 1937,
1947, 1948 and 2020. Each time I look at the map, my
heart is torn apart. Is that what we deserve? Is that what
the Palestinian people deserve? Why? At some point
things were different for us. How did we arrive at these
islands? On this occasion, I would like to address the
Israeli people and tell them that the ongoing occupation,
settlements and military control of another people will
not help them achieve security and peace. We have only
one choice. We must be partners and neighbours, each
in our own independent and sovereign country. Let us
remain committed to that just choice before it is too late.
I again stress that our conflict is not with the Jewish
people. We are not against Jews; we are Muslims not
against Jews. A Muslim who says that he is against a
Jew commits blasphemy. If a Muslim says that he is
against the Jews or the Torah is an infidel, not a Muslim.
We are not against Jews. We are against anyone who
attacks us, regardless of who he is and the religion he
believes in. Our conflict is not with the Jews but with
whoever occupies our land.
Therefore, we will continue our struggle, in which
we have sacrificed thousands of martyrs, prisoners
and wounded to end occupation and establish our
Palestinian State, while stressing that our people will
not surrender. Council members have seen that we will
not surrender. We will continue to demand our rights. If
we are allowed to enjoy our rights, we will be grateful
to whoever grants them to us. However, we will never
relinquish our rights or surrender to the occupation,
regardless of the time we invest and the sacrifice we
have to make.
In conclusion, I reiterate that I am ready to start
negotiations. I have always been ready, so long as
Israel shows itself to be a partner ready for peace and
negotiations, under the auspices of the international
Quartet and on the basis of internationally agreed
parameters. I am serious. I stand ready to begin
immediate negotiations here at the United Nations,
which represents international legitimacy. I am ready
to start those negotiations immediately. I will say one
thing — we will not resort to violence and terrorism,
regardless of how strong the aggression against us. We
believe in peace. We believe in combating violence. We
will therefore not resort to violence.
There are already 83 countries — soon to be 133.
We are ready to cooperate with any country to combat

20-034207/24

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

terrorism. We are against terrorism and violence in
all their forms and manifestations. We will not resort
to terrorism. We will fight using peaceful, popular
resistance. One need only look at what is happening
now in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Hundreds of
thousands of people have taken to the streets, braving
the freezing cold to say “no” to the deal. It is not just I
or my delegation rejecting the deal. All our people are
saying “no, no, no” to the deal. Finally, I ask the world
to be careful to not kill the hope of our Palestinian
people. I have come for the sake of hope. Do not dash
my hope.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Abbas
for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): If President Abbas were
truly serious about negotiating in good faith; if he
were really interested in peace, he would not be here
today. He would have taken the advice that he received
from several members of the Council and from many
Arab States and used this opportunity to start direct
negotiations. If President Abbas were serious about
negotiating, he would not be here in New York; he
would be in Jerusalem.
In 1977, after the Yom Kippur War and countless
clashes on the border, President Sadat of Egypt did not
come to New York to speak at the United Nations. He
went to Jerusalem to speak in the Knesset. President
Sadat understood that to achieve peace, bold and brave
steps must be taken and that a difficult history must be
relegated to the past. President Sadat went to Jerusalem
and spoke directly to the Israeli people about extending
a hand for peace. I remember listening to that speech,
as a child. The fact that the leader of a country against
which we fought numerous wars spoke in the Knesset
was incredible. All of Israel was glued to our screens,
listening to his voice. Not long after the speech and
that show of leadership and willingness to negotiate
and compromise, Prime Minister Begin and President
Sadat signed the historic peace treaty between Israel
and Egypt.
If President Abbas were serious about negotiating,
he would not be here in New York; he would be in
Washington, D.C. In 1994, His Majesty King Hussein
of Jordan did not go to the United Nations to discuss
the dispute with Israel. He went to Washington, D.C.,
and, together with Prime Minister Rabin and President
Clinton he signed the Washington Declaration. Back
8/24

11/02/2020

then, they agreed on the terms for negotiations and,
only three months later, a historic peace treaty was
signed between Israel and Jordan.
If President Abbas were serious about negotiations,
he would not be here today. He would be in Jerusalem or
in Washington, D.C., sitting down with his negotiating
partner. But President Abbas is not serious about
negotiations or about peace. Instead, he has done what
he always does. He came here to distract us from his
unwillingness to negotiate, sit down and talk. Members
can ask him about the last time he met with our Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. In the past decade, they
have met only once. How many times has President
Abbas come here to speak in the Security Council or
the General Assembly? Why come all the way here?
Why not drive to Jerusalem or have the Prime Minister
drive to Ramallah? He is trying to blame the lack of
progress towards peace on Israel, complaining instead
of leading. That is not leadership. That was his way
when he took office and that remains his way today in
the sixteenth year of his four-year term.
President Abbas claims that he wants sovereignty
for the Palestinian people, but has done everything to
avoid receiving it. His words are nothing but lip service.
His call for sovereignty long ago became a battle cry
rather than an actual goal. It is a way to keep the conflict
alive. As I mentioned, in the last decade not even one
meeting has taken place. On the other hand, over 150
United Nations resolutions concerning the Palestinians
have been adopted in that period. Does that seem like
a reasonable balance if one is sincere about peace? To
hold zero meetings with one’s negotiating partner while
over 150 United Nations resolutions are adopted? It is
only reasonable to someone who has no real intention
of negotiating.
It must be noted that the rejectionism of President
Abbas has been encouraged by many in the international
community, if not through words then through actions.
Voting in favour of one-sided resolutions only further
encourages his behaviour. Many here have fallen into
the habit of trying to force the outcome of negotiations
before they have even begun, adopting preconditions
that directly contradict previous agreements between
the sides.
For example, Israel and the Palestinian Authority
previously agreed, in internationally endorsed
agreements, that a border would be determined only
through direct and bilateral negotiations. Yet still,
20-03420

11/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

some here, against that explicit agreement, try to either
precondition that future borders must be negotiated
based on the so-called 1967 lines. Let us negotiate. If
he is told that will be the outcome, he will not enter the
room. That is what we are doing here. Why should he
negotiate with us when others are negotiating for him?
Negotiation means entering the room with demands and
negotiating. That is what we did with President Sadat
and King Hussein, and, God willing, that is what we
will do one day with the Palestinians. But that is what
real negotiations are.
When President Abbas sees that his battles are being
fought for him and there is no need for him to negotiate
or agree to mutual compromises, it makes peace an ever
more remote possibility. Meeting here once again to
criticize Israel and the United States for their efforts to
promote peace also does not increase the likelihood of
President Abbas agreeing to negotiate. It would be best
if the international community focused its efforts on
bringing both sides to the negotiating table.
It is also time to reconsider the international
community’s approach to resolving this conflict. It
is clear that something in the current approach is not
working. President Abbas spreads lies in order to
mislead the international community into believing
that his desired solution to the conflict is the only
solution. In fact, he did just that today. However, all
previous attempts at peace have been based on the same
principles and dogmas, and they have all failed. Albert
Einstein once defined insanity as doing the same thing
over and over and expecting different results.
President Trump’s takes a sane approach to
solving this conflict. It understands that we have to
try something different. Maybe it will work this time.
The basis of the plan is the idea of achieving just and
lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
However, what this plan does differently is refuse to
accept the same out-of-date concepts of previous peace
plans. This plan refuses to accept that the only way to
solve the conflict is with a formula that has failed for
over 70 years. The plan represents the requirement of
a realistic approach that is not afraid to incorporate
innovative ideas to address the concerns of both parties.
It represents the necessity of a pragmatic approach in
order to solve a complex problem. Even if some are
critical of the specifics of the plan — and I know many
are — they should still embrace its spirit, which says
that it is time to look for a new and pragmatic approach
to resolving this conflict.

S/PV. 8717

The plan’s drafters themselves have said that the
plan is only a suggestion — a tool for the sides to use
in their negotiations. It is clear that some delegations
are beginning to embrace the spirit of the plan. That
is why they have used the opportunity presented by its
release to call on President Abbas to negotiate, and we
thank them for that. But President Abbas refuses to be
pragmatic. He refuses to negotiate. He is not interested
in finding a realistic solution to the conflict.
Let us not beat around the bush. Progress towards
peace will not be made as long as President Abbas
remains in his position. That is the reality. Only when
he steps down can Israel and the Palestinians move
forward. A leader who chooses rejectionism, incitement
and glorification of terror can never be a real partner
for real peace.
Israel has embraced the new innovative spirit of
President Trump’s plan and has agreed to use it as a
starting point for negotiations. We thank President
Trump and his team for their dedication to the cause of
peace. Israel is criticized in this Chamber on a regular
basis, but despite the lies and the hypocrisy, we are
determined to fight for peace. We have always been
willing to negotiate. We have on many occasions offered
President Abbas opportunities to begin negotiations.
But his response remains the same, and I encourage
people to ask him, when they meet with him later today,
why he is unwilling to meet with us. His response is
always “no”. He said it just the other week: “a thousand
times no”.
Peace is a core aspect of our belief, of the Jewish
way of life. I urge the members of the Council to tell
President Abbas that speeches here at the United Nations
cannot replace direct negotiations. I urge them to tell
President Abbas that, unlike him, they choose peace.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to those Council members who wish to
make statements.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to once again welcome His
Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the
State of Palestine. I express the appreciation of Tunisia
for his efforts to defend the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people.
I would also like to commend the efforts of
Secretary-General António Guterres to achieve peace
in the Middle East and to support a peaceful settlement

20-034209/24

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Arab-Israeli conflict based on the two-State
solution and the internationally agreed parameters. I
further commend the role of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
It is my pleasure, in the same context, to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States. I appreciate his
participation in this meeting in order to reaffirm the
Arab position in support of the Palestinian question and
its attachment to a just and comprehensive peace on the
basis of the relevant international resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
My country’s delegation would also like to thank
the friendly Kingdom of Belgium, the current president
of the Security Council, for convening this meeting.
This meeting is being held as the Arab-Israeli
conflict is at a critical juncture. Tensions are rising in
the region, the peace process is stalled and there have
been attempts to depart from resolutions of international
legitimacy and the fundamental parameters of the
settlement that are the basis for comprehensive, lasting
and just peace. The aim is to end the occupation and
restore the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
most importantly their rights to self-determination
and to establish their own independent State along
the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
Given the responsibility of the Security Council
to maintain international peace and security and settle
conflicts, we stress its important role in moving the
peace process forward, on the basis of the agreed
parameters and the two-State solution, with a view to
settling all final status issues.
In that regard, over the past few days Tunisia and
Indonesia, in close coordination with the Palestinians
and in consultation with Security Council members,
Arab and Muslim countries and regional and political
groupings, especially the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, have started negotiations on a draft
resolution. The draft text reaffirms the need to reach
a comprehensive, lasting and just peace based on
international resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab
Peace Initiative, while ending the Israeli occupation
of all territories occupied in 1967, including East
Jerusalem, and promoting a two-State solution of two
States living side by side in peace and security.
10/24

11/02/2020

Tunisia would like to express its thanks and
appreciation to Council members for engaging positively
in those consultations with a view to enhancing the role
of the Council and reaffirming international legitimacy,
along with the two-State solution. In addition, the
objective is to revive the prospects for peace based on
the internationally agreed parameters in order to ensure
the legitimate rights of the fraternal Palestinian people,
end tensions and guarantee security and peace for all
the peoples of the region.
The Israeli occupying Power continues to violate
international resolutions and to impose a fait accompli
by expanding its settlement activities in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem. It continues to threaten to annex
Palestinian territory, in stark violation of international
law, to impose a blockade on the Gaza Strip and to
collectively punish the Palestinian people. That calls on
the international community to assume its responsibility
and quickly take the necessary measures to put an
end to those policies, which seriously undermine any
prospects for peace and increase tensions and instability
in the Middle East.
Tunisia is committed to international legitimacy
and to the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, which represent a guarantee of
security and stability in the world and a governing
framework for international relations. We therefore
stress the need for the international community
to adopt a unified position against the violation of
international law and the imposition of a fait accompli,
and emphasizing the importance of multilateralism
and the role of the United Nations in reaching a
comprehensive and just solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict. We strongly believe that restoring security and
stability in the region is contingent on Israel’s ending
its occupation of all occupied Arab territories and on
compelling Israel to comply with the will to achieve
peace and implement international resolutions.
In closing, Tunisia renews its commitment to
maintaining its steadfast and principled support
for the Palestinian question and the indivisible and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, which
are not time-bound. We stress our attachment to
peace as a strategic choice and affirm our support for
any constructive efforts to revive the peace process
based on international resolutions, the Madrid terms
of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the twoState solution as the only path to achieving a lasting,
comprehensive and just peace.
20-03420

11/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Permit me, first of all, to
express our appreciation to Belgium, as President of
the Council for this month, for arranging this important
meeting and, of course, to welcome His Excellency
Philippe Goffin, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Defence of Belgium to the Chamber.
I would like to pay tribute to my brother, Ambassador
Moncef Baati, for his service, dedication and friendship
and to wish him all the best in his future endeavours.
We are honoured today by the presence of His
Excellency President Mahmoud Abbas of the State of
Palestine, the voice of the Palestinian people. Let me
reassure him of the solidarity and full support of the
Government and the people of Indonesia for the cause
of the people of Palestine. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General António Guterres for his remarks
and Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing. Furthermore, I welcome His Excellency
Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States.
We asked for this meeting today in response
to recent developments in the region, including the
announcement on 28 January of the plan on the Middle
East, which may cause concern and affect the stability
of the region and beyond. That new development has
reminded us once again of the necessity of upholding
the Charter of the United Nations and the spirit of
multilateralism, which we hold near and dear to our
hearts. Against that backdrop, allow me to make the
following points.
First, Indonesia’s position has been loud, clear and
consistent and is firmly rooted in our constitutional
mandate. That mandate guided Indonesia at the
Bandung Conference of 1955, which concluded with
the adoption of the Bandung Principles as a guide
to achieving the full independence of all nations
under occupation and colonialization. The Bandung
Conference expressed Asian and African countries’
support for the independence of Palestine. The people
of Palestine have long been denied their legal and
inalienable right to create a sovereign independent
State. It is indeed a deplorable fact that the Palestinians
have lost their lands to illegal settlers and continuous
annexation by Israel as the occupying Power, in
violation of many international laws. The human rights
of the people of Palestine have been violated, and many
have been forced to become refugees. The Security
Council owes a debt to the people of Palestine and must

S/PV. 8717

find solutions to the plight and dire humanitarian needs
of the Palestinians. How long must we wait before we
see an independent, sovereign State of Palestine?
Secondly, we reaffirm the two-State solution in
accordance with international law and internationally
agreed parameters. We call on the international
community to respect the various decisions and
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) and 2334
(2016), bearing in mind the vision of a region where
two sovereign States, Israel and Palestine, live side by
side in peace within secured and recognized borders
based on 4 June 1967 lines. Our objective must be to
ensure respect for and the preservation of the integrity
and contiguity of the Palestinian territory, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. While we are of the view that
we need to be realistic, the illegal actions and measures
undertaken by the occupying Power, including
changing the demographic character of the territories,
will only imperil the viability of the two-State solution
and jeopardize our pursuit of peace.
Thirdly, there is a need for credible multilateral
negotiations. Indonesia calls for the early resumption
of credible multilateral negotiations on the question
of Palestine and reaffirms the importance of dialogue
among the relevant parties, under the multilateral
framework and guided by the internationally
agreed parameters.
Any agreement on an issue of the magnitude of the
Palestine-Israel conflict should be undertaken with the
involvement of the two parties. Only then can we have a
comprehensive and lasting peace, security and stability
in the Middle East.
As a firm supporter of multilateralism, Indonesia
has always taken a stance on the importance of upholding
international law, including in settling international
disputes and conflicts. It is worth underlining that
the need for practical solutions should not come at the
expense of international law, including various United
Nations resolutions.
In closing, and in line with these reflections,
Indonesia is pleased to observe that the SecretaryGeneral affirmed the position of the United Nations on
the matter, which is bound by the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council.
We, the Security Council, have the authority, the duty
and the moral obligation to ensure that all the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council are faithfully implemented. The Council and

20-0342011/24

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

its members, at the very least, should create a conducive
atmosphere so that peace can prevail.
We, the Security Council, cannot afford to be
seen as a spectator in the process of the maintenance
of international peace and security, particularly in
securing the independence of Palestine. This is a moral
mission and a solemn duty that have slipped from our
grasp over the past decades.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I want
to begin by welcoming President Abbas today to the
Council and also to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mladenov and Ambassador Danon and my Council
colleagues for their comments.
How the Council allocates its time defines who we
are and what we believe is important. This is especially
true of today’s meeting, because finding a solution to the
conflict between Israelis and Palestinians is important.
It is important to President Trump. It is important to
me personally. Based on our recent conversations, I
know that it is very important to each member of the
Council, and it is vitally important to both Israel and to
the Palestinian people.
Since the formation of the United Nations, the
Council and the General Assembly have demonstrated
their belief in the importance of Middle East peace
through countless hours of debate and by adopting more
than 800 resolutions addressing this issue, but neither
these debates nor these resolutions have resulted in a
true and lasting peace.
So with a record of failure this spectacular, it would
be folly to suggest that this time was well spent and that
what is needed now is more of the same. That is why
President Trump has proposed a new vision for peace
that poses a tangible challenge to the status quo. Given
that challenge, it is understandable that emotions are
running high today and that strongly worded statements
are being made.
I heard President Abbas speak of hope. I heard his
words about the importance of hope. To keep hope alive,
there must be a willingness to compromise, to engage
in good faith, but we are not here to merely promise
hope. Anyone can promise hope. We are here to deliver
on hope, because that is what leaders do. It is what we
are called to do today. But once we have said our piece
today, I want us to begin thinking about what is going
to happen tomorrow.
12/24

11/02/2020

Rather than respond directly to today’s fiery
rhetoric, now is the time to set the table for a new
conversation, a conversation during which we do not
talk at each other but with each other a conversation
that is a starting point, not a finishing line. And when
I speak of a conversation, I want to be clear, as the
President stated. We are not here to lecture. We are not
here to tell other people how to live, who to be or how to
worship. Instead, we are here to offer partnership based
on shared interests and values. Such a partnership must
begin with an understanding that real peace is never
something theoretical. It is not something to be found on
pieces of paper but in concrete experiences of security,
economic opportunity and freedom. For too long, we
have made the mistake of assuming that documents
filled with high-level principles or theoretical concepts
alone will lead to the kind of peace that provides for the
dignity of all people.
But I am here to tell the Council today that this kind
of peace, concrete, lasting, dignity-honouring peace, is
intrinsic to the plan proposed by President Trump on
28 January. This vision for peace is different from any
of its predecessors because it is specific and realistic.
Israel’s acceptance of the plan and its conceptual map
represents a historic step towards the establishment of
a Palestinian State with a capital in East Jerusalem.
This vision shows respect for the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan’s special role in Muslim holy shrines in
Jerusalem and ensures the ability of Muslims from
around the world to worship at the Al-Aqsa mosque.
I would emphasize especially to those who
expressed concern that the plan offers something
deeply meaningful to the Palestinian people: a realistic
prospect for seeing, in their lifetime, a self-governing
and fully recognized Palestinian State. The plan also
recognizes that a political resolution to the conflict
is not enough to ensure that the Palestinian people
have opportunities to thrive, opportunities they need,
opportunities they deserve.
The plan proposes historic levels of economic
investment in the future State of Palestine — more than
$50 billion in total. Such an investment would reverse
the brutal cycle of poverty that has trapped thousands
of Palestinian men, women and children for decades. As
President Trump said two weeks ago, he wants this plan
“to be a great deal for the Palestinians. It has to be”.
In laying the foundations for widespread economic
opportunity, the United States plan is more than a path
20-03420

11/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to Palestinian independence. It is a blueprint for the
construction of a flourishing Palestinian State. This
is not a proposal of peace in theory but of dignity in
practice. The United States believes that this plan is
realistic and implementable, and I will repeat here what
senior adviser Jared Kushner has asserted on multiple
occasions: this plan is not a take it or leave it; it is not
my way or the highway; it is not set in stone. Rather, it is
an opening offer. It is the beginning of a conversation,
not the end of one. The United States stands willing
to support all efforts to begin this conversation, and
moving forward we hope that all parties will keep an
open mind, listen and engage. I am optimistic that all
Council members will give this approach a fair hearing
rather than revert to the old habits that have not produced
and cannot produce the peace that we all seek.
Above all, we hope that the Israelis and Palestinians
will have the courage to sit down together to talk to
one another. Council members have heard me say
repeatedly that the United States will always stand by
Israel, ensuring that its security is never threatened and
that its prosperity is protected. That has not changed,
and it never will. The people of Israel have no better
friend that the United States, and I want them to know
that as they forge a new path to peace, we will be with
them every step of the way.
But I want to make clear that the United States also
stands by the Palestinian people and supports their will
for a better future for themselves and for their children.
My fervent hope is that after today’s rhetoric clears,
Palestinian leaders will see this plan for the opportunity
it is, roll up their sleeves and seize this chance to sit down
with the leaders of Israel to begin a new conversation.
Continuing to leave this conflict unresolved benefits
only the extremists, who seek to radicalize younger
generations and perpetuate the cycle of terrorism. But
peaceful coexistence is not out of reach. By committing
to extending freedom, dignity and opportunity to all
Palestinians and Israelis, we can build the future we
have all sought for so long. Only that way can the
weapons of war at last be beaten into ploughshares, and
can peace — true, lasting peace — descend on this land
that is holy to so many. President Trump has stated that
he wants President Abbas to know that if he chooses
the path to peace, America and many other countries
will be there.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General and his Special Coordinator
for their briefings. I also welcome the presence of

S/PV. 8717

President Abbas among us today. We are all here today
in the presence of the Secretary-General because we
share the conviction that it is necessary to resume the
negotiations process between the parties with the view
to achieving a just and lasting peace that meets the
legitimate aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis alike.
For France, a just and lasting peace hinges on
respect for international law, compliance with all
relevant Security Council resolutions. It must seek
the establishment, alongside Israel, of an independent,
viable and sovereign Palestinian State, within the
framework of internationally agreed parameters. Those
parameters are well known and have been endorsed
on several occasions by the Council, most recently
in resolution 2334 (2016). They are geared towards
the objective of ensuring the existence of two States,
within secure and internationally recognized borders,
on the basis of the lines of 4 June 1967, with agreed
swaps of comparable territory and with Jerusalem as
the capital of the two States.
There is no ambiguity vis-à-vis what the twoState solution entails. The aim is to establish an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State
that enjoys territorial contiguity and lives in peace and
security alongside Israel. That necessitates security
arrangements that guarantee Israel’s security and
safeguards the sovereignty of the Palestinian State. It
also requires a just, equitable and agreed solution to the
Palestinian refugee problem.
We will continue to advocate a negotiated solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in accordance with
international law and within the framework of Council
resolutions. International law and the decisions of the
Council are not options that Member States can choose
whether or not to respect. They are binding on all of
us, in full, as required by the Charter of the United
Nations. Respect for international law is a prerequisite
for international peace and security and constitutes a
guarantee of the effectiveness of our collective action.
That is not merely a position of principle. On the
contrary, it reflects the deep conviction of France
and its European partners that this solution alone is
realistically able to put an end to the occupation and
thereby deliver a just and lasting peace. Absent such
a solution, the political vacuum and the continuing
deterioration of the situation on the ground will fuel the
despair of new generations and threaten to radicalize
the young.

20-0342013/24

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

11/02/2020

France remains resolutely committed to Israel’s
security. We strongly condemn all those who threaten
it. President Macron reaffirmed that once again during
his visit to Israel and the Palestinian territories last
month. In that context, there is an urgent need to
revive negotiations on the basis of agreed parameters
to regenerate a political horizon. The plan announced
by the United States is the fruit of efforts that have
been under way for several months, which we have
recognized as such.

and support the resumption of negotiations on the basis
of international law. The Secretary-General and his
Special Coordinator have our full support in that regard.

I have recalled the framework within which France,
the European Union and our Arab partners believe
that the peace process must be relaunched. The active
involvement of the main countries of the region, as
well as the Europeans, is necessary to contribute to the
resumption of the political process. The Arab Peace
Initiative was a milestone in the process and remains
fully relevant, as recalled by the Council of Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the League of Arab States in
Cairo on 1 February and also just now by the Tunisian
representative. The European Union, which is a member
of the Quartet and has been committed to resolving
the conflict from the outset, stands ready to support
the resumption of negotiations, as recalled by its High
Representative Josep Borrell Fontelles.

The question of Palestine, an issue that has
remained unresolved for over 70 years, is the root cause
of the turbulence in the Middle East. That issue calls
into question the human conscience and international
justice. Independent statehood is an inalienable national
right of the Palestinian people. It cannot be subject to
trading in any way. The Palestinian people continue to
endure terrible suffering. Clashes and confrontations
between Palestine and Israel are incessant. Settlement
activities and the demolition of Palestinian housing
are continuing and expanding. The Middle East peace
process has deviated from the right track. China is
deeply worried.

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks you, Mr. President, for presiding over
this meeting. We also thank President Abbas and
Secretary-General Aboul Gheit of the League of Arab
States for their presence at today’s public meeting. We
further thank Secretary-General Guterres and Special
Coordinator Mladenov for their briefings.

It is essential that both parties return to the
negotiating table in good faith. Neither side should
be marginalized. A solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict requires negotiation, not unilateral decisions.
President Abbas’ proposal to establish a multilateral
mechanism to resume peace negotiations on the basis
of previous resolutions and agreed parameters deserves
close consideration in that context. We stand ready to
engage in a discussion on those modalities.

China has noted the United States announcement
of a new Middle East peace plan and the reactions
of Palestine, the Arab League, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the Secretary-General and others.
China has always believed that the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international consensus on the
two-State solution and the principle of land for peace
constitute an important foundation for resolving the
question of Palestine. As such, they must be effectively
observed. The question of Palestine can be settled only
through political means.

France calls on the parties to establish conditions
conducive to the resumption of discussions. That
requires all parties to refrain from violence and
incitement to violence, and an end to settlement activity
and any unilateral measure contrary to international
law, which would only increase tensions. In that regard,
we caution against any decision to annex part of the
West Bank.

Any proposed solution to this issue must be
based on the views and opinions of the major parties,
in particular those of Palestine, as well as on giving
consideration to the voices of regional countries and
organizations. Such a solution must be reached through
dialogue and negotiations on an equal footing and
contribute to a comprehensive, fair and lasting solution
to the question of Palestine at an early date.

I wish to conclude this statement by reiterating
France’s readiness to work, alongside all its partners
and without further delay, to relaunch the peace process
with the objective of arriving at a just and lasting peace
and the stabilization of the Middle East. The role of
the Council and the United Nations is to encourage

Over recent days, Council members have held
intensive consultations on the question of Palestine.
China supports the efforts of Tunisia and Indonesia in
that regard. We believe that the Council must base its
work on the resolutions adopted in the past; heed the
voices of the Palestinian people; reaffirm its support for

14/24

20-03420

11/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the two-State solution, the importance of the relevant
resolutions and existing international consensus; and
call upon all parties to comply with international
law in order to prevent the further complication and
deterioration of the situation. China encourages all
the parties to continue consultations in a responsible
manner, while narrowing differences and widening
consensus with a view to creating conditions conducive
to resolving the issue.
China is highly concerned about the economic and
humanitarian situation in Palestine. We call on the parties
concerned to fulfil their international treaty obligations
and the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations,
comprehensively implement the relevant resolutions,
fully lift the blockade against Gaza in a timely fashion,
and improve the economic and humanitarian situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) continues to face financial
shortages this year. The international community must
increase its political and financial support to UNRWA
so as to effectively improve the humanitarian situation
of the Palestinian refugees and their host countries. It
must also bolster its input into economic reconstruction
in Palestine.
The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. In the current circumstances, the Council
should work alongside the international community and
play a constructive role in seeking a comprehensive,
fair and lasting solution to the question of Palestine
at an early date. China remains firmly committed to
supporting the just cause of the Palestinian people to
restore their legitimate national rights.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his statement. I also
thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing.
Estonia welcomes all efforts aimed at finding a
peaceful solution to the long-lasting Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We welcome the United States initiative aimed
at reviving the peace process, which has been stalled
for years. It is essential that the European Union and
the United States work together as closely as possible
on this complex issue. We call on Israel and Palestine
to take steps towards resuming direct and meaningful
negotiations to resolve all permanent status issues,
including issues related to borders, the status of

S/PV. 8717

Jerusalem, security and the refugee question, with the
aim of achieving a just and lasting peace.
Estonia’s position on the Middle East peace
process remains unchanged. The only way to reach
lasting peace is through direct negotiations between
Israel and Palestine, taking into account the legitimate
aspirations of both parties. We remain committed to a
negotiated two-State solution that meets both Israeli and
Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations
to statehood, based on the 1967 lines, with equivalent
land swaps, as may be agreed between the parties, and
that respects the internationally agreed parameters and
relevant resolutions.
Recognizing that there are sensitivities related to
several issues yet to be resolved, we urge all parties to
exercise restraint and refrain from any unilateral actions
that could further aggravate the tensions and undermine
the viability of the two-State solution. We are concerned
about the continuation of Israel’s settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory. in violation of
international law. Annexation of any parts of the West
Bank would be in contravention of international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
It is crucial that all parties refrain from acts of
violence, terror and incitement. An escalation of
violence would be negative for all sides and further
undermine the prospects for a solution to the conflict.
We also reiterate our commitment to the security
of Israel.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Let
me begin by joining others in thanking the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, for his introductory
remarks, as well as the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his briefing. I also welcome President Mahmoud Abbas
of the State of Palestine; Ambassador Danny Danon,
Permanent Representative of Israel; and the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States to the Chamber
this morning.
The moral purpose of the United Nations is to
ensure freedom for all nations and peoples — for all
States, big and small. The foundational pledge to respect
the political independence and territorial integrity of
all States is one that our forebears did not take lightly.
They knew all too well that, without mutual guarantees
of sovereignty, the consequences would be anarchy
and immense human suffering. For a small State like
ours, which depends so heavily on a robust body of

20-0342015/24

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international law for our peaceful existence, it is
particularly unnerving to witness the slow unravelling
of those internationally agreed norms. Indeed, one of
the essential contributions to be made by small States
like ours is the tireless advocacy for timeless principles
enshrined in international law. We consider it our solemn
obligation not only to articulate those principles but to
ensure that they are applied consistently and upheld in
the international community as universal truths, rather
than as selective, uneven and unpredictable tools.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is deeply
concerned about any attempts to deviate from the
settled parameters governing the delicate quest for
peace between Israel and Palestine. In that connection,
we call for the full implementation of all relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
calling for a cessation of all Israeli settlement activities,
including those relating to Jerusalem and confirming
that the latter is an integral part of the occupied
Palestinian territory. We wish to underscore that any
measures aimed at altering the legal, geographic and
demographic character or status of Jerusalem and the
occupied Palestinian territory as a whole are null and
void and have no legal validity whatsoever.
While we acknowledge the ongoing efforts of the
United States of America to reinvigorate the IsraeliPalestinian peace process, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines remains committed to the international
community’s long-standing, principled support for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
to self-determination, and for the two-State solution
based on the pre-1967 borders. That vision still reflects
the will of the international community and ought to
be our starting point. We will not resolve the conflict
by simply moving the internationally agreed goalposts
on an increasingly uneven playing field. We therefore
support the calls for the resumption of negotiations
under those internationally agreed parameters.
Echoing the Secretary-General’s call, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines is also of the view that we must never
foreclose dialogue. There can be no real dialogue — and
indeed, no real solution — without all parties at the
table. However, there is a need for mediators that are
acceptable to both Israel and Palestine. In the struggle
for sustainable peace, we can claim no easy victories.
Unresolved conflicts can be addressed only through
equity and harmony. History has taught us that lasting
peace can be achieved only through earnest attempts
16/24

11/02/2020

at reconciliation. Indeed, there can be no peace without
togetherness, and no togetherness without justice for all.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): First, I would like to extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas,
President of the Palestinian State, and thank him for his
statement. We also thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his remarks, and Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for
his briefing.
The quest for a comprehensive and lasting solution
to the Palestinian question continues to command the
interest and concern of the relevant parties, countries in
the Middle East and the international community. Viet
Nam joins the international community in reaffirming
our strong support for the legitimate struggles of the
Palestinian people and their inalienable rights. We
firmly believe in and strongly support the two-State
solution, including the establishment of an independent
and sovereign State of Palestine, with the borders
enshrined in the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, living side by side with the State of Israel in
peaceful coexistence, security and mutual recognition.
After decades, peace and a final settlement
remain elusive. We share the deep concerns of other
Security Council members with regard to Israel’s
continued settlement activities and the recent call for
the annexation of parts of the occupied Palestinian
territory. We therefore call on and support the relevant
party in striving for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace settlement, through dialogue and negotiations,
on the basis of respect for international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations, including resolution 2334 (2016),
with the consent of the parties concerned. We are
convinced that such a peace agreement can be reached
only by exercising restraint, avoiding actions that
might further complicate the situation and maintaining
direct dialogue. It is our sincere hope that the parties
will engage in discussion in good faith and in a
constructive manner.
To that end, Viet Nam welcomes all initiatives and
efforts to restart the Middle East peace process, based
on international law and bilateral agreements. We are
ready to make a positive contribution to the promotion
of dialogue and negotiations, within and beyond the
United Nations, with a view to achieving a solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that ensures the
20-03420

11/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

legitimate rights and interests of Palestinians and the
other party concerned.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me extend
a very special welcome to His Excellency President
Abbas. Let me also thank the Secretary-General,
Special Coordinator Mladenov and Ambassador Danon
for their remarks and statements. I would also like to
extend a special welcome to the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States, His Excellency Mr. Ahmed
Aboul-Gheit.
Germany remains firmly committed to a negotiated
two-State solution, based on 4 June 1967 lines, with
equivalent land swaps, as may be agreed between the
parties, with Jerusalem as the future capital of both
States, and with the State of Israel and an independent,
democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine, living side by side in peace, security and
mutual recognition.
We continue to believe that the two-State solution
is the only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict that meets Israeli and Palestinian security
needs, fulfils Palestinian aspirations for statehood and
sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in 1967,
resolves all permanent-status issues and guarantees
equal rights for all.
Unilateral actions and creating facts on the
ground in order to impose a certain outcome are
counterproductive and will neither bring about a just
and lasting solution nor lead to a sustainable peace and
security. To achieve a just and lasting solution, final
status issues, including the issues related to borders,
the status of Jerusalem, security and the refugee
situation, must be resolved through direct negotiations
between both parties. We therefore call on the parties
to the conflict, and on all international stakeholders, to
refrain from taking any measures that risk undermining
the viability of a negotiated two-State solution on the
basis of international law, all relevant United Nations
resolutions and the internationally agreed parameters.
We have taken note of the proposals presented
by United States in relation to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and have determined that they depart from
the internationally agreed parameters, notably on
the final-status issues, with regard to the status of
Jerusalem, future borders and Israeli settlements. The
Middle East peace process has been stalled for too long,
and the absence of direct negotiations towards a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflict is

S/PV. 8717

source of frustration, first and foremost for the people
in Israel and for the Palestinians, who desperately
need and want peace. We therefore welcome fresh
thinking and any efforts that aim at reviving the
political process and reaffirm our belief that any viable
proposal for direct negotiations must be accepted by
both parties. The previous resolutions of the Council
reflect both international law as well as parameters for
negotiations that both parties have previously accepted
in negotiations.
The most recent proposals by the United States
contain detailed provisions for future negotiations that
merit thorough analysis and discussion, as they raise
a number of pertinent questions of great importance
to both parties. We therefore believe that establishing
or reviving a multilateral format would enable us to
elaborate the most recent proposal and others before
it. Those discussions could be helpful in achieving
the shared objective of creating an environment
conducive to the resumption of meaningful and
genuine negotiations between the parties to resolve all
permanent-status issues and to achieve a negotiated,
just and viable solution to the conflict.
We welcome the proposals to that effect and have
taken note of President Abbas’s ideas in that regard.
We noted that the international community expressed
its willingness to support the parties in returning
to direct negotiations. Both parties are therefore
invited to submit suggestions for multilateral formats
to advance discussions on proposals for the Middle
East peace process, including the recent proposals by
the United States. Meanwhile, we call on both sides,
as well as relevant actors in the region, to show their
commitment to a negotiated solution to the conflict
through confidence-building measures.
One of the main obstacles to a political settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains the ongoing
Israeli occupation and the continued settlement
activities in the territories occupied since 1967. We
reiterate our position that Israeli settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under
international law. They undermine the prospects for
ending the occupation and achieving a negotiated twoState-solution. We note that the most recent proposal
submitted by the United States includes an immediate
temporary halt to the expansion of existing settlements.
Adherence to that proposal would be an important
step in building confidence in renewed efforts towards

20-0342017/24

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

negotiations and would be in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
We remain extremely concerned about the repeated
statements by Israeli officials alluding to or announcing
an intended annexation of the Jordan Valley and other
parts of the occupied West Bank. The annexation of
any part of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, constitutes a breach of international
law, undermines the viability of the two-State solution
and challenges the prospects for just, comprehensive
and lasting peace. Steps towards annexation, if
implemented, would not be recognized and would
have serious negative repercussions across the region.
We therefore strongly advise the Israeli Government
against taking any steps in that direction. If carried out,
such steps would severely undermine any new initiative
for negotiations between both parties, including the
most recent efforts by the United States.
We reiterate that Germany will continue to
distinguish between the territory of the State of
Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. We will
not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines,
including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those
agreed by the parties through negotiations.
We are encouraged by President Abbas’s call for
elections. We believe that free and fair elections should
take place without undue delay. Those elections would
constitute an important step towards the legitimacy
of Palestinian self-governance and towards building
confidence in the peace process.
We are concerned that the growing division between
the Palestinian citizens living in Gaza and those living
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem undermines the
prospect for peace negotiations. We therefore call on
the Palestinian leadership to redouble efforts to pave
the way towards reconciliation, and we appreciate the
efforts by Egypt in that regard.
Fully implementing resolution 2334 (2016) would
be an important step towards building confidence
in the recent efforts to advance Middle East peace.
As we have stated before, that includes credible and
substantive efforts to prevent acts of terrorism, violence
against civilians, incitement, provocative actions and
inflammatory rhetoric. Hamas and the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad must stop firing rockets into Israel.
There is no justification for the firing of rockets into
Israel or any other form of terrorism, which Germany
strongly condemns.
18/24

11/02/2020

We remain steadfast in our commitment to Israel’s
security and stress Israel’s right to self-defence and its
right to react adequately and proportionally to attacks
against its territory. We will not be silent whenever
Israel’s security or right to exist is questioned or
compromised. However, incidents in which innocent
civilians are indiscriminately targeted and subjected
to violence must be thoroughly investigated, and
accountability for violations of international law must
be ensured.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): South Africa
is grateful to Belgium for scheduling this meeting
today. We welcome in particular the President of the
State of Palestine, His Excellency President Mahmoud
Abbas, to the Security Council and thank him for his
important statement, in which he has articulated the
true aspirations and the voice of the people of occupied
Palestine — a people who lives under occupation in an
asymmetrical environment and, for decades, has fought
for its right to self-determination and for the recognition
of its basic human rights. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Coordinator for the
Middle East for their important briefings this morning.
The Security Council held its first meeting on the
matter of Palestine (see S/PV.222) on 9 December 1947.
In the over 72 years since then, we have, unfortunately,
not progressed in resolving this matter, as the views
and aspirations of the Palestinian people have been
consistently ignored. In that context, the Palestinian
people have once again sought to come to the Council
to set out their substantive legal and political case. It is
our responsibility, as the organ tasked with maintaining
international peace and security, to take on this task
and assist both the Palestinians and the Israelis.
South Africa notes the recent developments that
have brought renewed focus and attention to this
decades-long conflict. Unfortunately, the recent
initiative and proposal do not take into account the
substantive views and aspirations of the Palestinian
people. It is only through initiatives developed with
the full participation of all parties, specifically the
Palestinians, that lasting peace and stability can be
achieved. A genuine, inclusive and open dialogue,
where both parties are at the table, is the only means to
resolve this current impasse. Peace cannot be imposed.
It can be premised only on a mutually acceptable and
just solution.
20-03420

11/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It has been universally acknowledged, in the
Security Council and in other international forums,
that the only way peace can be established between
the Israelis and the Palestinians is through direct
negotiations between them. The Security Council must
help create an environment that will allow Israel and
Palestine to come together, as equals, to resume the
peace process.
Peace initiatives aimed at resolving the IsraeliPalestinian conflict must conform to the internationally
agreed terms of reference and parameters, including
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative,
the initiatives of the Quartet and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and Security
Council — resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
2334 (2016), among others. Flagrant violations of
international law, at the expense of what is deemed
by some as political reality or expediency, undermine
the rule of just law and the global multilateral system,
which has developed over the past 75 years.
South Africa’s position on the question of
Palestine is very clear. We have consistently called
for a peaceful, negotiated settlement and continue to
support international efforts aimed at the establishment
of a viable Palestinian State, existing side by side and
in peace with Israel, within internationally recognized
borders, based on those existing on 4 June 1967, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with all relevant
United Nations resolutions, international law and other
internationally agreed parameters. That is also in line
with the sentiments expressed in the African Union
summit just concluded in Addis Ababa, where African
Union leaders reaffirmed the African continent’s
solidarity with the people of Palestine in support of
their inalienable right to self-determination.
South Africa maintains its principled position that
any peace plan should not allow Palestinian statehood to
devolve into an entity devoid of sovereignty, territorial
contiguity and economic viability. Doing so would
severely compound the failure of previous peacemaking
efforts, accelerate the demise of the idea of a two-State
solution and fatally damage the cause of durable peace
for the Palestinians and the Israelis alike.
Any solution must therefore be premised on a
just settlement with just laws. It must focus on rights
and facilitate equality and equity for all who have a
right to live in the territories of Israel and Palestine.
That includes sovereign equality between States.

S/PV. 8717

Consequently, all final-status issues, including illegal
Israeli settlements, the status of Jerusalem and the right
of refugees to return to their homeland, must be settled
in accordance with international law.
In conclusion, 11 February is a historic day in South
Africa’s history, and indeed in the history of oppressed
people worldwide, for it is on this day, 30 years ago,
that Nelson Mandela was released from prison after
27 years in captivity. His release and eventual election
to the highest office as the President of a united and
democratic South Africa demonstrated that what for
some had seemed to be an intractable conflict was
actually solvable. May that serve as a lesson for finding
peace between Palestinians and Israelis.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I welcome you to
the Security Council, Sir, for Belgium’s presidency.
I join others in welcoming President Abbas and the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States. I also
thank Secretary-General Guterres and Mr. Mladenov
for their remarks.
As we have heard today, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has blighted an entire region and untold lives.
To this day, its implications are felt across the Middle
East and around the world. It is almost as old as the
Security Council and has gone on for too long.
The United Kingdom’s long-standing position on the
Middle East peace process is clear and has not changed.
We support a negotiated settlement leading to a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders, with agreed
land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both
States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement
for refugees. The United Kingdom’s commitment to
the resolutions of the Council is unwavering, and we
support what the German representative said about
Israel’s security.
We need to acknowledge that progress towards
meaningful peace has stalled. The absence of dialogue
risks a prolonged political vacuum that will only fuel
instability and extremism. Israelis and Palestinians
deserve better. They deserve a durable resolution that
provides all with dignity and security. Palestinians
deserve self-determination and freedom from
occupation. Israelis deserve to live free of terrorist
rocket fire and in a future characterized by fruitful
cooperation with their neighbours in the region.
That can be achieved only by finding a path back to

20-0342019/24

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

11/02/2020

negotiations and securing a settlement that is acceptable
to all parties. No other path to peace exists.

now take the first step on the road back to negotiations.
There is no other way forward.

It has been over a decade since the last direct
negotiations, as we have heard today. A resolution of
the issue has only become harder, illegal settlements
have expanded, acrimony between Palestinian factions
has deepened. If we try again only in another half
decade, a settlement will be harder still. Our American
colleagues have offered proposals to break the deadlock
that represent genuine desire to resolve the conflict.
The United Kingdom does not believe the proposals are
the end of the road, but we hope that they may lead to a
first step. Both Israeli and Palestinian leaders owe it to
their people to give them due consideration.

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First, we thank the SecretaryGeneral for his presence and his briefing. We also
thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
detailed report on the current situation in the region.
We welcome President Mahmoud Abbas, to whom
we extend the appreciation and consideration of the
Dominican people. I also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Philippe Goffin.

Let me, if I may, extend the regards of my Prime
Minister to President Abbas. President Abbas has long
championed peace and dialogue. We have not forgotten.
All of us here today understand that the proposals put
forward by the United States may feel very different to
what has been discussed before. Time will be needed to
digest them, and members of the Council should strive
to provide that. President Abbas has expressed serious
concerns with the proposals, as is certainly his right. It is
for Israeli and Palestinian leaders to determine whether
the plan meets the needs and aspirations of those they
represent. However, where there is disagreement or
even outrage, the only path to resolution is dialogue.
The United States proposals now on the table, the
United Kingdom looks to the Palestinian leadership to
offer its own vision for a settlement and to find a way
of re-engaging with the negotiation process so that its
concerns can be considered and discussed.
Let me be clear: unilateral action by either party
is unacceptable. The United Kingdom Government,
including our Foreign Secretary, most recently in his
statement on 31 January, has made clear our serious
concern about reports of possible moves towards
annexation of parts of the West Bank by Israel. I have
said in the Council before, and I repeat, that any such
unilateral moves would be contrary to international
law and damaging to renewed efforts to restart peace
negotiations. We hope that President Abbas returns to
negotiations, but if he cannot, that would not justify
annexation. Any changes to the status quo cannot be
taken forward without an agreement negotiated by the
parties themselves.
Let me conclude by reiterating the contention of
my Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary. We must
20/24

The Dominican Republic, as a country whose
fundamental principles include respect for human
rights and international law, which recognizes an
international legal order that guarantees respect for the
fundamental rights to peace, justice and the political,
social, economic and cultural development of nations
and is committed to peaceful coexistence and solidarity
among nations, calls for the pursuit of a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution that addresses the legitimate
needs of the parties to the conflict. In that regard, the
position of the Dominican Republic, which is consistent
with those principles, continues to be respect for the
sovereignty and self-determination of peoples and for
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We therefore reaffirm our full support for
a two-State solution, as set out in the various United
Nations resolutions.
In order to reach an agreement between the
parties, the Dominican Republic considers it vital to
redouble reconciliation efforts, with the support of
the international community, in order to guarantee
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and the right of Israel to live in peace,
within secure and recognized borders. We understand
that is the only way to obtain a just and lasting peace
that will resolve a conflict that for decades has eclipsed
regional and international peace and security. We are
convinced that it is unnecessary to formulate new
resolutions or to return to paths already taken. The
Dominican Republic remains committed to the frame
of reference based on previous resolutions and bilateral
agreements between Israelis and Palestinians. We
encourage the parties to promote genuine dialogue
and to relaunch negotiations on a peace plan based on
internationally reached agreements. As the international
community, we understand that our collective action
must be aimed at contributing in an impartial and
effective manner to the quest for real solutions. We
20-03420

11/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

reiterate the need to increase efforts and continue
working tirelessly until a constructive dialogue based
on mutual respect is resumed, leading to a new stage
in the construction of a genuine peace between Israel
and Palestine.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to see Minister Goffin
preside over the Security Council and to welcome the
President of Palestine, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas. We thank
the Secretary-General of the United Nations for his
statement and are grateful to the Special Coordinator,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his report on the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories. We welcome
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit.
We are firmly convinced and have consistently
stated that the lack of a resolution to the Palestinian
issue remains among the key factors of instability in
the Middle East, which fuels extremist and radical
sentiment and incites public resentment among ordinary
Palestinians and Arabs. The Russian Federation has
supported and continues to support a just solution to the
Palestinian issue on the basis of the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, which
provide for the creation of an independent, sovereign,
territorially contiguous Palestinian State within the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
coexisting in peace and security with Israel. Our vision
for a Palestinian-Israeli settlement coincides and aligns
with the consolidated Arab assessments that have
been reflected in the final outcome of the ministerial
meeting of the League of Arab States that was held on
1 February in Cairo.
The European Union, in a special statement dated
4 February, confirmed its full commitment to the twoState solution. The present United States Administration
has proposed another way to resolve the protracted
Palestine-Israeli conflict through a path that fails to
reflect the core elements of the universally recognized
international legal framework for the Middle East peace
process, as set out in Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We have stated repeatedly that we will accept
a settlement plan that is mutually acceptable to both
sides. However, what is to be done when one side, the
Palestinian side, regards the plan as unjust and refuses
to accept it? This is a plan that proposes to resolve

S/PV. 8717

key final-status issues for the Palestinian territory,
including borders, settlements, East Jerusalem, refugees
and fundamental security issues, at the expense of
unilateral concessions.
And how is it possible to achieve a fair, just
settlement unilaterally? Admittedly, given current
circumstances, there is one silver lining: the fact that
the Palestinian problem, which for many years was
relegated to the back track while everybody waited
for the United States to finally present its Middle East
initiative, amid turbulence in the Middle East, is once
again in the international spotlight.
The “deal of the century” — regardless of what
views there may be in that respect — has drawn
attention to the need to resolve the Palestinian issue.
However, we are convinced that there is a need to
ensure cohesive action on the part of the international
community to achieve a just, long-term Middle East
settlement. We believe that, given the situation that
has unfolded, there is a need to revitalize the efforts
of the Quartet of international mediators, which is the
sole mechanism recognized by the Security Council
to support the Middle East peace process. Russian,
as a member of the Quartet, stands ready to engage
in close coordination with Arab partners, Israel, the
Palestinians and all interested parties in order to help
facilitate a compromise. What is all the more relevant
under these circumstances is bringing Palestinians
together to uphold the shared national interests of the
Palestinian people.
Russia has been making efforts to restore
inter-Palestinian unity, and we welcome the efforts
undertaken by our Egyptian colleagues to that end.
In close contacts with both Palestinians and Israelis,
we will continue to steadfastly urge them to adopt a
constructive approach in order to agree on negotiated
solutions to all pending issues. We note that, despite
the differences of views, both President Abbas and the
representative of Israel, Danny Danon, today spoke of
the need for negotiations. We should like to see here
an opportunity for the advancement of the Middle East
settlement in order to achieve a just solution. In that
context, we reiterate our proposal to provide a platform
for direct negotiations between the leaderships of Israel
and Palestine in Moscow.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.

20-0342021/24

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The peaceful resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, one of the most long-standing conflicts on
the Security Council’s agenda, can be a factor of peace
and stability in a particularly troubled region. Belgium
therefore deems it important that the international
community redouble its efforts to contribute to a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace between Israel
and Palestine.
Our position has not changed. With its European
Union partners, Belgium has always stressed that a
credible negotiating process must take place within the
framework of international law and include the relevant
resolutions of the Council. There is no sustainable and
realistic alternative to meet the legitimate aspirations
of both Israelis and Palestinians for lasting peace.
To facilitate the negotiation of such a solution, the
international community has set out parameters from
the outset. Allow me to recall them here.
The first is an agreement on the borders between
the two States on the basis of the borders of 4 June
1967, with land swaps mutually agreed between the
parties. In that regard, Belgium deems the policy of
settlements to be illegal under international law and to
constitute a growing risk to the two-State solution. Any
credible initiative to relaunch the peace process must
be accompanied by measures aimed at putting an end to
that policy. Moreover, any unilateral annexation would
constitute a flagrant violation of international law and
be an obstacle to peace. Recent statements in that regard
are extremely worrisome. The European Union will not
recognize any changes made to the pre-1967 borders,
including as concerns Jerusalem, unless they have been
accepted beforehand by the parties.
Secondly, a just, equitable and realistic solution to
the issue of refugees is a prerequisite. In that context,
Belgium continues to support the indispensable work
done on the ground by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and calls on all its partners to do the same.
Thirdly, concerning Jerusalem, we must find
through negotiations a way to settle the status of
Jerusalem as the future capital of both States that
in particular will do justice to the aspirations of all
its inhabitants.
Fourthly, there must be provisions made in the
area of security that respect Palestinian sovereignty
and show that the occupation is over, and that ensure
Israeli security, prevent the resurgence of terrorism and
22/24

11/02/2020

respond effectively to the threats that have emerged in
the region and to the unacceptable attempts of those
who try to call into question the very existence of Israel.
A lasting solution requires a State of Israel
with legitimacy recognized by all States and an
independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and
viable Palestinian State, so that the two States can live
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition.
Those parameters address extremely sensitive
issues. Any contribution to relaunching negotiations
is welcome, but unilaterally calling into question those
parameters could exacerbate tensions, which are also
already very high on the ground. We therefore call on
all parties to show the greatest restraint and respect
international law.
The American vision has put the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict back at the top of the international and
diplomatic agenda, and it underscores the importance
of the international community becoming mobilized
once again in order to provide an environment that
is favourable to good-faith negotiations between
the parties.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict must be urgently
resolved in the context of a dialogue between the parties,
supported by the multilateral system established by the
international community in 1945 as a framework for
relations among its members, within which Belgium
believes has a fundamental responsibility.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Aboul Gheit.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (spoke in Arabic): In my capacity
as the representative of the League of Arab States, I
address the Security Council following the League’s
ministerial meeting that took a collective decision on
1 February to reject the peace plan for Palestinians and
Israelis proposed by the United States of America on
28 January. That rejection did not come out of the blue
or without explanation.
There have been well-known and established
givens in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, primarily the
significant imbalance of forces on the ground between
a party under occupation and another party, namely, the
occupying Power. That has been set out for decades,
but it is not the entire issue. In fact, international
legitimacy is on the side of the Palestinian people. As
20-03420

11/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

embodied by the Security Council, and more broadly
by the United Nations, international law constitutes the
primary support for the Palestinians in this protracted
conflict, even before the support of their Arab brethren.
The Palestinian people, even with the support
of their Arab brethren, do not have a choice but to
remain steadfast on their land first and then call for
the Council’s sense of justice and fairness. Direct
negotiations, which should have led to a road map for a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State along the
4 June 1967 borders, nearly 50 years ago, regrettably
did not lead to anything.
The presentation of the United States plan was
preceded by many proactive measures, as mentioned
by President Mahmoud Abbas, all of which would
have a direct impact on the issues that were agreed
upon in Oslo to be negotiated, such as Jerusalem and
refugees. These measures are clearly geared towards
settling those issues for the benefit of the Israeli side,
prior to any negotiations. Then came the plan as if it
were the outcome of negotiations between the mediator
and Israel. Palestinians were not consulted, as we
heard, much less informed about the content of the
plan, which directly impacts their fate. It is now being
demanded that they accept the plan and succumb, or
subsequently be obligated in the near future to accept
its unilateral implementation. It is as if the plan had
been drafted to be rejected by the Palestinians, Arabs
and Muslims, and then be imposed unilaterally, leaving
us to face a new version of unilateral withdrawal plans
promoted by the Israeli right but under the slogan of
a permanent solution. All of this negates the basis of
neutral mediation.
In principle, we welcome the interest of the
Government of the United States to seek a political
settlement to this conflict. We welcome this initiative;
but, unfortunately, we found that the proposed plan
contravenes the principles that the United States
itself set out as the basis for a lasting solution when it
committed to a political settlement for the Israeli-Arab
conflict 40 years ago. First and foremost among those
principles is that of land for peace, which means ending
the occupation versus achieving security, recognition
and the beginning of peaceful relations in exchange.
The proposed plan includes new parameters that can
be summarized as follows: granting land, settlements,
Jerusalem and security to Israel and then normalization
and peace — also for Israel. As for the Palestinians,

S/PV. 8717

they will merely get a dismembered territory, without
sovereignty or Jerusalem and without an acceptable
solution to the problem of refugees. In short, this is
not even tantamount to full autonomy, let alone an
independent State.
The plan does not propose the two-State solution,
even if it mentions it. What it proposes falls well short
of that. This is a plan that practically suggests the
creation of a single State with two categories of people:
citizens enjoying full-fledged citizenship and others
with no rights. This is shameful, as has been echoed
here in the Chamber, along with condemnation and
denunciation. Will the international community accept
a new apartheid in the Middle East? On the holy land?
The Arab and Palestinian position is not rejection
for the sake of rejection. Neither is it allowing an
opportunity to slip away, as some might say repeatedly,
as if we were pleased to live in an endless conflicts and
crises. We Arabs have a peace proposal as well, based
on the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative. It was a robust,
clear and simple initiative presented to Israel, seeking
normalization of relations with 22 Arab States — if
Israel ended its occupation and allowed a Palestinian
State to emerge along the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, accompanied with an
agreed solution for the refugees issue. Those are
the principles of the Arab solution. Our initiative
does not include details because we do not want to
impose details. We want to help both parties reach a
solution through negotiations — I repeat, through
negotiations — between the two parties concerned.
Turning to the United States plan, it undermines
the very meaning of negotiations. There was no need
for the mediator to present a solution detailing what
the lasting solution was to be, unless the two parties
requested that. It should have been the outcome of
direct negotiations.
I have worked for decades towards achieving
peace in the Middle East. I have learned an important
lesson, namely, that there can be no lasting peace
between two parties unless it is based on justice. There
can be no peace in the Middle East if it means one
party acknowledging defeat and forced to succumb.
That would unfortunately lead to the continuation of
the conflict. Dashing the national aspirations of the
Palestinian people for freedom and independence while
attempting to obliterate their national dream and push
them to yield to an unfair settlement would be a major

20-0342023/24

S/PV.8717

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

11/02/2020

sin on an international level, were the international
community to permit it.

embraced the path towards achieving just peace and
political settlement, would be weakened.

Perhaps the current balance of power today allows
for ideas such as these to emerge. However, there is
no doubt that such ideas cannot pave the way towards
genuine security, lasting peace or a historic settlement
to a conflict that has lasted for decades.

In conclusion, I was appalled to hear a while ago a
clear call to exclude Palestinian President Abu Mazen,
characterizing him as not a true partner in making peace.
Such rhetoric demonstrates ill intentions vis-à-vis the
Palestinian President and a real cause for concern. This
way of thinking clearly reflects a personal problem,
because I strongly believe that if Abu Mazen does
not sign, no other Palestinian will sign. Those are the
ambitions and rights of a people and not a leadership
problem. I heard similar rhetoric 15 years ago, targeting
another Palestinian President. Both of them rejected the
proposal and did not give up.

We demand that the international community
safeguard its credibility and uphold the principles it has
established and called on the two parties to acknowledge.
Those principles came to be required for a settlement,
and most Palestinians believed in them and struggled for
the last three decades to achieve them, since the signing
of the Oslo Accords. If those principles are neglected,
the credibility of the international community would be
at stake and the position of the Palestinians, who have

24/24

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

20-03420
