S/PRST/2012/15

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 April 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6755th meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 April 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its Press Statement SC/10607 of 13 April
2012 and reiterates its strong condemnation of the military coup by the
military leadership and political elements in Guinea Bissau, thereby
undermining the conclusion of the legitimate presidential electoral process.
“The Security Council rejects the unconstitutional establishment of a
Transitional National Council by the military leadership and its supporters.
“The Security Council demands the immediate restoration of the
constitutional order as well as the reinstatement of the legitimate government
of Guinea-Bissau. The Security Council further demands the immediate and
unconditional release of the interim President Raimundo Pereira, Prime
Minister Carlos Gomes Junior and all officials currently detained in order to
enable the completion of the presidential and legislative elections. In this
regard, the Council welcomes the decision of the African Union Peace and
Security Council to suspend, with immediate effect, Guinea-Bissau from the
African Union (AU) until the effective restoration of constitutional order.
“The Security Council underlines the need to ensure the safety and
security of those detained and that those responsible for violent and illegal acts
must be held accountable.
“The Security Council is deeply concerned by reports of violent
repression of peaceful demonstrations, looting, restriction of freedom of
movement, the arbitrary detention of civilians and demands their release. The
Council calls on the military leadership to release information on the number
of arrests and the names and whereabouts of those arrested and further calls
upon the military to protect human rights including the rights to freedom of
movement, peaceful assembly and expression.
“The Security Council welcomes and supports the active engagement and
measures undertaken by the AU, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries
(CPLP), and encourages the coordination of these efforts for the immediate
restoration of the constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau.
12-30614 (E) 230412

*1230614*

S/PRST/2012/15

“The Security Council urges Guinea-Bissau’s partners to further
strengthen these efforts and requests the Secretary General to support these
endeavors, namely through his Special Representatives.
“The Council stands ready to consider possible further measures,
including targeted sanctions against the perpetrators and supporters of the
military coup, should the situation remain unresolved.
“The Security Council takes note of the AU’s decision to initiate
consultations with ECOWAS, the CPLP, the United Nations and other partners
on possible additional means necessary for the stabilization of the country, in
consultation with the legitimate government of Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed
on developments in Guinea-Bissau and to submit a report by 30 April 2012,
concerning the reestablishment of the constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council stresses that the recurrence of illegal interference
of the military in politics contributes to the persistence of instability and a
culture of impunity, and hampers efforts towards consolidation of the rule of
law, implementation of Security Sector Reform, promotion of development
and entrenchment of a democratic culture. In this regard, the Council
welcomes the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission Country Specific
Configuration and of the Angolan bilateral Mission (MISSANG) in pursuit of
peace and stability in the country.
“The members of the Security Council emphasize the need to uphold and
respect the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter.”

2

12-30614
