A/RES/73/157

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 January 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 72 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 17 December 2018
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/73/587)]

73/157.

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 3
and other relevant human rights instruments,
Recalling the provisions of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2004/16
of 16 April 2004 4 and 2005/5 of 14 April 2005 5 and relevant Human Rights Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 7/34 of 28 March 2008, 6 18/15 of 29 September
2011 7 and 21/33 of 28 September 2012, 8 as well as General Assembly resolutions
60/143 of 16 December 2005, 61/147 of 19 December 2006, 62/142 of 18 December
2007, 63/162 of 18 December 2008, 64/147 of 18 December 2009, 65/199 of
21 December 2010, 66/143 of 19 December 2011, 67/154 of 20 December 2012,
68/150 of 18 December 2013, 69/160 of 18 December 2014, 70/139 of 17 December
2015, 71/179 of 19 December 2016 and 72/156 of 19 December 2017 on this issue,
and its resolutions 61/149 of 19 December 2006, 62/220 of 22 December 2007,

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23),
chap. II, sect. A.
5
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23, E/2005/23/Corr.1 and
E/2005/23/Corr.2), chap. II, sect. A.
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53),
chap. II.
7
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and
A/66/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. II.
8
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.
1
2

18-22252 (E)

160119

*1822252*

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/73/157

63/242 of 24 December 2008, 64/148 of 18 December 2009, 65/240 of 24 December
2010, 66/144 of 19 December 2011, 67/155 of 20 December 2012, 68/151 of
18 December 2013, 69/162 of 18 December 2014, 70/140 of 17 December 2015,
71/181 of 19 December 2016 and 72/157 of 19 December 2017, entitled “A global
call for concrete action for the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination ,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”,
Acknowledging other important initiatives of the General Assembly aimed at
raising awareness about the suffering of victims of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and forms of discrimination, including in the
historical perspective, in particular regarding commemoration of the victims of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade,
Recalling the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal, and the Judgment of the
Tribunal which recognized as criminal, inter alia, the SS organization and its integral
parts, including the Waffen SS, through its officially accepted members implicated in
or with knowledge of the commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity
connected with the Second World War, as well as other relevant provisions of the
Charter and the Judgment,
Mindful of the horrors of the Second World War, and stressing in this regard that
the victory over Nazism in the Second World War contributed to the establishment of
the conditions for the creation of the United Nations, designed to prevent future wars
and save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Noting that neo-Nazism is more than just the glorification of a past movement,
it is a contemporary phenomenon with strong vested interests in racial inequality and
an investment in gaining broad support for its false claims of racial superiority,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001, 9 in particular paragraph 2
of the Declaration and paragraphs 84 to 86 of the Programme of Action, as well as
the relevant provisions of the outcome document of the Durban Review Conference
of 24 April 2009, 10 in particular paragraphs 11, 13 and 54,
Alarmed at the spread in many parts of the world of various extremist political
parties, movements, ideologies and groups of a racist or xenophobic character,
including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and at the fact that this trend has resulted
in the implementation of discriminatory measures and policies at the local or national
levels,
Noting with concern that, even where neo-Nazis do not formally participate in
government, the presence therein of extreme right-wing ideologues can have the
effect of injecting into governance and political discourse the same ideologies that
make neo-Nazism so dangerous,
Alarmed at music lyrics and video games that advocate racial hatred and incite
discrimination, hostility or violence,
Concerned by the use of Internet platforms by groups that propagate hate to
plan, fundraise and circulate information about public events aimed at promoting
racism, xenophobia and related intolerance, such as rallies, demonstrations and acts
of violence,
__________________
9
10

2/10

See A/CONF.189/12 and A/CONF.189/12/Corr.1, chap. I.
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
18-22252

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/73/157

Seriously concerned that neo-Nazi groups have increasingly targeted
susceptible individuals, mainly children and youth, by means of specifically tailored
websites with the aim of their indoctrination,
Deeply concerned by all recent manifestations of violence and terrorism incited
by violent nationalism, racism, anti-Semitism, Islamophobia, Afrophobia,
xenophobia and related intolerance, including during sports events,
Recognizing with deep concern the alarming increase in instances of
discrimination, intolerance and extremist violence motivated by anti -Semitism,
Islamophobia and Christianophobia and prejudices against persons of other ethnic
origins, religions and beliefs,
Noting with concern that the variation in national standards prohibiting hate
speech may provide safe havens for neo-Nazi, violent nationalist, xenophobic or
racist speech owing to the fact that many neo-Nazi and relevant extremist groups of
a racist or xenophobic character operate transnationally by relying on Internet service
providers or social media platforms,
Expressing its concern about the use of digital technologies by neo-Nazis and
other hate groups to disseminate their ideology, while recognizing that digital
technologies are of great importance for the enjoyment of human rights and for
combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
1.
Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration 9 and of the
outcome document of the Durban Review Conference, 10 in which States condemned
the persistence and resurgence of neo-Nazism, neo-Fascism and violent nationalist
ideologies based on racial and national prejudice and stated that those phenomena
could never be justified in any instance or in any circumstances;
2.
Recalls the provisions of the Durban Declaration and of the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference, in which States recognized the positive
contribution that the exercise of the right to freedom of expression, in particular by
the media and new technologies, including the Internet, and full respect for the
freedom to seek, receive and impart information can make to the fight against racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
3.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, prepared in accordance with the request
contained in its resolution 72/156; 11
4.
Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and her Office for their efforts to fight racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, including the maintenance by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of the database on practical
means to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intoler ance;
5.
Expresses deep concern about the glorification, in any form, of the Nazi
movement, neo-Nazism and former members of the Waffen SS organization,
including by erecting monuments and memorials and holding public demonstrations
in the name of the glorification of the Nazi past, the Nazi movement and neo -Nazism,
as well as by declaring or attempting to declare such members and those who fought
against the anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement participants
in national liberation movements;
6.
Calls for the universal ratification and effective implementation of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 3
__________________
11

18-22252

A/73/312.
3/10

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/73/157

and encourages those States parties that have not yet done so to consider making the
declaration under its article 14, thus providing the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination with the competence to receive and cons ider communications
from individuals or groups of individuals within their jurisdiction claiming to be
victims of a violation by a State party of any of the rights set forth in the Convention;
7.
Encourages States to eliminate all forms of racial discrimination by all
appropriate means, including legislation as required by circumstances, while ensuring
that the definition of racial discrimination set out therein complies with article 1 of
the Convention;
8.
Encourages those States that have made reservations to article 4 of the
Convention to give serious consideration to withdrawing such reservations as a matter
of priority, as stressed by the Special Rapporteur;
9.
Acknowledges that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance in all its forms and manifestations, including neo -Nazism, Islamophobia,
Christianophobia and anti-Semitism, are a threat to societies as a whole, not just to
those racial and ethnic groups that are their direct target;
10. Recalls that any legislative or constitutional measures adopted with a view
to countering extremist political parties, movements, ideologies and groups of a racist
or xenophobic character, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups and similar
extremist ideological movements, should be in conformity with the relevant
international human rights obligations, in particular articles 4 and 5 of the Convention
and articles 19 to 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and P olitical Rights; 2
11. Encourages States parties to the Convention to ensure that their legislation
is in accordance with their obligations under the Convention, including those under
article 4;
12. Emphasizes once more the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur that
“any commemorative celebration of the Nazi regime, its allies and related
organizations, whether official or unofficial, should be p rohibited” by States, 12 also
emphasizes that such manifestations do injustice to the memory of the countless
victims of the Second World War and negatively influence children and young people,
and stresses in this regard that it is important that States take measures, in accordance
with international human rights law, to counteract any celebration of the Nazi SS
organization and all its integral parts, including the Waffen SS, and that failure by
States to effectively address such practices is incompatible with the obligations of
States Members of the United Nations under its Charter;
13. Expresses deep concern about increased frequency of attempts and
activities intended to desecrate or demolish monuments erected in remembrance of
those who fought against Nazism during the Second World War, as well as to
unlawfully exhume or remove the remains of such persons, and in this regard urges
States to fully comply with their relevant obligations, inter alia, under article 34 of
Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949; 13
14. Firmly condemns incidents that glorify and promote Nazism, such as acts
involving pro-Nazi graffiti and paintings, including on monuments dedicated to
victims of the Second World War;
15. Notes with concern the use of the Internet and social media by neo-Nazi
groups to amplify their hate-filled messages and recruit new members across borders,
__________________
12
13

4/10

A/72/291, para. 79.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512.
18-22252

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/73/157

while recognizing that the Internet can also be used to counteract these groups and
their activities;
16. Also notes with concern the significant number of racist incidents
worldwide, including the rise of skinhead groups, which have been responsible for
many of these incidents, as well as the resurgence of racist and xenophobic violence
targeting, inter alia, persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities, or on any other grounds, including arson attacks on houses and
vandalization of and violence in schools and places of worship;
17. Reaffirms that such acts may be qualified as falling within the scope of the
Convention, that they may not be justified when they fall outside the scope of the
rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association as well as the rights to
freedom of expression and that they may fall within the scope of article 20 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and may be subject to certain
restrictions, as set out in articles 19, 21 and 22 of the Covenant;
18. Encourages States to take appropriate concrete measures, including
legislative and educational ones, in accordance with their international human rights
obligations, in order to prevent revisionism in respect of the Second World War and
the denial of the crimes against humanity and war crimes committed during the
Second World War;
19. Takes note of the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance that education that seeks to undercut the racist effects of
nationalist populism should include accurate and representative accounts of national
history that give voice to racial and ethnic diversity and that expose the untruths of
those who attempt to write ethnic groups out of national histories and identities in
order to sustain ethnonationalist myths of racially or ethnically “pure” nations; 14
20. Condemns without reservation any denial of or attempt to deny the
Holocaust, as well as any manifestation of religious intolerance, incitement,
harassment or violence against persons or communities on the basis of ethnic origin
or religious belief;
21. Welcomes the call of the Special Rapporteur for the active preservation of
those Holocaust sites that served as Nazi death camps, concentration and forced
labour camps and prisons, as well as his encouragement to States to take measures,
including legislative, law enforcement and educational measures, to put an end to all
forms of Holocaust denial; 15
22. Takes note of the conclusion of the Special Rapporteur that revisionism
and attempts to falsify history may, in certain circumstances, fall under the prohibition
of hate speech under article 4 (a) of the Convention, which States are required to
declare as offences punishable by law; 16
23. Calls upon States to continue to take adequate steps, including through
national legislation, in accordance with international human rights law, aimed at
preventing and countering hate speech and incitement to violence against persons in
vulnerable situations and, where necessary, to consider reviewing national anti-racism
legislation in the light of the increasingly open expression of hate speech and
incitement to violence against such persons;

__________________

A/73/305 and A/73/305/Corr.1, para. 56.
A/72/291, para. 91.
16
A/HRC/38/53, para. 15.
14
15

18-22252

5/10

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/73/157

24. Expresses deep concern at the increase in instances of groups and
individuals espousing ideologies of hatred through the Internet to disseminate ideas
based on racial superiority or hatred, organize meetings and violent protests, fundraise
and engage in other activities;
25. Also expresses deep concern about attempts at commercial advertising
aimed at exploiting the sufferings of the victims of war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed during the Second World War by the Nazi regime;
26. Stresses that the practices described above do injustice to the memory of
the countless victims of crimes against humanity committed in the Second World War,
in particular those committed by the SS organization and by those who fought against
the anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement, and may
negatively influence children and young people, and that failure by States to
effectively address such practices is incompatible with the obligations of States
Members of the United Nations under its Charter, including those related to the
purposes and principles of the Organization;
27. Also stresses that all such practices may fuel contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, anti-Semitism, Islamophobia, Christianophobia,
xenophobia and related intolerance and contribute to the spread and multiplication of
various extremist political parties, movements and groups of a racist or xenophobic
character, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and in this regard calls for
increased vigilance;
28. Expresses concern that the human rights and democratic challenges posed
by extremist political parties, movements and groups are universal and no country is
immune to them;
29. Emphasizes the need to take the measures necessary to counter the
practices described above, and calls upon States and all other stakeholders to take
more effective measures in accordance with international human rights law to
prevent, counter and combat those phenomena and extremist movements of a racist
or xenophobic character, which pose a real threat to democratic values, and to increase
their vigilance and be proactive in strengthening their efforts to recognize and
effectively address those challenges;
30. Underlines the importance of data and statistics on racist and xenophobic
crimes for identifying the types of offences committed, the profiles of victims and of
perpetrators and whether the latter are affiliated with extremist movements or groups,
thus enhancing better understanding of the phenomenon and identifying effective
measures to address such racist and xenophobic crimes, and recalls in this regard the
commitments made in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 17 on data,
monitoring and accountability, including collecting data disaggregated by
characteristics relevant in national contexts;
31. Encourages States to adopt further measures to support training for the
police and other law enforcement bodies on the ideologies of extremist political
parties, movements and groups whose advocacy constitutes incitement to racist and
xenophobic violence, to strengthen their capacity to address racist and xenophobic
crimes, to fulfil their responsibility for bringing to justice the perpetrators of such
crimes and to combat impunity;
32. Expresses deep concern about the increased number of seats occupied by
representatives of extremist parties of a racist or xenophobic character in a numbe r of
national and local parliaments, and emphasizes in this regard the need for all
democratic political parties to base their programmes and activities on respect for
__________________
17

6/10

Resolution 70/1.
18-22252

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/73/157

human rights and freedoms, democracy, the rule of law and good governance and to
condemn all messages disseminating ideas that are based on racial superiority or
hatred and that have the objective of fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
33. Takes note of the concern of the Special Rapporteur regarding the
resurgence of neo-Nazism in contemporary times and growing support for and
acceptance of neo-Nazism and related ideology in an increasing number of
countries; 18
34. Notes with appreciation, in this regard, the call of the Special Rapporteur
upon political leaders and parties to strongly condemn incitement to racial
discrimination or xenophobia, to promote tolerance and respect and to refrain from
forming coalitions with extremist parties of a racist or xenophobic character; 19
35. Takes note of the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to continue
to take steps through national legislation, in accordance with international human
rights law, aimed at preventing hate speech and incitement to violence and to
withdraw support – financial and otherwise – from political parties and other
organizations that engage in neo-Nazi or other hate speech; 20
36. Expresses concern that ethnic and racial profiling and police violence
against persons in vulnerable situations discourage victims from se eking redress
owing to distrust of the legal system, and in this regard encourages States to improve
diversity within law enforcement agencies and to impose appropriate sanctions
against those within the public service found to have committed racially moti vated
violence or to have used hate speech;
37. Expresses deep concern about the increase in reported cases of racist,
anti-Semitic, Islamophobic, Arabophobic, Afrophobic and xenophobic manifestations
during sports events, including those committed by extremist groups of a racist or
xenophobic character, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and calls upon
States, sports federations and other relevant stakeholders to strengthen measures to
address such incidents, while also welcoming the steps that many States, sports
federations and clubs have taken to eliminate racism at sporting events, including
through sport practised without discrimination of any kind and in the Olympic spirit,
which require human understanding, tolerance, inclusion, fair play and solidarity;
38. Recalls the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to introduce into
national criminal law a provision according to which committing an offence with
racist or xenophobic motivations or aims constitutes an aggravating circumstance,
allowing for enhanced penalties, 21 and encourages those States whose legislation does
not contain such provisions to consider that recommendation;
39. Notes measures taken by States to prevent discrimination against, in
particular but not limited to, persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities, people of African descent, Roma, migrants, refugees and asylum
seekers, and to ensure their integration into society, urges States to ensure the full and
effective implementation of legal, policy and institutional measures protecting these
individuals and groups, including women and girls, and recommends that States
effectively guarantee to everyone, without discrimination of any kind, their human
rights, including those related to safety and security, access to justice, adequate
reparation and appropriate information about their rights, and pursue prosecution and
adequate punishment, as appropriate, of those responsible for racist and xenophobic
__________________

A/HRC/38/53, para. 16.
A/72/291, para. 83.
20
A/HRC/38/53, para. 35 (c).
21
A/69/334, para. 81.
18
19

18-22252

7/10

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/73/157

crimes against them, including the possibility of seeking reparation or satisfaction for
damages suffered as a result of such crimes;
40. Underlines that the roots of extremism are multifaceted and must be
addressed through adequate measures such as education, awareness -raising and the
promotion of dialogue, and in this regard recommends the increase of measures to
raise awareness among young people of the dangers of the ideologies and activities
of extremist political parties, movements and groups;
41. Reaffirms, in this regard, the particular importance of all forms of
education, including human rights education, as a complement to legislative
measures, and calls upon States to continue to invest in education, in both
conventional and non-conventional curricula, inter alia, in order to transform attitudes
and counteract ideas of racial hierarchies and superiority, and counter their negative
influence, and to promote the values of non-discrimination, equality and respect for
all, as outlined by the Special Rapporteur;
42. Recognizes the paramount role of education in promoting human rights
and combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
especially in promoting the principles of tolerance, inclusion and respect for ethnic,
religious and cultural diversity and preventing the spread of extremist racist and
xenophobic movements and ideas;
43. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur presented at
the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, in which he emphasized the
importance of history classes in teaching the dramatic events and human suffering
which arose out of the adoption of ideologies such as Nazism and Fascism; 22
44. Stresses the importance of other positive measures and initiatives aimed at
bringing communities together and providing them with space for genuine dialogue,
such as round tables, working groups and seminars, including training seminars for
State agents and media professionals, as well as awareness-raising activities,
especially those initiated by civil society representatives, which require continued
State support;
45. Underlines the positive role that relevant United Nations entities and
programmes, in particular the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, can play in the aforementioned areas;
46. Reaffirms article 4 of the Convention, according to which States parties
condemn all propaganda and all organizations which are based on idea s or theories of
superiority of one race or group of persons of one colour or ethnic origin, or which
attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and discrimination in any form, and
undertake to adopt immediate and positive measures designed to eradicate a ll
incitement to, or acts of, such discrimination and, to this end, with due regard to the
principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 and the rights
expressly set forth in article 5 of the Convention, inter alia:
(a) Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas based
on racial superiority or hatred, and incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all
acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons of
another colour or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist
activities, including the financing thereof;
(b) Shall declare illegal and prohibit organizations, and also organized and all
other propaganda activities, which promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall
__________________
22

8/10

A/64/295, para. 104.
18-22252

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/73/157

recognize participation in such organizations or activities as an offence punishable
by law;
(c) Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions, national or local,
to promote or incite racial discrimination;
47. Also reaffirms that, as underlined in paragraph 13 of the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference, any advocacy of national, racial or
religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence
should be prohibited by law, that all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority
or hatred, or incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or
incitement to such acts, shall be declared offences punishable by law, in accordance
with the international obligations of States, and that these prohibitions are consistent
with freedom of opinion and expression;
48. Recognizes the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression, as well as full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and
impart information, including through the Internet, can play in combating racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
49. Encourages States to strengthen freedom of expression, which can play a
crucial role in promoting democracy and combating racist and xenophobic ideologies
based on racial superiority;
50. Expresses concern about the increased use of the Internet to promote and
disseminate racism, racial hatred, xenophobia, racial discrimination and related
intolerance, and in this regard calls upon States parties to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights to counter the dissemination of the above-mentioned
ideas while respecting their obligations under articles 19 and 20 of the Covenant,
which guarantee the right to freedom of expression and outline the grounds on which
the exercise of this right can be legitimately restricted;
51. Recognizes the need to promote the use of new information and
communications technologies, including the Internet, to contribute to the fight against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
52. Also recognizes the positive role that the media can play in combating
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, promoting a culture
of tolerance and inclusion and representing the diversity of a multicultural society;
53. Encourages States, civil society and other relevant stakeholders to use all
opportunities, including those provided by the Internet and social media, to counter,
in accordance with international human rights law, the dissemination of ideas based
on racial superiority or hatred and to promote the values of equality,
non-discrimination, diversity and democracy;
54. Encourages national human rights institutions, where they exist, to
develop appropriate programmes to promote tolerance, inclusion and respect for all
and to collect relevant information in this regard;
55. Notes the importance of strengthening cooperation at the regional and
international levels with the aim of countering all manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particula r regarding issues
raised in the present resolution;
56. Stresses the importance of cooperating closely with civil society and
international and regional human rights mechanisms in order to counter effectively
all manifestations of racism, racial discrimi nation, xenophobia and related
intolerance, as well as extremist political parties, movements and groups, including

18-22252

9/10

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/73/157

neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other similar extremist ideological movements
that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and r elated intolerance;
57. Recalls the request of the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution
2005/5, 5 that the Special Rapporteur continue to reflect on this issue, make relevant
recommendations in future reports and seek and take into account in this regard the
views of Governments and non-governmental organizations;
58. Invites States to consider including in their reports for the universal
periodic review and their reports to relevant treaty bodies information on the steps
taken to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
including with the aim of implementing the provisions of the present resolution;
59. Requests the Special Rapporteur to prepare, for submission to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fourth session and to the Human Rights Council at its fortyfirst session, reports on the implementation of the present resolution, and encourages
the Special Rapporteur to pay specific attention to paragraphs 5, 11, 12, 13, 16, 23,
25, 42 and 43 above, based on the views collected in accordance with the request of
the Commission, as recalled in paragraph 57 above;
60. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments and non-governmental
organizations that have submitted information to the Special Rapporteur in the course
of the preparation of her report to the General Assembly;
61. Encourages States and non-governmental organizations to provide
information to the Special Rapporteur on developments with regard to the issues
raised in the present resolution in order to contribute to the preparation of future
reports to the General Assembly;
62. Stresses that such information is important for the sharing of experiences
and best practices in the fight against extremist political parties, movements and
groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other extremist ideological
movements that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
63. Encourages Governments to invest more resources in building and sharing
knowledge on successful positive measures to prevent and counter racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance that go beyond sanctioning
violations once they have occurred, including the provision of remedies to victims of
relevant violations;
64. Encourages Governments and non-governmental organizations to
cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the exercise of the tasks outlined in
paragraph 59 above;
65. Encourages Governments, non-governmental organizations and relevant
actors to disseminate, as widely as possible, information regarding the contents of
and the principles outlined in the present resolution, including through the media, but
not limited to it;
66.

Decides to remain seized of the issue.
55th plenary meeting
17 December 2018

10/10

18-22252
