II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Condemns Israel's continued occupation of Arab
territories in violation of the Chartcr of the United
Nations, the principles of international law and repeated United Nations resolutions;
3. Reaffirms that a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East cannot be achieved without Israel's withdrawal from all Arab tcrritories occupied since 1967
and the attainmcnt by the Palestinian people of their
inalienable rights, which are the basic prerequisites enabling all countries and peoples in the Middle East to
live in peace;
4. Condemns all measures taken by Israel in the
occupied territories to change the demographic and
geographic character and institutional structure of these
territories;
5. Requests once again all States to desist from
supplying Israel with military and other forms of aid
or any assistance which would enable it to consolidate
its occupation or to exploit the natural resources of
the occupied territories;
6. Requests the Security Council to take effective
measures, within an appropriate time-table, far the
implementation of all relevant resolutions of the Council and the General Assembly on the Middle East and
Palestine;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
Co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference on the Middle
East of the present resolution and to submit a report
on the fallow-up of its implementation to the General
Assembly at its thirty-second session.
95th plenary meeting
9 December 1976
31/62.

Peace Conference on the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Having discussed the ítem entitled "The situation in
the Middle East",
Noting the report of the Secretary-General on this
item 45 and his initiative of 1 April 1976,46
Gravely concerned at the lack of progress towards
the achievemcnt of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East,
Convinced that any relaxation in the search for a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of the
Middle East problem to achieve a just peace in the
area constitutes a grave threat to the prospects of peace
in the Middle East as well as a threat to intemational
peace and security,
l. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To resume contacts with all the parties to the
conflict and the Co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference
on the Middle East, in accordance with bis initiative
of 1 April 1976, in preparation for the carly convening
of the Peace Conference on the Middle East;
( b) To submit a report to the Security Council
on the results of his contacts and on the situation in
the Middle East not later than 1 March 1977;
45 A/31/270-S/12210. For the printed text, see Offecial Rec-

ords of the Security Council, Thirty-first Y ear, Supplement
for October, November and December 1976.
46
f\./31/270-S/12210, para. 8. For the printed text, see
Offeczal Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement far October, November and December 1976.

23

2. Calls for thc early convening of the Pcace Conference on the Middle East, under the auspiccs of the
United Nations and the co-chairmanship of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America, not later than the end of March 1977;
3. Requests thc Security Countil to convene subsequent to thc submission by the Secretary-General of
the report referred to in paragraph 1 ( b) above, in
order to consider the situation in thc area in the light
of that report and to promote the process towards the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the area;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to inform
the Co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference on the
Middle East of thc prcsent resolution.
95 th plenary meeting
9 December 1976
31/63.

Third united Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea 47

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973, 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974
and 3483 (XXX) of 12 December 1975,
Noting the letter dated 20 September 1976 from the
President of the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea to the President of the General
Assembly 48 regarding the decisions reached at the fifth
session of the Conference, held in New York from
2 August to 17 September 1976,
Having considered the decision of the Conference, as
conveyed in the letter of its President, that its sixth
session should be convened in New York on 23 May
1977 for a period of seven weeks, with a possible extension to eight weeks should the Conference so decide,
Bearing in mind the request of the Conference, referred to in the letter from its President, that the Secretary-General should provide the necessary facilities for
prívate consultations between sessions among Governments and delegations,
Taking into account the recommendation made by
the Conference that the General Assembly should study
measures to ensure stability and continuity for the secretariat personnel recruited far the Conference,
1. Approves the convening of the sixth session of
the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea in New York for the period from 23 May
to 8 July 1977, with a possible extension to 15 July
should the Conference so decide;
2. Reiterates its decision at its thirtieth session49
to accord priority to the Conference in relation to other
United Nations activities, except those of organs established by the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to make available, as appropriate, the necessary facilities for private
consultations between sessions among Governments and
delegations;
. 4. Further authorizes the Secretary-General to contmue to make the necessary arrangements originally
providcd under paragraph 9 of General Assembly
47

See also sect. X.B.6 below, decision 31/407.

48 Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Ses-

sion, Annex~s, agenda item 30, document A/31/225.
49 Resolution 3483 (XXX), para. 2.

24

General Assemhly-Thirty-first Session

resolution 3067 (XXVIII) for the efficient and continuous servicing of the Conference in 1977 and of
subsequent activities as may be decidcd upon by the
Conference, as well as to take appropriate measures to
ensure stability and continuity for the secretariat personnel recruited for the Conference;
5. Recalls, in this connexion, that it noted in paragraph 4 of its resolution 3334 (XXIX) the decision of
the Conference to accept the invitation of the Govemment of Venezuela to meet at Caracas at an appropriate
date for the purpose of signing the Final Act and related instruments adopted by the Conference and authorized the Secretary-General to make the necessary
arrangements to that end.
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1975

Bearing in mind that Bolívar envisaged a Latin
American region of free and brotherly countries united
by common ideals, a dream which makes him the precur~or of the integration of that region,
Recognizing that the Treaty of Perpetua! Union,
League and Confederation, signed in Panama on 15 July
1826, reflects a universalist spirit which is currently
embodied by the United Nations, in that it reaffirms
the sovereignty and independence of States and their
intention "to secure to themselves from this time forward the cnjoyment of unalterable peacc, and to promote in this behalf better harmony and good understanding as well between the countries, citizens and
rnbjects, respectively, as with the other Powers with
which they should maintain or enter into friendly relations" ,53

31/104.

Recalling that Simón Bolívar referred on several occasi ons to the need for a possible opening of a canal
in Panama, which "will shorten distances throughout
the world, strengthen commercial ties" 54 between the
continents and promote the exchange of projects "from
the four corners of the globe",M

Admission of thc lndependent State of
Western Samoa to membership in the
Unitecl Natiom,

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 1 December 1976 that the Independent State
of Western Samoa should be admitted to membership
in the United Nations,11º
Having considered the application for membership
of the Independent State of Western Samoa, 51
Decides to admit the Independent State of Western
Samoa to membership in the United Nations.
100th plenary meeting
15 December 1976
31/142. One hundred ami fifticth anniversary
of the Amphictyonic Conµ;ress of Panama

The General Assembly,
Having decided to hold a special commemorative
plenary meeting to pay a tribute to Simón Bolívar, the
Liberator, on the occasion of the one hundred and
fiftieth anniversary of the Amphictyonic Congress of
Panama, which met on 22 June 1826,
Considering that the main objective of that Congress
was to constitute an assembly of confederated countries
which should establish the legal foundations for the
relations between the American Republics and all the
nations of the world, and should serve as "a council
during periods of great conflicts, to be appealed to in
the event of common danger, and to be a faithful interpreter of public treaties when difficulties arise, in brief,
to concíliate all our dífferences" ,52 concepts which form
the basis of the international law of the American countries and are thus the direct predecessors of the Covenant of the League of N ations and the Charter of
the United Nations,
50 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 26, document A/31/369.
5 1 A/31 /364-S/ 12245. For the printed text, see Ofjicial Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Y ear, Supp!ement
for October, November and December 1976.
52 Simón Bolívar, Lima, 7 December 1824. For the text,
see Selected Writings of Bolívar, vol. JI, Vicente Lecuna,
comp., Harold A. Bierck, Jr., ed. (New York, The Colonial
Press Inc., 1951), p. 457.

1. Pays a tribute to Simón Bolívar, the Liberator,
as a promoter of Latin American integration and as a
builder of constructive plans for international organization on a continental and wor!d-wide scalc and, in
this connexion, decides to place a commemorative
plaque in the United Nations Headquarters building
as a permanent tribute to his memory;
2. Recognizes that the Amphictyonic Congress of
Panama represents the most outstanding and audacious
unionist experiment at the international leve! in the
nineteenth century, with oecumenical features which
anticípate and coincide with the ohjectives of the United
Nations system;
3. Expresses the hope that the ideal of Bolívar will
inspire the establishment of a more just intcrnational
order of respect for law, devoted to the maintenance of
pcace, the preservatíon of democratic principles, the
promotion of economic and social progress, and the
freedom of all peoples;
4. Formulates the wish for a successful outcome of
the negotiations for the conclusion of a new treaty on
the Panama Canal, which will eliminate the causes of
conflict between thc Republic of Panama and the United
States of America, in accordance with the Declaration
of Principies, signed by the parties concerned on 7 February 197 4, where it is stated that the Panamanian
territory of which the Panama Canal is a part shall be
returned promptly to the jurisdiction of the Republic
of Panama and that the Republic of Panama "will assume total responsibility for the operation of the Canal
upnn the termination of the treaty";" 5
5 :1 Article 2 of the Treaty of Perpetua! Union, League and
Confederation, Panama, 15 July 1826. For the text, see
lnternational Confcrences of American States, 1889-1928,
James Brown, ed. (New York, Oxford University Press, 1931),
p. XXV.
54 Simón Bolívar, "Reply of a South American to a gentleman of this Tsland [Jamaica]", Kingston, 6 September 1815.
Por the text, see Selected Writings of Bolivar, vol. I, Vicente
Lecuna, comp., Harold A. Bierck, Jr., ed. (New York, The
Colonial Press Tnc., 1951), p. 119.
5 :; Eight-point agreement signed in Panama City on 7 February 1974 by Mr. Juan Antonio Tack, Minister for Externa!
Relations of the Republic of Panama, and by Mr. Henry
Kissinger, Secretary of State of the United States of America.
For the text, see United States Department of State Bulletin,
vol. LXV, No. 1809, 25 February 1974, pp. 184 and 185.
