UNITED

NATIONS

tll
MEETING:

14 DECEMBER

1976

CONTENTS
PLlgC

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1979)

Welcome

to Ml .. Jacques Leprette,

AdOptiOll

Of

the

;kgenda

.....................................
representative

of France

1
...............

1

................................................

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/ 12253 and A&I. 1). . . . . . . . . , . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . .

1

S/PV. 1979

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . ..) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemot~ts of the O#ki~11 Records ctf rlre Security Corl~rcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsc~/ution~ crud
Ikisians
of the Security
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1979th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 14 December 1976, at 4 p.in.
President:

Mr. Ion DATCU

(Romania).

Present: The representatives of the following States;
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l979)
1. Adoption

2.

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-Genera1 on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/12253 and
Add. 1)

1. The PRESIDENT
(interprc’trrtion
,fron~ Fre~lch):
Before coming to the item on the agenda, I should like
to perform an agreeable duty at this meeting of the
Security Council. I should like to extend a warm welcome to the new representative of France, Mr. Jacques Leprette. I wish him every success in his important work in the service of his country, France,
here in the United Nations. I should like to assure
him of our friendship and our wish to co-operate
actively with him in promoting together the purposes
of the United Nations. We are convinced that
ivlr. Leprette, a distinguished diplomat, will make an
outstanding contribution
to our work, as did his
brilliant predecessors, the last of whom, Mr. de Guiringaud, now occupies the important post of Minister
for Foreign Affairs.
Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/12253 and Add-l)
The

3. I therefore propose in accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, as well as the usual
practice of the Council, and if there are no objections,
to invite the Cyprus delegation to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

of the agenda

Welcome to Mr. Jacques Leprette,
representative of France

2.

requests to be invited to participate in the Security
Council’s discussion and indicates the composition
of the delegation which he heads,

PRESIDENT

(intL’I’pI’CtIItiO/l

,fhil

F~~~~tcah):

I have received a letter dated I3 December 1976 from
the Mieisterfor Foreign Affairs of Cyprus, in which he

4. The PRESIDENT
(i/ltP/.pl’Ct~ltiO/l ,fiwu F~CJIIC$):
The representatives of Turkey and Greece have also
addressed letters to me in which they request to be
invited to participate in the Council’s discussions
without the right to vote, pursuant to the relevant
provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of
procedure of the Council.
5. I therefore propose, in accordance with the usual
practice and with the consent of the Council, and if
there are no objections, to invite the representatives
of Turkey and Greece to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.

The PRESIDENT
(i,Itrrp,‘ctrrtic,n
jiwr
F~/rdfJ:
I should like now to remind the Council that, in the
course of consultations which took place yesterday.
members of the Council agreed that. under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure, the Council would
invite Mr. Vedat A. Celik. If I hear no objections. I
shall take it that the Council decides to invite
Mr. Celik, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
6.

7.

The

PRESIDENT

[int~l/prctlrtio,r

jhr/

E‘W//t’ll):

At the appropriate time, 1 shall request Mr. Celik
to take a place at the Council table to make his

statement.
8, The Security Council will now consider the item on
its agenda.

difficulties of UNFICYP.
I and my colleagues in the
Secretariat will do our best to find ways of improving
the present critical financial situation. I would be grateful for the co-operation of the members of the Council
in solving this problem. It involves both the collective
responsibility of the Organization for the maintenance
of international peace and security and the heavy
burden which falls, in present circumstances, upon a
small number of States.

9. I should like to draw attention to the report of the
Secretary-General, which was distributed last Friday.
Today the Secretary-General
has submitted an
addendum to his report, which has just been circulated
to the members of the Council.
10. As members are aware, the Council has before it
the text of a draft resolution arrived at during the
course of broad consultations in which all members of
the Council participated [S//22.56]. In the course of
consultations which were held this afternoon before
the beginning of the meeting, it was agreed that the
Council would vote on that draft resolution before
hearing statements.

16. I hope that I shall be in a position to report
progress to the Council on those and other aspects of
the Cyprus problem in the coming year.
17. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
I thank the Secretary-General for
statement.

1I. If I hear no objections, I therefore propose to
‘put the draft resolution to the vote immediately.

from French):

that important

18. The first speaker is the Foreign
Cyprus, on whom I now call.

Minister

of

19. Mr. CHRISTOPHIDES
(Cyprus): Mr. President,
may I at the outset offer you my warm congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. Your wide experience and your diplomatic
skill, as well as your deep knowledge of United
Nations matters, augur well for a successful outcome
of this debate. My delegation and I take particular
pleasure in seeing you in the Chair, since you are the
representative of a country with which Cyprus
maintains very friendly relations.

12. The PRESIDENT
(inte/‘pretrrtion front French):
I should like first to call on the Secretary-General,
who has expressed the desire to make a statement.
13. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The Security
Council has just adopted a resolution extending once
again the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP).
The resolution also,
among other things, requests the Secretary-General to
continue the mission of good offices entrusted to him
by paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 367
(1975). I wish to assure the Council that I shall do my
utmost to give effect to its decisions.

20. I wish also to express to Mr. Kurt Waldheim,
on behalf of the Government of Cyprus and on my own
behalf, sincere congratulations on his well-deserved
reappointment as Secretary-General
of the United
Nations and to express to him again our deep
appreciation for his untiring efforts in the search for a
just and lasting solution of the Cyprus problem. In
this respect, I acknowledge also the significant contribution of Under-Secretaries-General
Roberto Guyer
and Brian Urquhart and their collaborators
in the
Secretariat.

14. In particular, I shall continue my efforts to
bring about a resumption of the negotiations between
the representatives of the two Cypriot communities
at an early date. I and my Special Representative
will be making contact with the parties concerned with
a view to ensuring that such negotiations will be
meaningful and will concern themselves with the basic
issues of the Cyprus problem. As I said in my report,
I continue to believe that the best hope of achieving
a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem
is through negotiations between the representatives
of the two communities. I am also convinced that
if the present impasse is prolonged, the basic issues
will inevitably become more and more intractable.
I shall, of course, keep the Council informed on my
efforts in this regard.

21. May I say also how grateful we are to the
Special Representative
of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Perez de Cuillar, for the very efficient, indeed
exemplary, manner in which he carries out his onerous
and delicate responsibilities.
On the occasion of
Lieutenant-General D. Prem Chand’s relinquishing his
duties as Commander of the Force, duties which he
has carried out for the past seven years with great
devotion and conspicuous ability, I wish on behalf of
my Government and the people of Cyprus to pay the
highest tribute to him. May I at the same time congratulate General James Joseph Quinn of Ireland on
his appointment as the new Commander of UNFICYP.
We wish him every success and, for our part, we
pledge our full co-operation as he carries out his
difficult task. To the Governments which, through
their voluntary contributions in personnel and funds,
enable UNFICYP to continue its peace-keeping role,

15. I have already mentioned my concern over the
financial situation of UNFIC!YP, both in my report
and in consultations with the members of the Security
Council. I wish here to stress once again the urgent
necessity of making progress in solving the financial
2

Cypriot refugees who were uprooted in the course of
the invasion in 1974 and whom the invader continues
to prevent by force from returning to their homes
despite the repeated calls for’ their safe return in
United Nations resolutions. The number of those
expelled is daily increasing, and it is now abundantly
clear and evident even to those who might have had
some doubts as to the true intentions of Ankara that
all Greek Cypriots will soon be uprooted from the
occupied area.

as well as to the officers and men serving in the field,
we express once again our gratitude.
22. The Security Council has just decided to renew
the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force established, with the consent of the Government
of Cyprus, pursuant to Council resolution 186 (1964).
It took that decision in the light of the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Obviously, this subject cannot be
considered in isolation from the general situation
prevailing in Cyprus, which, as is clearly shown in
the report, continues to be grim and potentially
explosive, thereby constituting-as
was confirmed
only recently by the General Assembly in its resolution
31/12 of 12 November 1976-a danger to international
peace and security.

27. Referring to the subject of expulsions,
the
Secretary-General
observes in paragraph 72 of his
report:
“The situation of Greek Cypriots in the north i.4 a
matter of special concern. The greater part of those
Greek Cypriots have now left for the south for the
stated purpose of seeking security and better living
conditions,
and this development
has further
heightened tension. It had originally been expected
that this problem would be considerably alleviated
by the agreement reached in this regard at the third
round of the Vienna talks on 2 August 1975 [,FL’~
S//17RY] and, in particular,
by the granting to
UNFICYP
of free and normal access to Greek
Cypriot habitations in the area. Regrettably, it has
not been possible to implement
that agreement
adequately and the exodus of Greek Cypriots from
the north continues.”

23. In my statement before the Council on 11 June
1976 [!925th n~c~ti/tg], I drew the Council’s attention
to the continuing tragedy of the people of Cyprus, as a
result of the Turkish aggression and occupation, and
to certain ominous
developments
which were
aggravating the situation and which, if they continued
unchecked, could lead to the worsening of the situation,
thus endangering peace in the island and in Ihe sensitive
Eastern Mediterranean region.
24. Those developments were the deliberate creation
of fit/s mwmpli.v
by Turkey, which, as a prelude
to partition, had embarked on a process of systematically expelling the remaining Greek Cypriots from the
occupied area and of colonizing that area by the
importation of tens of thousands of mainland Turks,
in an obvious attempt to change, the demographic
composition of Cyprus. Another set of problems,
equally disturbing, arose from the obstacles placed
by the Turkish occupation army in the way of the
Force carrying out its mission in the occupied part of
the island.

28. As the Secretary-General
observes, the exodus
-as it is called in the report-of
the Greek Cypriots
becomes unavoidable “for the. . . pufpose of seeking
security and better living conditions”.
Being insecure, deprived of medical care, educational facilities and freedom of movement, and living in an
atmosphere of fear and intimidation,
the only option
left to them is exodus. The Turkish Cypriot leadership calls this forced exodus “voluntary departure”,
and pieces bf paper signed by those unfortunate
people with trembling
hands are being called
“voluntary
applications”
in an effort to mislead the
world. The reply to this baseless contention is given
by the Secretary-Genera1 in paragraph 3 1 of his report:

25. From the report of the Secretary-General,
which
is before us, it is abundantly clear that there has
been no improvement in the situation in Cyprus since
lase June. On the contrary, there has been a turn for
the worse with regard both to expulsions and* the
colonization of the occupied area .and to the process
of negotiation and the freedom .of movement of the
United Nations Force. A new and very disturbing
development, which is extensively dkalt with in the
Secretary-General’s report, is the effort of Ankara to
interfere with the mission of the United Nations Force
and through intimidation,
blackmail and the exercise
of force to change rhe s&&s y~lo in the buffer areas
between the military lines.

“The
‘Cypriot

agreed procedure for screening Greek
applicants for tranfer to the south [see
S/i2031 of 31 Murch 1976, pmt. 51 has not been
implemented
effectively. In most cases, UNFICYP
has not been able to establish whether the Greek
Cypriots concerned wanted to leave the north, as had
been agreed when the matter was discussed at the
Cyprus talks in Vienna in August 1975.”
29. The brazen violation by the Turkish side of the
humanitarian
agreement of 2 August 1975, to which
the Secretary-General
repeatedly makes reference in
his report, is yet further clear evidence of Ankara’s
duplicity and of its true intentions towards the Greek
Cypriots living in the occupied area. Ankara, having
secured the implementation
of those provisions of

26. The expulsions of the Greek Cypriots from the
occupied area haxe,assumed the dimensions of a human
drama, Living under constant threats, and being
subjected daily to all kinds of deprivations, physical
violence and psychological brutality, these Greek
Cypriots are forced to abandon their ancestral homes
and properties and to join the more than 200,000 Greek
3

attitude of negativeness, procrastination
promises.

the agreement which were to its advantage, not only
ignores the rest of them but also blatantly violates them.
Instead of giving every facility to the Greek Cypriots
in the occupied area for a normal life, as provided
for in the agreement, Ankara and its instruments in
Cyprus facilitate their departure by applying a
combination
of oppressive tactics, harassment an
brute force. Also, instead of allowing UNFICYP
freedom of movement in the Greek Cypriot villages,
as agreed at Vienna, Ankara and its agents have further
restricted the movement of the Force and its contacts
with the Greek Cypriots in the occupied area.

and broken

34. More than 20 months have elapsed since the
adoption of Council resolution 367 (1975), which established the process of the talks and gave to the
Secretary-General his mandate. There have been five
rounds of talks in Vienna and New York under the
auspices and direction of the Secretary-General.
Yet, for one reason or another, with one excuse or
another, under the shield of one pretext or another,
the end result remains that the Turkish side, almost
two and a half years after the invasion of Cyprus
and more than 20 months after it solemnly undertook to participate in meaningful negotiations, has
managed to evade giving any indication whatsoever
of its intentions on the all-important
aspect of the
Cyprus problem, that of territory. Even the solemn
commitment to present concrete proposals in respect
of territory, undertaken at the fifth round of the
intercommunal talks, in February 1976, by the TurkishCypriot negotiator, has not been honoured to this date.

30. The Secretary-General’s categorical statements.
and the facts to which I have referred convincingly
disprove the Turkish allegations that the Greek
Cypriots leave the north of their own free will. If,
however, the Turkish side were to persist in its
unfounded allegations, the need for the Security Council to investigate this intolerable state of affairs for
itself would become self-evident. My Government
declares its readiness to co-operate with any investigative committee which the Council might wish to send
to Cyprus with a view to establishing whether the
accelerated exodus, as it has been called, of the
Greek Cypriots from the occupied area is due to
various forms of unbearable pressure and intimidation
practised by the occupation forces and the colonizers
from Turkey, or whether the Greek Cypriots opt to
leave their ancestral homes and properties of their
own free will, as Turkey wants us to believe.

35. ‘The Turkish attitude in the talks proves beyond
any reasonable doubt that Ankara, which dictates to
the Turkish Cypriot negotiator his course of action,
is not genuinely interested in fillding a solution through
the talks. The Turkish side simply wishes to seem to
go through the motions of negotiating; it is interested
in preserving an empty shell at the negotiating process, to be used as a shield against any pressure by
world opinion for the implementation
of the United
Nations resolutions on Cyprus as the means for the
solution of the problem or against friendly persuasion
from third parties for conciliation and flexibility-and
this shield has so far served the Turkish side well in
misleading well-meaning third parties.

31. The question of expulsions is, as the SecretaryGeneral says in paragraph 28 of his report, “a matter of
grave concern”. Therefore, establishing the true facts
in this respect becomes imperative and urgent. Thus
I address myself to the representative of Turkey
and invite him to declare in turn that the occupation
forces of Turkey will co-operate with such a committee of the Council. If Turkey has nothing to hide,
he should have so difficulty in giving such an undertaking. Nor can he claim that the co-operation of
Turkey is not reqitired, for it is well known that in the
occupied north of Cyprus, it is Ankara that commands.

36. We have noted with interest the SecretaryGeneral’s observations in paragraphs 75 and 76 on
the question of the intercommunal
talks. We share
the Secretary-General’s view that the intercommunal
talks under his auspices and personal direction
continue to be the most appropriate procedure, of those
so far made available, for finding a just and lasting
solution to the Cyprus problem, in accordance with the
United Nations resolutions. The talks, however,
as the Secretary-General points out, must be meaningful and productive. This is what the United Nations
resolutions call for. This is what common sense
requires. This is what reality dictates. However,
no meaningful talks can be held unless the two sides
are willing to reach a just agreement through negotiations; unless both sides have the political ability to
take the right decisions for a settlement; unless both
sides view the procedure of the talks as a means to
an end and not an end in itself; and unless both sides
adhere to the agreements reached at’all previous rounds
of talks, a point well emphasized both by the
Secretary-General in his report of 5 June 1976
[S//2093] and by the Security Council in its resolution391 (1976) and in the resolution that has just been
adopted.

32. The continuing expulsions and the refusal of
Turkey to allow the return of the more than 200,000
refugees to their homes in violation of the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949’ and the United Nations
resolutions on Cyprus, coupled with the abhorrent
policy of colonization pursued by Ankara, to which
reference is made in paragraph 30 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, have no other purpose than to alter
the age-long demographic composition of Cyprus.
These unilateral actions of Turkey, illegally perpetrated, serve to promote its partitionist plans and aim
at the destruction of Cyprus as an independent,
sovereign and territorially integral State.
33. It is within the framework of this constant
objective of Ankara that one should view the attitude
of the Turkish side at the negotiating table-an
4

37. The same defiance as that which Ankara has
been showing towards the United Nations resolutions
it is now demonstrating towards the United Nations
Force by impeding its freedom of movement and by
endangering the lives of its men. The SecretaryGeneral speaks eloquently
on these issues in
paragraph 16 of his report: “On three occasions,
shots have been fired in the direction of UNFICYP
troops by members of the Turkish forces”. Again,
in paragraph 24 the report states:

“it is an essential element of the cease-fire that
neither side can exercise authority or jurisdiction
beyond its own forward military lines or make any
military moves beyond those lines. It follows that, in
the area between the lines, the status qrro (including
innocent civilian activities and the exercise of property rights) is maintained, without prejudice to an
eventual political settlement concerning the disposition of the area.”
In this respect, the Government of Cyprus justifiably
expects that UNFICYP
will continue to uphold that
principle.

“On 10 September, 36 Turkish-Cypriot
farmers
moved south, attempted to work land previously
under Greek-Cypriot
cultivation
and eventually
attempted to collect Greek-Cypriot fruit crops. That
led to two scuffles betwen UNFICYP
troops and the
Turkish-Cypriot
farmers, and some injuries were
sustained by both sides; following the second
scuffle, Turkish troops in Avlona fired some 50 shots
over the heads of the UNFICYP
troops.”

40. Ankara’s behaviour towards UNFICYP,
as
described in the Secretary-General’s
report, is aimed
at turning the role of the Force into that of a passive
observer of its arbitrariness, a role which, 1 am certain,
is contrary to the position of the Council and that of
the UNFICYP Command. It is, therefore, our view that
matters of this nature directly and closely connected
with the mission and functions of the Force cannot be
ignored by the Council or considered unrelated to the
renewal of the mandate.

Further, in paragraph 28, the report states: “UNFICYP
access to Greek-Cypriot habitations and freedom of
movement in the area remain restricted”.
Again, in
paragraph 42, one reads:

41. My Government is fully cognizant and highly
apprecialive of the useful, and indeed essential, role
being played by UNFICYP
in the cause of peace in
Cyprus and-this should also be remembered-in
the
interest of international peace in the eastern Mediterranean region. We have therefore consented to the
renewal of the mandate of the Force for anothet
six-month period, as suggested by the SecretaryGeneral. We have done so on the understanding that
such renewal carries with it the implication
that
UNFICYP
is thereby authorized to take all steps
necessary for the due exercise of its functions to the
full extent required under its mandate. This includes
the effective protection of the buffer zone and the
discharge of the role assigned to UNFICYP
undet
the Vienna humanitarian agreement of 2 August 1975
for the protection and well-being of the indigenous
Greek Cypriots in the occupied area. It is our firm
conviction that the Council itself would wish to
strengthen the hand of [he SecreLary-General
in
direcling
UNFICYP
operations in those specific
respects indicated in the report where the Force
had met with resistance or encountered difficulties.
since it is to the Council that the Secretary-General
can turn for support and guidance *hen encountering
insuperable obstacles.

“UNFICYPfreedom
of movement in the northern
part of Cyprus continues to be restricted and is
limited to access to UNFICYP
camps and liaison
posts in the north, use of the new Famagusta Road
by UNFICYP vehicles to a limited extent, and daily
resupply convoys to the north, which are restricted
as to number of vechicles and are escorted by
Turkish Cypriots. Similar restrictions apply to
UNCIVPOL
teams distributing social welfare payments to the Greek Cypriots in some 13 villages in
the Karpas. Weekly visits to Greek Cypriots
remaining in’the Kyrenia area are carried out by
UNFICYP
liaison teams, and these are likewise
accompanied by Turkish Cypriot police, who are
present during any encounters with the villagers.”
38. Another matter of grave concern to my Government is that of the buffer areas. This problem is
extensively covered in paragraphs 19 to 26 of the
Secretary-General’s
report and is indicative
of
Ankara’s arbitrariness and greediness. After keeping
under its aggressive occupation 40 per cent of the
territory of the Republic in continuing violation of the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, Ankara is now trying to seize more lands
belonging to and cultivated by the Greek Cypriots
who try to make a living out of what has been left to
them by the invader.

42. I now wish to refer to an eminently humanitarian
issue that keeps in anguish a large segment of the
population of my country. I speak of a very painful
aspect of the Cyprus tragedy-that
or missing persons.
In so doing. 1 do not intend to enter into the question
of how many of those missing persons are still
nlive, nor do I wish to make recriminations 0~ allusions
or to try lo apportion blame concerning the events
which led lo the creation, among other unfortunate
sitilations, of the one to which I am now referring.
My concern is purely humanitarian.

39. The arbitrary and provocative Turkish behaviour
in these areas could lead to serious consequences
not only for peace in Cyprus but also for one of the
cardinal principles on which the peace-keeping
operations of the United Nations are based. My
Government,
therefore, fully shares the view
expressed in this respect in paragraph 19 of the
Secretary-General’s report, which reads:
5

controlled by the Government of Cyprus and in those
controlled by the Turkish army, as well as in Turkey,
where many Cypriots were transported following the
invasion of 1974.

43. It may be recalled that in its resolution 3450
(XXX) the Genera1 Assembly requested the SecretaryGeneral to “exert every effort, in close co-operation
with the International
Committee of the Red Cross,
to assist in tracing and accounting for persons
missing.. . in Cyprus”. Yet, the Secretary-Genera1
observes in paragraph 74 of his report that

49. The prolongation of the Cyprus crisis as a result
of the contemptuous disregard shown by Turkey
towards United Nations resolutions should be as
much a source of serious concern for the Council as
it is for the people of Cyprus, for the situation in
Cyprus and its implications, which extend beyond the
confines of Cyprus and the suffering of its people,
endanger international peace and security and at the
same time pose a serious challenge to the effectiveness
of the Organization. I believe that the point has been
reached when further passive toleration of the Turkish
military occupation and of gross interference in the
internal affairs of Cyprus is unacceptable and seriously
prejudices the whole edifice of international law and
order.

“is is a matter of deep concern that despite the
continued efforts of my Special Representative and
of the International
Red Cross, there has been
no progress so far in making arrangements to trace
persons missing since the events of 1974, or discovering their burial places.”
44. I wish to assure members of the Council that
my Government offered its full co-operation to the
Secretary-General
in the fulfilment
of the task
entrusted to him under the aforementioned resolution.
I regret to say, however, that the response of the
Turkish side, even on this purely humanitarian issue,
has been completely negative. Today, two and a half
years after the cessation of active hostilities and
one year after the adoption of resolution 3450 (XXX),
we are still faced with the living drama of relatives
of the missing persons seeking information about
their loved ones.

50. As is known, the Genera1 Assembly, on
12 November, conscious of its responsibilities under
the Charter, by an overwhelming majority adopted
resolution 31/12, by which it reaffirmed its resolutions
3212 (XXIX) and 3395 (XXX), demanded their urgent
implementation
and expressed the hope that the
Security Council would consider appropriate steps for
the implementation of its own resolution 365 (1974),
by which it had endorsed Genera1 Assembly resolulion
3212 (XXIX). I wish to draw the attention of the
Council to this latest resolution of the Assembly and
to state that the people of Cyprus, and indeed the
world commu;ity,
consider that they are entitled to
expect that the Council will discharge to the full its
responsibilities under the Charter in this regard, for it
remains our conviction that the most appropriate and
effective way to a peaceful, just and lasting solution
of the Cyprus problem is through the effective
implementation
of the relevant United Nations
resolutions.

45. I do not think that anyone can fail to recognize
the basic human need of families to be informed
about missing relatives. And who can fail to agree
that all evidence should be unearthed so that the
fate of each missing person may be established?
For it would be better for the relatives to know the
truth-the whole truth, bitter though it might be-and
learn to live with it than to remain anguished in
uncertainty and doubt. I am certain that no one
could argue against this line of reasoning and, indeed,
I think that no one could find it easy to do so, for
human suffering knows no frontier or nationality.
46. The Secretary-General, in his report of30 October
of this year [S/1222.?], stated that the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was willing to
designate members of an investigatory body for the
tracing of those missing or the discovery of their
burial places, provided that it was requested to do so
by both parties and that such body be given full
co-operation.

51. We trust, therefore, that the Security Council will
soon have the opportunity to give serious consideration lo taking effective measures for the implementation of its own mandatory resolution, in accordance
with the Charter and the Council’s own responsibilities
and self-respect.
52. The PRESIDENT
(i77tr~7p/.eftrrion
jk~77
Frcnc*lz):
The next speaker is Mr. Celik, whom I invite to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

47. I wish to reiterate on behalf of my Government
its solemn pledge of full and unconditional co-operation with such an investigatory body, and I invite the
representative of Turkey, in the name of humanenesb,
to come forward and pledge his Government’s
co-operation in this specific, purely humanitarian
endeavour.

53. Mr. CELIK: Mr. President, I should like to thank
you and each and every member of the Security
Council for having given me the opportunity to address
the Council and to present the Turkish viewpoint
on the current state of the Cyprus conflict. I should
like to thank you, too, for the great effort and
diplomatic skill you have displayed during the past
week to ensure the extension of the mandate, and
agreement on the resolution that has just been adopted.

48. I should like to add that this body should be
entrusted with the investigation of all cases submitted
to it by all sides and that it should be allowed the
required freedom of mocement, both in the areas
6

54. .Allow me also to express, on behalf of theTurkish
Cypriot communtiy, our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his dedicated and
tireless efforts in the search for a just and lasting
solution of the Cyprus problem and to congratulate
him once more on his reappointment for a second
term.

60. I should also like, since this is the first opportunity I have had to address the United Nations
since the adoption of General Assembly resolution
31112 on 12 November 1976, to comment on that
resolution.
As is well known, when the Cyprus
problem was debated at full length in the General
Assembly only a month ago, one of the two principal
parties to the Cyprus dispute, the Turkish-Cypriot
community, was unfortunately not accorded an equal
or adequate opportunity to participate in that debate.
I should like to take this opportunity, therefore, to
make a few comments on the latest resolution adopted
by the Assembly in connexion with the Cyprus question
and to state briefly why that resolution is not acceptable to the Turkish Cypriot side in its entirety.

55. We are also grateful to Mr. Javier Perez de
Cuellar, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Cyprus, and to the staff of the Secretariat
for the exemplary, impartial and efficient mannet
in which they have discharged their important duties.
I should like to take this opportunity also to express
our gratitude to Lieutenant-General
D. Prem Chand,
the outgoing Commander of UNFICYP,
and pay
tribute to him for the efficient and impartial mannet
in which he has carried out his difficult duty for the
last seven years. I take this opportunity also to welcome the new Force Commander, Major-General
James J. Quinn, and to assure him of our fullest
co-operation in the difficult task that lies ahead of him.
Finally, I should like to express appreciation to all
the officers and men of UNFICYP for their peacekeeping efforts, as well as to all those countries
that have generously contributed men and funds to the
Force in Cyprus.

61. I shall state at the outset, however, that we.do
not wish to appear as a small communtiy or a little
federated State which is trying to defy the United
Nations. On the contrary, we have great respect for
the Organization and the resolutions adopted by it.
We are in full agreement with the main principles
outlined in the United Nations resolutions for a just
and lasting solution of the Cyprus problem. We believe
that Cyprus must remain an independent, sovereign
and non-aligned State. We support the intercommunal
talks and are convinced that they are indeed the
best and only method for finding a permanent solution
to the dispute. Our quarrel, therefore, is not with the
United Nations but with the Makarios Administration.

56. Before I start on my statement, I would like to
comment on the resolution just adopted.

62. Nevertheless, we are unable to accept the latest
resolution of the General Assembly.for the following
reasons.

57. Besides other points which we might justifiably
comment upon, the resolution makes reference to
“the Government of Cyprus”, a non-existent entity,
and therefore, is unacceptable to us in toto. As is
well known, there is no Government in Cyprus,
either c/e fiwo or lie ,&re, representing the whole of
the island or administering control over it. In fact,
there are two distinct administrati,ons+hat
of the
Turkish Cypriot community in the north, and that
of the Greek Cypriot community in the south. A
misleading reference, therefore, to a “Government
of
Cyprus” is not acceptable to us.

63. First, the Turkish Cypriot community was denied
participation
on an equal footing with the Greek
Cypriot community at the debate. This is a point to
which we take strong exception. In view of the fact
that there is’no central authority in Cyprus authorized
to sneak for and act on behalf of Cyprus as a whole;
considering thal the Turkish community of Cyprus is
an equal partner and co-founder of the Cyprus Republic; and, furthermore, bearing in mind the fact that
we are one of the two main parties to the Cyprus
dispute, we consider that we should be accorded an
equal opportunity to participate fully, whenever and
wherever the Cyprus question is debated. Unfortunately, that opportunity was denied us at the thirtyfirst session of the Assembly. In the circumstances,
the Turkish Cypriot community cannot be reasonably
expected to associate itself with a resolution adopted
in its absence.

58. I have been instructed, however, by Mr. Denktas, President of the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus, who had been officially consulted on the
matter through the Special Representative
of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Perez de Cuellar to convey
his approval for. the extension of the mandate of
UNFICYP for another six months. Needless to say,
the Turkish Cypriot side is, as always, ready and
willing to resume mtercommunal dialogue.

64. Secondly, we regard the General Assembly
resolution as being seriously outdated and, therefore,
unrealistic. It fails to take into account significant
developments which have occurred since the adoption
of the earlier resolutions of the Assembly; more
specifically,
it completely
disregards agreements
actually reached at Vienna and subsequently implemented in Cyprus.

59. We express full support for, and our readiness
to co-operate with, UNFICYP,
and hope that the
pro&s-verbal which has been negotiated and is ready
for signature will become final as early as possible,
thus removing any difficulty that might exist at present
regarding the stationing, functioning and deployment
of UNFICYP in the north.
7

ever, to the day when there will be no need for any
forces of any kind on the island.

65. Thirdly and finally, we believe that in the context
of the question of Cyprus, the resolutions of the
Assembly should not attempt to influence or prejudge
the deliberations of the Security Council as paragraph 5
of that resolution purports to do.

70. In view of the foregoing, the Turkish Cypriot
side considers certain aspects of resolution 31/12 to
be totally unrelated to the realities in Cyprus and,
therefore, unacceptable.

66. The undeniable fact is that, although the Greek
Cypriot side may have reason to conceal it, there
has been considerable progress on certain aspects
of the Cyprus problem, while others have been virtually
settled.

71. At this point I should like to comment on a few
of the issues raised by Mr. Christophides in the statement just made by him.
72. The question of missing persons is a humanitarian
issue which has unfortunately been the target of
Greek Cypriot exploitation for propaganda purposes.
The problem of missing persons is common to the two
communities. Indeed, as far as the Turkish Cypriot
community is concerned, the problem first arose after
the Greek Cypriot onslaught against the Turkish
Cypriot community in December 1963. During that
month and the years of Greek Cypriot oppression
that followed it, many Turks were indiscriminately
abducted from their places of work, from roads and
even from hospitals. In paragraph 117 of the SecretnryGeneral’s report of 11 March 1965 [S/h228] and
paragraph 76 of his report of 10 June 1966 to the
Security Council [S/73.50] confirm that over 200 TLlrkish Cypriots were missing following the events of
1963. Scores of letters written at the time by Mr, Denkta$ to Mr. Clerides about the fate or whereabouts of
those people remain unanswered to this date.

67. That is true of the question of refugees, more
particularly the recurrent refugee problem faced by the
Turkish Cypriot community in the past, which has been
in effect settled in accordance with the agreement for
a voluntary exchange of populations reached at the
.third round of the Vienna talks [SCP S/11789 qf
5 Augu.u 197.51.The Turkish Cypriots are now living in
safety and security in the north: similarly, the bulk
of the Greek Cypriot population is living in their
region in the south. Less than one quarter of 1 per cent
of the Greek Cypriot population remains in the north,
and those people have also come to realize that there
exist in Cyprus two separate regions and that any final
solution will be based on that reality. The applications
submitted by the Greek Cypriots for transfer to the
south are indicative of their desire to be among
their fellow Greeks. Thusxthe return of all displaced
persons to their former homes would not only be
unrealistic in view of the voluntary exchange of
populations that has already taken place, but would
also impede a permanent solution of the Cyprus
problem. The remaining aspects of the refugee question
can and will be dealt with within the framework of an
overall settlement of the political problem.

73. After the Greek-inspired cob/p (I’Prtrr of 15 July
1974, another 600 Turkish Cypriots were added to the
list of missing persons. By far the great majority
of those people were civilians, and included babies at
the breast and elderly persons. Lists of the names
of those people were circulated to all relevant international bodies whose assistance was sought in tracing
them. Unfortunately,
however, the Greek Cypriot
administration has to this day declined to account fol
their fate. In view of the fact that mass graves of
hundreds of Turkish Cypriots have been discovered
at Aloa, Sandallaris and Maratha, it is not too difficult
to guess the tragic fate of those people. Permission fol
the opening of another mass grave in the south, the
existence of which is known to UNFICYP,
has been
refused by the Greek Cypriot authorities. That is a
mass grave that we know exists at Tokhni (Tashkent),
another Turkish village in the south of Cyprus. Thus
President Denkta? was left with no alternative but to
tell the relatives of those Turkish Cypriot missing
persons that those still unaccounted for must,
unfortunately, be presumed dead. That was the only
way in which their agony could be alleviated.

68. Substantial progress has also been achieved on
the constitutional and territorial aspects of the problem.
Though later denied by the Greek Cypriot side, at the
third round of the Vienna talks there was wide understanding in principle on a bi-zonal federation and a
central government with agreed powers in which the
two communities would be equally represented.
69. As regards the withdrawal of foreign forces from
the island, it is worth noting that there has already
been a substantial withdrawal of troops, both during
1975 and this year. It will be appreciated, however,
that, before a final solution to the Cyprus problem is
found effectively guaranteeing the security of life and
property of the Turkish Cypriot community, a complete withdrawal of Turkish forces is impossible.
Today the presence of the Turkish forces on the island
is the only effective guarantee safeguarding the life
and property of the Turkish Cypriot community,
which was the sole victim of relentless Greek armed
attacks between the years 1963 and 1974, when the
island was under virtual occupation by about
20,000 Greek mainland troops which had clandestinely
entered the island to assist the Greek Cypriots in their
enosis campaign. We very much look forward, how-

74. Although everything about the missing persons
has been presented to the Greek Cypriot side,
unfortunately, they persist in exploiting the question of
missing persons, adding needlessly to the agony of
the relatives of those persons. The prdblem of missing
persons was the subject of numerous discussions
8

81. Another
matter which .is constantly
being
exploited by the Greek Cypriot community for purely
propaganda purposes is the movement
of Greek
Cypriots from the north to the south. I wish to state
most emphatically
that there is no forcible expulsion
of Greek Cypriots from the north. All Greek Cypriots
living in northern Cyprus enjoy the same rights as
Turkish Cypriots and have freedom of movement
subject only to minimal security precautions.

between President Denktas and Mr. Clerides, both
locally and during the intercommunal
talks held at
Vienna. During those discussions President Denkta?
made it clear to Mr. Clerides that there were no
“missing persons” or detainees or both in the hands
of the Turkish authorities. And the International
Red Cross has finally confirmed that prisoners of war
who were taken to Turkey during the war have all
been handed over to the Greek Cypriot authorities.
That confirmation was made by Mr. Hoffman, the
head of the International Red Cross in Cyprus.

82. It will be recalled that at the third round of the
intercommunal
talks in Vienna an agreement was
reached for an exchange of populations, in accordance
with which the Greek Cypriot side would allow Turkish
Cypriots living in the south to move to the north, while
the Turkish Cypriot side would permit those Greek
Cypriots who wished to go to the south to do so, Therefore, it has been the policy of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus to allow those Greek Cypriots who
have made application for transfer to the south, either
through the United Nations and the International Red
Cross, or to the Turkish Cypriot authorities directly,
to move in accordance with their wishes. This is also
confirmed by the latest report of the Secretary-General,
Yet, baseless Greek Cypriot allegations on this matter
continue rrll II(IIIS~~IIII.
Indeed, having run out of
material, the Greek Cypriot representative to the
United Nations, Mr. Rossides, has recently gone so
far as to ridicule himself-we
feel unnecessarily-by
alleging that Greek Cypriots were being forced to go
south, of all things, by marriage proposals by the
Turks. This is contained in document S/12243. Really.
there should be limits even to propaganda.

75. It has been suggested to the Greek Cypriot side,
.with ample justification, that instead of looking for their
missing persons in the Turkish Cypriot region, they
should hold those who were guilty of the 1974 car/p
d’btai
responsible for accounting for thetn. The fact
that 2,000 Greek Cypriots were killed in the col/p
of Nicos Sampson between 15 and 19 July 1974, that
is, before the Turkish intervention ever took place,
has been confirmed by foreign and Greek Cypriot
press reports and eyewitness accounts.
76. As far as the Turkish Cypriot side is concerned
therefore, the question of missing persons is a nonissue.
77. Regarding the issue raised with respect to the
buffer zone, I should like to summarize our position
as follows. As stated in the correspondence exchanged
between President Denktas and Mr. PCrez de Cuillat
on 22 July 1976, the legal and political status of the
buffer zone, or no-man’s land as we call it, will be
determined by mutual agreement betwen the parties,
through the intercommunal talks.

83. The fact is that Greek Cypriots are moving south
of their own free will, having ‘come to the conclusion
that this would be in their besr interest for the following
reasons. First, they see separation as a reality. They
realize that any final solution to the Cyprus problem
will be on the basis of a bi-zonal federation and
therefore, perhaps, they see a better future among theil
people in the south. Secondly, they wish to join
their families and fellow Greeks in the south, with
whom they have common cultural, social and economic
ties. Thirdly, Makarios’ call for a long struggle and
the setting up of militia forces in the south are
causing them anxiety and prompting them to move to
their own region, where they would feel more secure
should anything happen again in Cyprus. In short,
they are going to the south for the very reasons that the
Turks came to the north. This is merely the natural
outcome of many years of hostility between the two
communities,
nurtured by the Greek Cypriot policy of
r/lo.si,s and of regarding the Turkish Cypriots as enemies, to be hated and despised.

78. We are ti.yirlg, purely on humanitarian grounds,
to facilitate agricultural activities in the area, to the
extent permitted by security considerations:
but
we definitely cannot allow the practices of the Greek
Cypriot side to which objections have previously been
made to be consolidated’into a strrfl/.s c/r/o tr/r/c~. Needless to say, we shall continue to co-operate with
UNFICYP in .this regard.
79. This is yet another artificial crisis created by
the Greek Cypriot side in order to present Cyprus as
a boiling pot and thus justify its recourse to the
United Nations and other international forums.
80. Another often repeated allegation by the Greek
Cypriot side is the so-called colonization of the north
of Cyprus, The true facts on this subject are already
on record with the United Nations. It suffices to state
here that people who are coming to the north of Cyprus
are tither Turkish Cypriots returning home fat* settlemcnt now that conditions of security and economic
development have become suitable, or people who are
imported temporarily as skilled or unskilled labourers
and iire in Cyprus only temporarily, as I stated..It is
relevant to state here that some who came to Cyprus in
late 1974 or early 197s have already left the island.

84. It is worth noting that the grouping of the t.wo
communities in two distinct regions today is no more
thkn the natural and inevitable conclusion of an
evolutionary process which began as long ago as the
beginning of the century.
9

85. In ‘I91 1, for example, Turkish Cypriots lived in
230 mixed villages and 85 purely Turkish villages. By
1946 the number of mixed villages in which Turkish
Cypriots lived had fallen to 162, while the number of
purely Turkish villages had risen to 110. By 1960,
the year in which Cyprus became independent, the
number of mixed villages in which Turkish Cypriots
lived had been reduced to 102, while the number of
purely Turkish villages had risen to 130. Following
the Greek Cypriot onslaught against the Turkish
Cypriot community in 1963, during which Turkish
Cypriots were expelled from 103 villages, the number
of mixed villages was further reduced to 48, while
the purely Turkish villages numbered 105. Those
statistics indicate that the position today, where the
.Turkish Cypriots live in one region in the north and
the Greek Cypriots in another region in the s,outh, is
merely the conclusion of a trend which began many
years ago. The c’orrp of 1974 further intensified the
regrouping of the two communities; hence the two
distinct regions which we have today.
86. Despite the voluntary movement of the Greek
Cypriots to the south, statements are made alleging to
the contrary that pressure was exerted by the Turkish
Cypriot authorities. In actual fact, the following are
the reasons for the movement of Greek Cypriots LO
the south and for the statements thus made.
87. First, the Greek Cypriots are under pressure from
the Greek Cypriot administration to remain in the
north, perhaps for internal political reasons. Thus,
on arrival in the south, lest they be branded as traitors,
these people feel obliged to state that they left under
pressure from the Turkish Cypriot authorities. Indeed,
we are sometimes placed in a difficult position, as the
case of the three priests of St. Barnabas Church
illustrates. These three priests applied to go ‘to the
south both directly to us and also ,through international ecclesiastical organizations, yet the Greek
Cypriot press is still printing headlines to the effect
that these people are being forced to leave for the south.
The Greek Cypriot leadership may not want these
people to go south for political reasons, but.for that
reason we cannot imprison them in the north against
their will.
88.’ Secondly,

in view of the policy of the Greek
Cypriot administration-to
deny rehabilitation credits
and other benefits to Greek Cypriots who leave
the north voluntarily, they have no alternative but
to state that they were forced to leave by the Turkish
Cypriot authorities. Despite this and other direct and
indirect pressures and intimidation employed by the
Greek Cypriot administration, as will be observed
from paragraph 3 1 of the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral, almost a quarter of those who left the north
applied directly to the United Nations and the International Red Cross.
89. However, in view of the allegations constantly
being made regarding the expulsion of Greek Cypriots
from the north, we should be only too happy for the

voluntary applications of the Greek Cypriots to be
investigated and verified by independent and impartial
authorities. As confirmed in paragraph 33 of the
Secretary-General’s report, the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus has agreed to the establishment of an
enlarged UNFICYP Liaison Team Centre in Yialousa
and to arrangements that would enable UNFICYP
personnel to speak freely and in private with any Greek
Cypriot applying for transfer to the south, to verify
the voluntary nature of the applications and to provide
transport assistance where necessary. Furthermore,
until the agreement is actually signed, we have
authorized the International Red Cross to carry out
such investigations and verify the voluntary nature of
the migration,
90. As far as the living conditions of the Greek
Cypriots still in the north are concerned, the Greek
Cypriot allegations are totally unfounded. Greek
Cypriots living in northern Cyprus are accorded the
same rights as Turkish Cypriots, including freedom of
movement subject only to minimal security precautions. As confirmed by paragraph 38 of the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report, the Turkish Federated State
of Cyprus has improved freedom of movement and
travel for Greek Cypriots and is providing better
facilities for education and health.
91. In the field of education, as confirmed by
paragraph 35 of the Secretary-Generai’s
report, all
elementary schools, including a nursery-which,
by
any standards, is a luxury for villages-are
open and
functioning normally. There is one teacher for every
30 pupiis, a ratio which is far better than the international standard, not to mention those prevailing in
the Greek Cypriot controlled region in the south.
92. In the field of health, the fact that Greek
Cypriots are provided with all necessary medical facilities is again confirmed by the report. Over 1,000 Greek
Cypriot patients have been given free medical treatment in health centres and hospitals in the north.
93. With respect to agriculture, as confirmed by
the Secretary-General’s report, in paragraph 39, the
agricultural produce of Greek Cypriot farmers is
being purchased by Turkish
Cypriot authorities
at current market prices applicable also to Turkish
Cypriots.
94. It can be clearly seen that the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus has done everything possible to
improve the living conditions of the Greek Cypriots
in the north. The same could not be said, however,
of the Greek Cypriot administration, whose treatment
of the Turkish Cypriots at the time when they
were unfortunate enough to be living in the south
was far below acceptable minimum standards. The
following is what two Greek Cypriot party leaders
had to say on the subject when they appeared on a
television panel discussion on 29 May 1975.
10

95.

Mr. Clerides-whom

in the British Sovereign Base area cannot be returned
to their Turkish Cypriot owners because the Greek
Cypriot administration
will not permit British authorities to hand over such property. In spite of the Vienna
agreements, the Greek Cypriot administration
does
not permit the return of Turkish Cypriot owned property, and as a result millions of dollars worth of
Turkish Cypriot property and equipment is decaying
and rotting away in the British bases in Cyprus.
Recently, an application was made, both through the
United Nations and the British authorities in Cyprus,
at least for the return of Turkish Cypriot lorries
stranded in the bases for the purpose of transporting
emergency relief aid to the earthquake victims in
Turkey. Even under those exceptional humanitarian
circumstances,
however, the return of our lorries,
which we so desperately needed, was refused by the
Greek Cypriot authorities. Likewise, a request for
permission to remove from the enclaved Turkish village of Erenkijy prefabricated houses which would
have been speedily sent to the earthquake victims
in Turkey, has also, been denied. And these are the
people who are here now complaining about humanitarian problems in the north.

we all know well-said:

“We must, in a practical way, solve the problems
of the Turkish Cypriots in the south. This we
should have done long ago.
“The budget of the Republic, for example, should
include a provision for improving the living conditions of the Turks living under ‘government’
control. This was not done in the past. The Turkish
Cypriots must feel that they enjoy security of life
and property. But this is not enough. They must
also work. They must be given an opportunity for
economic development. They must enjoy freedom
of movement in the region under the control of the
Republic, because they should be able to sell theit
produce.
“The State should solve these fundamental problems of lhe Turks. We should educate our National
Guard soldiers so that they should not look upon
the Turkish Cypriots as the national “--or natural-” enemies of the Greeks.”
96. The other leader, Mr. Papaiannu,
AKEL, had the following to say:

the leader of

99. However, I do not think this is the time to
apportion blame. I shall now turn to the substance of
the Cyprus conflict.

“Turks in the south should be given a feeling of
security, so that they consider themselves as equal
citizens of the Republic.

100. The period since the last meeting of the Security Council on this subject six months ago, in June
[IYZSfh meeting], has been characterized by Greek
Cypriot endeavours to avoid intercommunal
negotiations for the settlement of the Cyprus problem, through
constant recourse to international forums, false and
malicious propaganda campaigns against Turkey and
the Turkish Cypriots, and attempts to distort the
intercommunal
nature of the problem. The net result
of all this has inevitably been a lack of progress in
the intercommunal
talks.

“We must begin, as a State, to treat them in the
same way as we treat the Greek Cypriots.. .
“The Turks must enjoy the same rights as the
Greeks. When their security is endangered, those
who violate the laws, those who are involved
in the activities against the Turkish Cypriots,
must be severely punished.”
Such treatment never materialized.

101. Despite the fact that the Cyprus dispute, is
manifestly an intercommunal
problem, between the
Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communities, and
although in particular the constitutional aspect of the
Cyprus problem is primarily the concern of the two
communities, Mr. Christophides, the Foreign Minister
of the Greek Cypriot administration,
had the audacity
to claim in the General Assembly last month that “the
Cyprus problem is not a difference between the two
With all respect to my counterpart,
communities”.2
I must say that I do not agree with that.

97. Moreover, while the Greek Cypriots were moving
to the south at a time of their own choice and.after
having wound up their businesses and sold their
produce, the Turkish Cypriots in the south were
given a time-limit
of only one month within which
they had to move north. The exodus of Turkish
Cypriots from the south in such a short time obviously
caused us severe humanitarian as well as administrative problems.’ Had we set a similar deadline for
the Greek Cypriots in the north, almost all of them
would have left by now.

102. How can there be progress in the intercommunal
talks if one party to the dispute insists on not recognizing the other party even as its counterpart? How
can there be any hope for a settlement if one party
persists in engaging in a monologue at international
forums while, at the same time, it pretends to favour a
meaningful intercommunal
dialogue?

98. Furthermore, as confirmed by paragraph 34 of the
Secretary-General’s report, the Greek Cypriots moving
to the south are permitted by the Turkish Federated
State to take their personal belongings with them,
while the Turkish Cypriots who left the south were
not permitted to do so. All they couId carry was a small
suitcase of clothing and the minimum of personal
belongings. Even property left by Turkish Cypriots

103. Ignoring the existence of the Turkish Cypriot
community
and its administration,
and engaging in
11

108. Unfortunately,
all our appeals to the Greek
Cypriot side for moderation .and realism have fallen
on deaf ears. The resolution of the Legislative
Assembly of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus,
adopted on 5 November 1976 [see S//2240], calling
for, inter r/&r, the setting up of sub-committees,
in accordance with the Vienna agreements and the
Brussels accord, and the speedy resumption of the
intercommunal
talks without further delay, has
received no response whatsoever froin the Greek
Cypriot side. Our repeated proposals for a joint
transitional federal government, which we believe
would go a long way towards normalizing the situation
in Cyprus and would prevent the further separation
of the two communities, have also received no positive
response from the Greek Cypriot side.

false propaganda and futile rhetoric, is not the right
way to go about solving the Cyprus problem. We
sincerely hope that the Greek Cypriot side will come
to realize the futility of such an approach and will,
instead, return to the negotiating table for serious and
meaningful negotiations. Needless to say, the Turkish
Cypriot side is always ready to resume the negotiations.
In fact, we have never left the negotiating table.
104. Why has there been no solution to the problem
so far? It takes two to make an agreement, and I am
sorry to say that our Greek friends have not yet even
decided who their partner is. As long as they insist
on regarding, the Cyprus problem as an international
problem to be solved between Turkey and the
so-called Government of Cyprus, there can be no
possibility of a solution. The Cyprus problem, as is
well known, did not start with Turkey’s intervention
in July 1974. A return to the sfrrlrls ylro existing
immediately before the events of 1974, as the Greek
Cypriot side seems to demand, will not, therefore,
solve the problem.

109. While we, as the Turkish Cypriot side, have
indicated our willingness and readiness that the intercommunal talks should resume, the Greek Cypriot
side is bent on internationalizing
the problem and
has gone out of its way to undermine the very
negotiating process itself. We fail to understand
why so much of their time and energy are spent on
running off to international forums, and so little on the
intercommunal dialogue so necessary for the solution
of the Cyprus problem. If the time thus wasted in
acrimonious debates had instead been utilized in fruitful intercommunal dialogue, it would have been time
much better spent, and most probably many of our
outstanding difficulties would have been settled by
now.

105. Indeed, itisonlysince 1974that,asaresultofthe
Turkish intervention and the presence of the Turkish
forces on the island, there has been peace and stability
on the island for the first time in many years. This
fact is confirmed by impartial foreign observers.
Mr. McLean, the Secretary of the Fleet Street branch
of the National Union of Journalists of the United
Kingdom, has stated in an interview which he gave
on 4 November 1976 that
“the present situation in the whole of the island-not
just the north but the whole of the island-is more
stable and secure today than it has been for many
years, including a large part of the period when the
British Government was responsible for the island,
when you had the EOKA. This is a fact; one only has
to come here and see for oneself.”

110. Every time the interlocutors at the intercommunal talks have come close to an agreement, the
rapprochement achieved has been sabotaged by
Archbishop Makarios and his collaborators.
At the
third round of the intercommunal
talks at Vienna,
for example, there was a wide understanding
on
bi-zonality, a loose federation, equal participation
in
the central government, and an exchange of maps on
the territorial aspects of the problem, as well as a
voluntary exchange of populations as a first step
towards the establishment of a bi-regional federation.
Indeed, at the time there was a real possibility
of
an early solution. But all hopes were completely
dashed as a result of Archbishop Makarios’ stubborn
refusal to accept and implement agreements made
by his representative at the talks. The various methods
and tactics pursued by the Greek Cypriot leadership to
frustrate progress towards an early solution are well
known.

106. Because of the equilibrium established, today
there is no fighting in Cyprus, for the first time in
years. Today there are no indiscriminate killings of
Turks on the roads; there are no surprise attacks
against the Turkish community; there is no domination
by the Greek Cypriot community over the Turkish
Cypriot community, unlike the situation throughout the
past two decades. Today, at long last, there exists a
basis-d real basis-for the permanent and peaceful
solution of the Cyprus problem.
107. As confirmed by various resolution of the United
Nations, the Cyprus problem can be solved only
through negotiations between the two communities of
Cyprus. We do not believe that constant recourse to
international forums can do much to solve the Cyprus
problem. On the contrary, as the past two years
have shown, such action serves only to disrupt and
stifle the negotiating process, for serious and meaningful negotiations
are incompatible with one-sided
debates and unilateral actions in international forums.

111. Following the third round of the intercommunal
talks, held at Vienna, Mr. Clerides was so harshly
attacked in the Greek Cypriot press, before he even
returned to Nicosia, that he had to deny that any agreement in principle or otherwise had been reached with
the Turkish Cypriot interlocutor, and he had to state
that he had no map to submit on territory. It was that
negative attitude adopted by the Greek Cypriot side,
therefore, that led to the failure of the fourth round
12

of the intercommunal
talks, held in New York on
8 and 9 September 1975.

expeditiously ousted. Those among the Greek Cypriots
who have had the courage to speak out against the
obsolete policies of their leaders-persons
such as
Mr. Zenon Stavrinides-have
been promptly silenced
and arbitrarily prosecuted, as we were authoritatively
informed by Mr. Christophides himself during the
recent debate on Cyprus in the General Assembly.

112. It was not until months after the deadlock in
New York that new hopes appeared for the resumption
of the talks, following the Brussels accord reached
between the Foreign Ministers of Turkey and Greece
on 12 December 1975. At the fifth round of the talks at
Vienna, agreement had been reached, within the framework of the Brussels accord, for an exchange of
proposals and the setting up of experts’ committees
LOtackle the constitutional
as well as the territorial
aspects of the Cyprus problem. Once again, however,
determined to undermine the talks and block any
progress towards a solution, Archbishop Makarios
created an artificial crisis, which finally led to the
resignation of Mr. Glnfcos Clerides as the Greek
Cypriot interlocutor and, subsequently, to his complete
ousting from the political scene.

116. Regretfully, today, as in the past, we are once
again missing opportunities for the early settlement of
the Cyprus conflict as a result of the retrograde policies of the Greek Cypriot leadership. Apparently the
Greek Cypriot side does not desire a realistic settlement
of the Cyprus conflict. Apparently, it does not even
desire an early settlement of the Cyprus crisis. It
may b’e pertinent at this point to‘examine just what
the Greek Cypriot side is really aiming at.
117. First, it intends to keep the Cyprus problem
in the limelight in order to prolong the issue in the
hope that it will ultimately succeed in bringing presstire
to bear on Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot community. Thus the object of its constant resort to
international forums is not to facilitate a solution but,
on the contrary, as Archbishop Makarios recently
admitted:

113. What is required at present is an atmosphere
conducive to constructive and meaningful negotiations. The continued call of the Greek Cypriot leadership For a long struggle; the recurring news reports
in the Greek Cypriot press regarding the formation
of militia forces; the exploitation of governmental
authority by the Greek Cypriot side: the policy of
isolating the Turkish Cypriot community and, what is
more important, the demand of the Greek Cypriot
side for a return to its pre-1974 position if and when
negotiations start-that is, the position in which it was
insisting on majority rule
with minimal rights of
local administration for the Turkish Cypriot community, at a time when the Turkish Cypriot community
wasunder Greek Cypriot domination and oppressionall that is certainly not helping in the creation of an
atmosphere conducive to the resumption of the talks.

“I would not say that the new United Nations
resolution in favour of Cyprus would provide a
solution to the Cyprus problem. But. besides moral
vindication,
our recourse to the international
Organization and its relevant resolutions keep oul
proklem in the limelight.”
Those comments were published in The CJ-prtr.s,J4tri/
of 9 September 1976.
118. Prolongation of the Cyprus conflict may help
Archbishop Makarios and a few of his close associates
to prolong their political lives, but it is definitely
against the interests of Cyprus as a whole.

114. The Greek Cypriot daily t;f/d~~~i/r~~r~os of
24 November 1976~and that newspaper, Incidentally
is, the official organ of the Maknrios Administrntionand G/ron?i of 29 November, to mention only two
piiblications, have been strongly advocating reversion
LOthe pre-I974 Greek position. This new development
is not only discouraging hut alarming and dil~l~~l*l~US,
and if pursued
it will destroy all hopes of a negotiated
settlement. This.attitudc of the Greek Cypriot side is
certainly not realistic. Unless the Greek Cypriot side
ceases to consider Cyprus il Greek island, unless it is
willing (0 share governmental
authority with us,
unless iI is prepared to treat us i\S equals,
there can bc
no solution:

119. Secondly. the Greek Cypriot side is trying to
strangle the Turkish Cypriot community by denying
its very existence and isolating it from the rest of the
world through an economic blockade. Its attempts
to disrupf international
trade with the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus, its endeavours to obstruct
tourists from visiting northern Cyprus and its efforts
to prevent recognition of passports and stamps issued
by the Turkish Administration-these
are but a Tew
examples of Greek Cypriot designs in this regard,
aimed at forcing us to submission. This attitude is not
only delaying the resumption of the talks but is inevitubly leading to further separation and compelling US
to t&e new measures in order to avert the serious
consequences of the policy followed by the Greek
Cypriot side.

115. U~~forttlnatcty, for the present,
the Greek
Cypriot leadership continues in its old ways. It seems
to have learned nothing from its past mistakes, and
those of its leaders who have had the foresight to
point otlt the futility of its ways-those like Mr. Glafcos
Clerides, who have publicly stated that miIIly OPPOltunities for a settlement have been missed due lo the
extreme tl~ttio~lillism, petty pOlitiCill interests ilnd demagoguery of the Greek Cypriot leadership-have
been

120. Surely the Greek Cypriot leaders must realize
that it is they themselves who, through their efforts
to isolate the Turkish Cypriot community. are responI3

First, the Cyprus Republic was established in 1960
by the two communities in exercise of their common
right of self-determination. The Republic was created
as a bi-national State based on the partnership and
equality of those two communities.
Unfortunately,
however, the Greek Cypriot community, as it later
transpired, did not regard the independent State as an
end in itself but merely as a means to an end-namely,
the union of Cyprus with Greece. Thus, scarcely
three years after independence, the Greek Cypriot
community under the leadership of Archbishop Makarios, in flagrant violation of the very principles in
accordance with which the Republic had been created
and in complete disregard of the legitimate rights of
its co-partners, set in motion the series of well-known
events which were aimed at the dissolution of the independent Cyprus State together with the elimination of
the Turkish-Cypriot community as a political entity.

sible for the separation which is unfortunately
becoming deeper and more permanent every day. If
this state of statelessness to which we have been
condemned is allowed to continue, and if the existence,
let alone the equal status, of the Turkish Cypriot
community
is denied, hopes of a settlement will
remain slender.
12 I. The Greek Cypriots are trying to preserve their
illegitimate
status as the so-called Government of
Cyprus by denying any participation to the Turkish
Cypriot community in the Government. Hence their
refusal to accept our offer for a joint transitional
government. In this way they hope to maintain their
monopoly in international forums and to be in a position
to prevent the participation of the Turkish Cypriot
community on an equal footing, thereby suppressing
the Turkish Cypriot viewpoint in the international
arena, as has been the case at Lima, at Colombo,
and, unfortunately, during the recent debate in the
United Nations General Assembly.

125. The Turkish intervention of 1974 was not an
aggression but an attempt to prevent the consolidation
of an aggression which had been taking place since
1963 and had culminated in the corrp of July 1974.
The Turkish intervention, therefore, is not the cause of
the Cyprus problem but its result. In other words, it is
the result of the policy of the Greek Cypriots and
Greece to unite the island with Greece at the expense
of the Turkish-Cypriot community. Had it not been for
the timely intervention of Turkey in 1974 and the
courageous resistance put up by the Turkish-Cypriot
community for the 12 years preceding the corrp, today
there would have been no Turkish-Cypriot community,
let alone an independent State of Cyprus.

122. The attempts of the Greek Cypriot side to
deprive the Turkish Cypriot community ofits legitimate
right to participate in international conferences,
however, are serving to prolong the dispute. As long as
Makarios is regarded as the legitimate head of State
-a State which, incidentally, he has been trying
to destroy for more than two decades-the prospects
for a solution will not be favourable; because as long
as his Administration is recognized as the legitimate
Government of the whole of Cyprus, he will continue
his well-known rhetoric about the “invasion” and
“occupation”
of Cyprus and the presence of “illegal
forces” on his island. He will continue’ to give the
false impression that when Turkey came to Cyprus in
1974, Cyprus was a “paradise” in which the two
communities lived together in peace and friendship.
He will continue to allege that, if the Turkish troops
withdrew, everything would once again be well with
Cyprus. Maybe he is right from the Greek Cypriot
point of view, but, as far as we are concerned, the
realization of his objectives would be tantamount to
the total elimination of the Turkish Cypriot community
as a distinct entity on the island. Unless actual and
physical guarantees can be found within the framework
of a bi-zonal settlement, unless effective measures
can be taken to prevent the recurrence of the past, a
second Lebanon tragedy may be created on the island.

126. Since the Greek aggression against the Turkish
Cypriot community in 1963, there have existed, and
there continue to exist in Cyprus, two separate
administrations each having exclusive control and
authority over its respective community and region,
The existence of two national communities and their
separate administrations on the island has also been
recognized by the three guarantor Powers, Turkey,
Greece and the United Kingdom, by their Declaration
in Geneva on 30 July 1974 [S/11398], as well as in
various resolutions of the United Nations. It is that
reality which necessitated the signing of the pro&sverbal between the United Nations and the Turkish
Cypriot side last December at Brussels.
127. After 1974 the restructuring of the Turkish
Cypriot administration as the Turkish Federated State
of Cyprus had become indispensable for meeting the
growing administrative requirements of the Turkish
region, the Constitution of the Federated State was
submitted to public referendum on 8 June 1975 and
endorsed unanimously by the Turkish Cypriot commt.rnity. As a result of the recent general elections held
in northern Cyprus, the Turkish Federated State
has attained a new and important legal basis. The
Turkish Cypriot community
will under no circumstances return to the degrading situation in which
it tried to survive prior to 1974.

123. The Cyprus problem can be solved only through
a realistic approach. There are two national communities which have been in a State of conflict since
the mid-1950s. Today the problem is how to find a
solution which will end that conflict and enable the two
communities to live side by side on the island in
peace. It is a matter of rearranging our home in
such a way that one party will not be able to
dominate or oppress the other.
124. What are the realities on the island which
must be taken into account in a search for a solution’?
14

128. Tlie sooner, therefore, the Greek Cypriot leadership recognizes as a reality the existence of the Turkish
Cypriot community and its administration, the soonel
there will be progress towards a settlement. Those
are the realities which must necessarily be taken into
account in any settlement of the Cyprus problem.

as well as the security and legitimate rights of the
two communities be effectively guaranteed. Regarding
the territorial aspect of the problefi, our position has
again been made abundantly clear. We do not regard
the numerical strength of the two communities
or
even the actual ownership of land, which incidentally
is in our favour, as being the only relevant factors
in the determination
of the areas to be administered
by the two Federated States respectively. The security
and the economic requirements ofthe twocommunities
are two important factors to be taken into account.
Accordingly in our proposals we have stated that the
Turkish Federated State must be economically viable,
to give to the Turkish Cypriot communily
the
opportunity
which was denied to it previously to’
develop economically in freedom. We have stated that
our State must be militarily defensible in order to
prevent the recurrence of the repeated attacks which
the Turkish Cypriot comm’unity had to suffer in the
past. As for the details of the problem, we have
agreed, in accordance with the Brussels agreement,
to the setting up of committees of experts to investigate
the intricate issues involved and to report to the
political interlocutors.

129. The Turkish Cypriot community is not making
extravagant demands. We do not want anything in
excess of our legitimate rights. All we want is to live
in our homeland as decent human beings, free from
oppression, the discrimination and the suffering which
we have had the misfortune to experience in the past.
After all, that is our right, just as it is the right of all
peoples. We have had more than our share of suffering
in the past. We know what it feels like to be under
domination. We know what it feels like to be homeless
and destitute, and we do not want the injustices
committed against us in the part to be repeated also
in the future. That is what we are striving for.
130. The Turkish Cypriot community was forced to
fight for its right of self-determination.
We are confident that the United Nations will confirm our right
of self-determination
and that the Security Council
will not allow itself to be exploited by those who
are trying to deny us that right.

134. And what proposals do we have from the Greek
Cypriot side’? Just a dry figure of 20 per cent territory
for the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus. But why
not 35 per cent? Why not 25 per cent? Why not X per
cent? What are the criteria? Apart from a simple
arithmetical
figure there is nothing concrete in the
Greek Cypriot proposals. Has the Greek Cypriot side
said, for example, whether it would accept a bi-zonal
federation-a
necessary prerequisite for any headway
in the talks‘? Has it accepted the principle of political
equality in the central federal government that is
inherent in any federation? It obstructs the setting
up of the sub-committees and continues to reject the
Turkish Cypriot community as its true, indeed only,
counterpart. Iti these circumstances,.can
the Turkish
Cypriot side really be accused of not making any
proposals? Can we really be blamed for the impasse
in the intercommunal
dialogue?

131. The Turkish Cypriots have struggled for the
independence of their country. As a community,
we
are indeed proud of the fact that we have succeeded in
preserving the independence of Cyprus, at great
sacrifice and loss of life, in the face of criminal
designs for the elimination of our community and the
annexation of our country by another State. We did
not tolerate such attempts to annex our country in the
past; we shall not do so in the future.
132. The Turkish Cypriot community has struggled
against those who have abused theil: governmental
authority and tried to destroy the constitutional
equality of our community. We are determined to
defend our equal status, for our very existence, as
well as the independence of the island, depends ‘on
that equality.

13.5. By its very nature the negotiating process
invQlves reciprocity,
mutual good will and accommodation. Yet the Greek Cypriot side expects the
Turkish Cypriot side to be more specific on the
territorial aspect without receiving anything concrete
on the other aspects of the problem. The problem
must be tackled as a whole.

133. The Greek Cypriot side often accuses us of not
having submitted concrete proposals for the solution
of the Cyprus problem, when it is they themselves
who have failed to put forward tangible or even
remotely realistic proposals. Contrary to the Greek
Cypriot accusations, the Turkish Cypriot proposals, are
perfectly precise and clear, as well as being throughly
realistic. The Turkish Cypriot proposals were circulated on 5 June last [S/12093, clnnex II] and are
available for everyone to examine. On the constitutional aspect of the problem, we have proposed the
establishment of a bi-regional federation composed of a
Turkish Federated State and a Greek Federated State
and a central Federal Government with agreed powers.
In view of our past experience, we believe that only
under such a set-up can the independence of Cyprus

136. We are being criticized for following a separatist policy. The physical separation on the island is
not of our making. It has been imposed on us by
the Greek Cypriot leadership. But, while on this
subject, I feel that I should put on record once more
that the Turkish Cypriot side opposes the partition of
the island. We believe that Cyprus must remain an
independent,
sovereign and non-aligned. State. We
believe that this can be achieved only through a bi-zonal
federation with the effective national guarantees of
15

warm and sincere congratulations
his high office.

Turkey and Greece. Today, the basis for such a settlement, which would enable the two communities to
coexist peacefully on the island, already exists. All
that is required is the agreement of the Turkish
Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communities, through
negotiations conducted between the two sides on an
equal fooling.

144. The Security Council, on the proposal of the
Secretary-General, has just decided to renew the
mandate of UNFICYP
.for a further period of six
months. This resolution, to which the Government of
Cyprus has agreed, is supported by my Government.

137. However, the success of the negotiations
depends on the statesmanship, good will and mutual
respect of the parties. We are a co-founder and
co-partner community. The problem and the Cyprus
crisis cannot be resolved without us, and this is of
paramount importance. We hope that the Greek
Cypriot leadership will abandon its policy of a “long
struggle”, will recognize the existence of the Turkish
Cypriot community on the island, will return to the
negotiating table for talks on an equal footing and will
refrain in future from acting in such a manner as to
frustrate the intercommunal dialogue.

14.5. I take this opportunity to express our pl’ofound
appreciation to the Member States that have provided
contingents to UNFICYP and to those that are making
voluntary contributions for its maintenance. We also
express our sincere thanks to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus, Mr. PCrez
de CuCllar, and to the outgoing Commander of the
Force, Lieutenant-General
D. Prem Chand, and his
officers and men, who have carried out their peaceful
and humanitarian task under conditions of personal
danger. We wish to join, too, in the special tribute
paid to Lieutenant-General
D. PI-em Chand of India,
who has served for a considerable length of time in
Cyprus and who, through
his dedication,
his
unswerving courage and his other high qualifications,
has rendered invaluable services to peace and to the
humanitarian task which the Force, under his cornmand, was called upon to perform in Cyprus.

138. Let us, instead, sit down together at the
negotiating table and discuss our differences frankly
and in a spirit of good will. The Turkish Cypriot side
is ready to resume negotiations at any time. In fact,
why do we not follow the example set by the Turkish
and Greek Foreign Ministers, who, immediately after
the debate in the Council on the Aegean question
last August, met to discuss the matter? Why do we
not do the same? Why do not my counterpart from
the south of Cyprus, Mr. Christophides, and I walk
into the next room and start negotiations straightaway
and without any further delay? That is the only way
that we can resolve our problem.

146. We welcome the new Commander of the Force,
Major-General James Joseph Quinn of Ireland, and
wish him success in his difficult and important mission.
147. As the Cyprus question was fully debated
recently in the General Assembly, it is perhaps not
necessary to go over again what the Council already
knows. It knows that the Gener-al Assembly, by an
overwhelming majority of 94 votes to only I,-that of
Turkey-adopted
resolution 31/12, which reaffirmed
resolutions 3212 (XXIX)
and 3395 (XXX) and
demanded their urgent implementation,
namely,
respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus:
abstention from unilateral actions and interventions
directed against it in contravention
of resolution
3212 (XXIX), including changes in the demographic
structure of Cyprus; withdrawal without further delay
of all foreign armed forces and foreign military
presence and personnel from the Republic of Cyprus
and the cessation of all foreign interference in its
affairs; the return of all refugees to their homes in
safety; and the resumption
of meaningful
and
constructive negotiations between the representatives
of the two communities under the auspices of the
Secretary-General.

139. I extend my hand in friendship to my distinguished friend, Mr. Christophides, and hope that he
will respond favourably to this earnest and sincere
offer.
140. The PRESIDENT (intc~plPf(ttion,~otn
I call on the representati;e of Greece.

on his re-election to

French):

141. Mr. PAPOULIAS
(Greece): Mr. President, I
should like, first of all, to extend to you the warmest
congratulations of my delegation upon your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. Your
prestige, your well-known competence and your high
qualifications and skill are fully appreciated by all
Members of the United Nations and constitute a
guarantee that our debate will be sucessfully concluded. My delegation and I personally take great
satisfaction at seeing in the presidency of the Security
Council the representative of a neighbouring ancl
friendly country with which Greece is linked by
historical ties of close friendship and co-operation.
142. At the same time, I wish to thank the members
of the Council for allowing me to participate in the
debate.

148. The General Assembly, voicing also through
resolution 31/12 its deep concern over the prolongation
of the Cyprus crisis which endangers international
peace and security, called upon the parties concerned
to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the
implementation of the General Assembly resolutions,

143. May I also address to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, my Government’s and my own
16

expressed the hope that the Security Council would
consider appropriate steps for the implementation
of
its resolution 365 (1974) endorsing General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX), and requested the SecretaryGeneral to continue to provide his good offices for
the negotiations between the representatives of the two
communities.

“The situation regarding the. implementation
of
the agreement recorded in the communiquC of
2 August 1975 at the end of the third round of
talks in Vienna remains as outlined in my report of
5 June 1976 [S/12093, pc~as, 22-24 11~1 chcrp, III].
The condition of the Greek Cypriots in the north
continues to be a matter of serious concern, not
only on humanitarian
grounds but also because it
constitutes a highly contentious issue between the
two commutiities.
They continue to be restricted
to their respective villages and to the immediate
surroundings thereof. Medical,
educational and
religious facilities have declined.“-1
stress this
point.--“No
Greek
Cypriot
physicians
are
practising in the north.”

149. This is the context in which the Council has
been called upon to extend for another six months
the mandate of UNFICYP.
Relevant to our debate
are also resolution 391 (1976) and preceding resolutions and, of course, the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on Cyprus of 30 October [S/12222] and of
9 December [S/12253] which are now before the
Council.

156. Paragraph 28 of the report we are considering
states: “As indicated in my report of 30 October
1976 [S//2222, pcr~. 81, the living conditions of Greek
Cypriots in the north have not improved, their exodus
to the south has accelerated and this situation continues
to be a matter of serious concern. UNFICYP access
to Greek Cypriot habitations and freedom of movement
in the area remain restricted”.

1.50. The Foreign Minister of Cyprus, Mr. Christophides, has already presented his Government’s views
as regards both the situation prevailing in the island
in the light of the Secretary-General’s reports and the
wider implications of the Cyprus problem, He has done
this so ably and convincingly that I do not need to be
repetitive. I shall, however, beg the Council’s indulgence if I draw its attention to the most distressing
and alarming facts contained in these reports, which
make even grimmer reading than the SecretaryGeneral’s report of June last [S/lZOSS], which led
the President of the Council, on 15 June 1976, to
declare on behalf of the majority of the members
of the Council “a deep concern for the future of the
indigenous people of Cyprus”.
[1927rh 777~wi71g,
prrrtr. 41

157. The Secretary-General also makes the following
observation in paragraph 72 of the same report:
“The situation of Greek Cypriots in the north
is a matter of special concern. The greater part of
those Greek Cypriots have now left for the south
for the stated purpose of seeking security and
better living conditions, and this development has
further heightened tension. It had originally been
expected that this problem would be considerably
alleviated by the agreement reached in this regard at
the third round of the Vienna talks on 2 August
1975 and, in particular, by the granting to UNFICYP
of fret and normal access to Greek Cypriot habitations in the area. Regrettably.
it has not been
possible to implement that agreement adequately and
the exodus of Greek Cypriots from the norrh continues.”

151, Inasmuch as the Secretary-General’s
reports
speak for themselves and are fully revealing, I shall
confine myself to referring to their salient points,
152. According to paragraphs 10 and 42 to 49 of the
report before us, the freedom of movement
of
UNFICYP
and its Civilian
Police (UNCIVPOL)
continues to be restricted under various pretexts, and
they have been able to carry out humanitarian work
only on a limited scale.

158. On the issue of the alteration of the demographic
paltern of the island through the uprooting of the
indigenous
Greek Cypriot
population
and the
systematic colonization
by migrants from the Turkish
mainland, the report could hardly be more explicit.
I quote puragraph 29:

153. Under the heading “Law and order”, parngraph 47 of the report States: “It has been reported
that appreciable quantities of commercial commodities... have continued to be removed from Greek
Cypriot-owned business houses and other premises in
the Famagusta area”.

“From

10 of document
154. According
to paragraph
S/l2222 and paragraph 48 of the report before us
no progress on the issue of.missing persons has been
made since the Turkish side has rejected the suggestion
of the ICRC for the designation of an investigatory
body,
155. On the humanitarian
document S/ 12222 states:

question,

7,371 on 5 June 1976, the Greek Cypriot

population
in the north decreased
to 3.631 011
6 December.
representing
n total evacuntion
of
3,740. Seventeen
Greek Cypriots remain in Kyrenia,
a decline of I@, and 3,614 in the Knrpas, a decline

of 3,580. The present rate of evacualion is averaging
some 41 persons daily. In the period June IU
December 1976, IO villages in the north were
‘depopulated of Greek Cypriots, of which three

paragraph 8 of

were in Kyrenia
and seven in the Karpas.
Not
i~~clucled in the above totals are 38 medical evacuil-

17

tions carried out by UNFICYP
the Karpas to the south.”

including the most fertile land, in the name of a minority
community that does not exceed 18 per cent of the
total population of the island, and despite the further
fact that a significant part of the land snatched from
its Greek Cypriot owners in the north remains
uncultivated, the Turkish military authorities have
attempted to encroach upon (he buffer zone by evicting
Greek Cypriots from the fields owned and cultivated
by them o,n the basis of established agreements and
by transferring Turkish farmers to them.

ambulance from

1.59. Of relevance, also, is paragraph 30, referring
to the massive expulsion of the inhabitants of the
Greek Cypriot town of Yialousa.
160. No wonder that the number of refugees, instead
of declining, has further increased, reaching a total of
195,991, as stated by the Secretary-General in paragraph 53 of the same report.

167. These attempts have resulted in regrettable
incidents between the Turkish side and UNFICYP,
as recorded in paragraph 24 of the report. I am sure
that the Council will agree that such unwarranted
actions by the occupying Power are not only contrary
to General Assembly and Security Council resolutions-specifically
to paragraph 3 of resolution 391
(1976) and previous resolutions-but
are fraught with
grave dangers as regards the maintenance of international peace and security in the area. The SecretaryGeneral, in paragraph 71 of his report, underlines the
importance of maintaining the sr~~tlrsquo of the ceasefire lines and of not turning the area into a wasteland.
We draw the Council’s serious attention to the matter.

16 I. As regards the Turkish argument that the Greek
C)priots voluntarily leave their ancestral homes in
order to go to the south, I shall refer to paragraph 31
of the report, which indicates: “The agreed procedure
for screening Greek Cypriot applicants for transfer
to the south has not been implemented effectively”.
162. I submit that this clear evidence removes any
credence from the arguments to the contrary employed
by the Turkish authorities. It is also not without
significance that a proposal by UNFICYP to send a
fact-finding team to the Karpas to ascertain conditions
was not accepted by the Turkish side, again under
various pretexts.

168. Section V, on the Secretary-General’s
good
offices, in pursbance of paragraph 6 of resolution 391
(1976), causes us grave concern, as it reflects the total
lack of progress towards a solution.

163. The statistics contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report indicate in the clearest terms the
measure and the imminence of the danger threatening
the remaining Greek Cypriot inhabitants in the area
under Turkish occupation, and place a heavy responsibility upon the Council to prevent the total elimination
from its ancestral home of an autochthonous population which throughout the long history of mankind
has made its contribution to civilization.

169. Let me say immediately how much my Government appreciates the painstaking and untiring efforts
made by the Secretary-General in seeking a peaceful
solution for Cyprus. I take this opportunity to convey
to him and his collaborators-the
Under-secretariesGeneral Mr, Guyer and Mr. Urquhart, and thei]
assistants-our most sincere thanks.

164. As I stated during my statem&t to the Council
on I I June, and I will repeat today:

170. May I again assure the Council that the Greek
Government will continue, as in the past, to lend its
full support to the Secretary-General’s
mission of
good offices, There can be no doubt that the best hope
for achieving a just and lasting settlement of the
Cyprus problem, as called for by the Council, is,
as the Secretary-General observes in paragraph 74 of
his report, through negotiations between the two
Cypriot communities.

“The wholesale eradication of an entire indigenous
population and the confiscation of all its property
are contrary not only to specific provisions of
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
to provisions of international treaties like the fourth
Ge’neva Convention’ regarding the treatment of the
inhabitants of occupied territories and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, gut they are...
flagrantly contrary to the Charter and to everything
the United Nations stands for.” [/925/h n7ecfing,
pu/w. 63.1

171. However, the Council has recognized through its
successive resolutions that, for the negotiations to be
serious and meaningful, the agreements reached at
all previous rounds of the talks held under the
auspices of the Secretary-General should be respected.
This has not been the case either with the agreement
reached at Vienna during the third round of talks on
humanitarian matters or with the agreement signed at
the fifth round regarding the intercommunal
negotiations. Both continue to be violated by the Turkish
side, on different pretexts each time.

165. Apart from the distressing facts I have just
mentioned, the Secretary-General’s report contains a
very disturbing new element concerning the attempts
made by the Turkish forces of occupation to tamper
with the .stlrr~/.sclrro of the cease-fire lines.
166. From paragraphs 19 to 27 of the report it becomes unfortunately evident that, despite the fact
that the Turks continue to occupy 40 per cent of the
Republic’s territory and 70 per cent of its resources,

172. The Security Council resolutions also stipulnte
that unilateral actions likely to affect adversely the
I8

lar, and the Under-Secretaries-General,
Mr. Urquhart
and Mr. Guyer for their devoted efforts in the fulfilment of their functions. My de,legation would also
like to commend Lieutenant General Prem Chand,
who is retiring after a long period of service in
Cyprus. We wish him all the best in the future. We
should also like to extend our best wishes to the new
Force Commander,
Major-General
James Joseph
Quinn.

prospects of the negotiations or actions that increase
tensions between the two communities
should be
avoided. I am sure that the Council shares the view
that the non-implementation
of the agreements reached
during the Vienna talks, the continued flagrant
violation of the human rights of the Greek Cypriot
population. in the area under Turkish control, the
systematic expulsion of the indigenous Greek Cypriot
population and the colonization of the north with
migrants from the Turkish mainland, the interference
with UNFICYP’s freedom of movement and the threats
to change by force the .stlltll.~ y/lo of the cease-fire
lines and certainly not the proper means to pave the
way for negotiations. Furthermore, the other side has
systematically avoided coming forward with concrete
proposals concerning the territorial aspects of the
problem. We are still awaiting those proposals from
them.

180. As the report of the Secretary-General recalls,
the function of UNFICYP
was originally defined in
Security Council resolution 186 (1964) in the following
terms:
“in the interest of preserving international peace anb
security, to use its best efforts to prevent a recurrence of fighting and, as necessary to contribute
to
the maintenance and restoration of law and order
and a return to normal conditions.”

173. Therefore, we are obliged to stress again that a
just and lasting solution of the Cyprus problem which
we all desire can be found only through serious,
sincere and meaningful negotiations, in conformity
with the basic principles of the Charter and through
the implementation of General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions.

That mandate, which was conceived in the context
of the confrontation between the Turkish Cypriot and
Greek Cypriot communities,
has been repeatedly
reaffirmed by the Council, most recently in its
resolutio’n 391 (1976).
181. The Force has now been in operation in Cyprus
for more than 12 years. Notwithstanding
the dedication of its officers and men, it has not been able to
prevent the recurrence of fighting and violence; similarly, it has not been able to thwart several attempts
to endanger international peace and security through
action designed to liquidate the independent Republic
of Cyprus from 1963 to 1974. During that period
several crises erupted on the island entailing actual
fighting, loss of life, severe hardship and suffering
for the numerically weaker community. Nevertheless,
the mandate of the Force has been continually renewed
because it was estimated that its presence was,
though in a limited way, a contributing factor in
preventing the escalation of violence+ But, in 1974,
UNFICYP
was powerless with regard to the fair
accompli of 15 July and its consequences. It was
the intervention of the Turkish forces, in conformity
with the Treaty of Guarantee,R that saved Cyprus
from annexation by Greece.

174. We would also emphasize to the Council the
imperative need not to allow the negotiating process
to degenerate into delaying tactics to perpetuate
frrirs trccon?p/is and create so-called irreversible situations. The United Nations has had bitter experience
of the results of such tactics.
175. The Cyprus problem urgently awaits a settlement. That is the only way to eliminate the danger
that threatens international peace and security, as the
General Assembly in its wisdom has recognized in its
resolution 3212 (XXIX).
176. The PRESIDENT (i/zterpretatio/z$om Frcnoh):
I call on the representative of Turkey.
177. Mr. TORKMEN
(Turkey): Mr. President, I
should like most warmly to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency. of the Security Council
and to express our deep appreciation of the diligent
and enlightened efforts you have undertaken in dealing
with the renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP.
I
should also like to pay a tribute to your country,
Romania,
with which Turkey enjoys constantly
developing friendly and mutually beneficial relations.

182. The Secretary-General
points out in paragraph 7 of his report that since July 1974 a number of
resolutions adopted by the Security Council “have
affected the functioning of UNFICYP
and, in some
cases, have required [it] to perform certain additional
or modified functions”. It was nevertheless clear in’
1974 from the very outset that the Force could not
continue
to perform its mission adequately, let alone its
additional or modified functions, unless the requirements of the emergent situation were fully taken into
account. It was self-evident that UNFICYP
had to
reach an understanding with both the Turkish and
Greek administrations
for its stationing, deployment
and functioning. In fact, a pro&s-verbal was signed

178. I wish to seize this opportunity to reiterate to
the Secretary-General
that we highly value his
sustained efforts in the search for a solution to the
Cyprus problem. We reiterate our appreciation to the
countries providing troops and contributing financially
to UNFICYP.
179. May I pay tribute to the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative in Cyprus, Mr. Pt?rez de CuCl19

186. Having said that, I should like to state the
position of my Government on the draft resolution
which has been adopted. The Council is familial
with our basic and unchanged position concerning the
representation of Cyprus. We cannot concur with any
document which refers to the so-called Government of
Cyprus, We are more insistent than ever in our view
that the Greek-Cypriot representatives have no right
whatsoever to speak on behalf of Cyprus., that there
is at present no government which represents Cyprus
and that the two communities are entitled to speak
with equal voice in all forums. The reference to B
“Government of Cyprus” in the resolution renders it,
therefore, unacceptable to us in its entirety.

exactly a year ago between President Denktay and the
Force Commander with a view to arriving at mutually
acceptable arrangements for the stationing, deployment and functioning of UNFICYP in the territory
under the authority of the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus. As the Secretary-General points out, an agreed
text of the exhange of letters to record those arrangements has been drawn up. Yet the exchange of
letters still remains to be finalized. The delay
encountered in that process is most regrettable.
183. The absence of an agreement between the
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus and UNFICYP
has, of course, been an impediment in overcoming
the difficulties referred to in the Secretary-General’s
report. Most of the issues mentioned in that report
have been elaborated upon by the representative of the
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus, Mr. Celik, in his
rebuttal to the distortions of Mr. Christophides.
Indeed, all those questions fall under the authority
and competence of the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus. The Turkish forces in the territory of that
State are not involved in the decision-making processes relating to any of those issues. The sole mission
of the Turkish forces is, by their mere presence, to
safeguard the security of the Turkish community, and
to deter any attack against it until a peaceful solution
acceptable to both communities can be reached. This, I
think, is an adequate answer to Mr. Christophides,
who erroneously addressed his questions to me.

187. As far as operative paragraph 2 is concerned,
the position of my Government is on record. We concur
with the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP
for a further period of six months. In doing SO, we take
note of the statement of Minister Celik who has
informed the Council of the agreement of the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus to the renewal of the
mandate.
188. We whole-heartedly support the call in the sixth
preambular paragraph for a resumption of intercommunal talks. We urge the Secretary-General
to
convene a meeting between the representatives of the
two communities at the earliest possible date.
189. As we conceived it, the purpose of the present
meeting was twofold: to renew the mandate of
UNFICYP,
on the one hand, and to give a new
emphasis to the negotiating process between the two
parties under the auspices of the Secretary-General,
on the other. This, we believe, is the only useful
contribution that the Security Council can make to the
question of Cyprus. This aim has been achieved.
Therefore, I am very reluctant to participate in a repetitive exchange of arguments which the representative
of the Greek Cypriot community seems to enjoy passionately. I do not enjoy it, and it certainly does
not serve any useful purpose.

184. In its resolution 391 (1976), the Council noted
from the Secretary-General’s report that one of the
tasks of UNFICYP
was to facilitate the continued
search for a peaceful solution. As we believed this was
indeed the case, we have in the past consistently
concurred with the extension of the mandate of
UNFICYP. The Force cannot, however, through its
mere presence contribute to the search for a negotiated
settlement. Such a quest is incumbent upon the two
parties directly conce;ned. It is in realization of this
fact that the Security Council has in its resolutions
combined the renewal of the mandate with a call for
substantial negotiations and has expressed the hope
year after year that at the end of each six-month
period there would be no need for yet another renewal.
This call should not be allowed to remain simply the
expression of a pious hope ritually repeated.

190. My colleague from Greece read out numerous
excerpts from the report of the Secretary-General,
interspersed with subjective judgements and surreptitious distortions which have completely changed the
true meaning of the paragraphs of that report, I
understand that, as the representative of Greece: he
has a heavy conscience, but I think he was ill-advised
to try to project himself as the angel of peace and
human compassion. 1 had expected that he would
refrain, as I have done, from participating
in the
regular polemics of these debates.

185. My Government welcomes and endorses the
very constructive call for negotiations just made by
the Turkish-Cypriot
representative. It is our ardent
hope that the negotiating process will be resumed in the
nearest possible future and that a just settlement will
enable the healing of the wounds of the past and open
the way to fruitful co-operation between the Turkish
and Greek communities. In this regard, we have been
very much encouraged by the statement of the
Secretary-General at this meeting. We wish him every
success in the endeavours he will undertake to ensure
a prompt resumption of the intercommunal talks.

191. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (irzterpretntinn $.~onl
Clzbzcs~~):During the general debate on the Cyprus
question in the current session of the General
Assembly,
the Chinese representative
already
expounded in a comprehensive way the Chinese
Government’s position on the question. And I am not
20

going to repeat it here. In view of the fact that the
draft resolution contained in document S/12256 mainly
concerns the question of the United Nations Force,
on which China’s position is known to all, the Chinese
delegation did not participate in the vote on the draft
resolution.

196. Sweden does not believe that any lasting solution can be found through one-sided actions by one
party or the other. The consequences would almost
certainly be counter-actions,
increased suffering and
tension, The Swedish Government therefore appeals
to both parties to resume negotiations
under the
Secretary-General’s
mission of good offices, with a
view to reaching a settlement which safeguards the
legitimate interests of all concerned. In this context,
we also hope that it will be possible to resume the
talks on the humanitarian problems, in order to achieve
relief as soon as possible for the many suffering
Cypriots uprooted since the events of 1974.

192. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): It was with great
satisfaction and relief that my delegation a couple of
hours ago ‘voted for the prolongation of the mandate
of UNFICYP
for another period of six monthssatisfaction and relief because it is obvious to my delegation that the presence of UNFICYP
in Cyprus is
an indispensable factor for maintaining peace and security in the island. The Secretary-General states in his
report that the continued presence of UNFICYP
is
essential. We agree. The Secretary-General points out
that the withdrawal of United Nations troops from the
island in the present circumstances would certainly
heighten tension between the two communities,
endanger the cease-fire and further reduce the
prospects of achieving a just and lasting peace in
Cyprus.

197. In joining today’s Council decision, my delegation is obliged to point to the fact that the UNFICYP
reimbursements
have run years behind their actual
payment schedules, owing to the shortfall in voluntary
contributions.
Since 1970 the deficit in UNFICYP’s
budget, has increased from $7.5 million to approximately $45 million. The growing deficit is causing
great concern also to my Government,
It is in fact
the troop-contributing
countries, of which my country
is one, which are financing the deficit, besides directly
bearing a considerable percentage of the cost themselves. A solution of the problems of reimbursement
to the troop-contributing
States is therefore a matter of
vital importance.

193. The task entrusted to UNFICYP
is not an easy
one. One of the main problems is to assist in keeping
the cease-fire lines intact in a situation where attempts
are made in some areas to move those lines forward.
UNFICYP has tried to keep the areas between the two
cease-fire lines open for innocent civilian activities,
especially farming. Those areas, comprising
approximately 3 per cent of the total area of Cyprus,
can thus be used for beneficial and constructive
purposes. But there is the risk that military actions
may turn them into a contexted and wasted no man’s
land. It is therefore important that the parties fully
co-operate with UNFICYP
in keeping intact the
military stoles L/I/O in this respect.

198. I should like on this occasion to express the
deep appreciation and gratitude of my Government to
Lieutenant-General
Prem Chand, the Force Commander, for his distinguished service and very able
leadership during a trying period. The Swedish delegation extends its very best wishes to him as he
relinquishes his command after several years in the
service of the United Nations. 1 should also like
to express to the men and the officers of UNFICYP
the Swedish Government’s deep appreciation of then
outstanding services in a very difficult task.

194. Another serious problem exists in connexion
with the situation in the northern sector of Cyprus
and the Greek Cypriots still living in that area. Here
UNFICYP has had special difficulties in exercising the
freedom of movement which is a necessary prerequisite for the carrving out of its responsibilities.
Undisturbed, free and normal access for UNFICYP
to
Greek Cypriots habitations has not been fully achieved.
and this hampers.its humanitarian activities and also
has a detrimental effect on the efforts to create an
atmosphere conducive to a just and lasting settlement.

199. Finally, my delegation wants to express its
sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General, as well as
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Perez de CuelIar. for their untiring and devoted
work in the cause of finally bringing peace to Cyprus.
These thanks also go to the staff supporting the
efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special
Representative.

195. UNFICYP’s operational problems are of course
a mere reflection of the complexities in the present
overall situation in Cyprus, The difficulties in creating
a negotiating process are obvious and must be deeply
regretted. The prolonged difficulties in bringing about
intercommunal
talks under the good offices of the
Secretary-General
give rise to serious concern.
The only way to find a peaceful, stable and just
solution of the Cyprus question is through an agreement between the two communities: and the best hope
for such a solution is through bilateral intercommunal
talks.

200. I should not like to conclude, today without
expressing, on behalf of the Swedish Government,
the deep appreciation of my Government and of the
Swedish people to the Secretary-General
for the
untiring efforts which he is deploying in the search
for peace and conciliation in Cyprus and elsewhere. We
congratulate him on his re-election; but even more we
congratulate the United Nations. We wish him success
iit his future work and we pledge the continued and
unstinted support of the Swedish Government and
people for his efforts.
21

201. The PRESIDENT (inte~prc’trrfio,?J~orn French):
1 should like in turn to address a few words to the
representative of Sweden.
202. It seems that this is the last time that our colleague from Sweden, Mr. Olaf Rydbeck, has spoken
in the Council. I should like to tell him how we have
all appreciated his very distinguished participation
in the work of the Council during the past two years
and how happy we all are to have worked closely
together in this body and in the United Nations in
general. I should like to wish him every success in
his tiew duties as Ambassador of his country to
London.

208. Almost two and one half years have passed
since the time when the Republic of Cyprus, an
independent, sovereign State and a Member of the
United Nations, fell victim to flagrant military interference from outside in its internal affairs. The results
of that interference are still being felt today. Foreign
troops are still stationed on the territory of Cyprus.
Far from ceasing, the attempts to partition Cyprus and
eliminate the united Cypriot State are being intensified.
Certain circles, in disregard of United Nations decisions, are trying to subordinate Cyprus to their own
militarist ends and to turn the island into stronghold
of the Worth Atlantic Treaty Organization in the
Eastern Mediterranean.

‘iO3. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): Mr. President, as
you have been kind enough to address me personally,
I should very much like to respond.

209. As a result of the events that took place in
the summer of 1974, the traditional economic and
other links between the various parts of the island
were disrupted. They have still not been restored.
Many thousands of Cypriots have been turned into
refugees in their own country. The talks between
representatives of the Greek and Turkish communities
in the island have not led to any tangible results; in
fact, they have reached a deadlock.

204. Not only am I leaving tomorrow but my country
is also leaving the Council at the end of the year. This
may or may not be the last meeting of the Council
for this month but, as you said, this is the last time
that I shall appear here. This gives me an opportunity
to express my appreciation, as well as that of my
collaborators in my delegation, to all members of the
Council for the fruitful co-operation and, I dare say,
friendship which we have enjoyed with all our colleagues during the past two years. It has been an
exceptionally active period and we have faced crucially
important questions, For us in the Swedish delegation, the experience of working closely on these
matters with other members of the Council-permanent or non-permanent-has
been an extremely
rewarding one, and we want to thank you, Mr. President, and all our colleagues on the Council for your
friendship and co-operation.

210. In recent years the Cyprus problem has been
repeatedly considered by the United Nations, both in
the Security Council and in the General Assembly. Just
a month ago the Assembly, by an overwhelming
majority, adopted resolution 31/12, in which it
reaffirmed its resolutions 3212 (XXIX) and 3395 (XXX)
and demanded the urgent implementation
of those
resolutions.
211. The situation in Cyprus has been repeatedly
considered by the Security Council. During the past
two and one-half years, the Council has adopted
14 resolutions on Cyprus.

205. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (i,lt(~~prctlrtion~~~~~/~~R/~sitr/r): I should like
first of all to welcome here at the Security Council
table the new representative of France to the United
Nations, Mr. Jacques Leprette, and to wish him sucess
in this responsible position. It is with particular
satisfaction that we see Mr. Leprette heading the
French delegation here in the Security Council,
since he is no newcomer to United Nations affairs.
We are therefore sure that his knowledge. and
experience will be useful to the entire Council.

212.. These United Nations decisions clearly define
the fundamental principles for a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem. Above all, this means that
there must be respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of
Cyprus and resolute opposition to any attempts to
partition the island. This means, furthermore,
that
there must be a speedy withdrawal from the island of
all foreign troops and foreign military personnel and
that all foreign interference in the affairs of the
sovereign Republic of Cyprus must stop. This means
that urgent measures must be taken to enable the
refugees to return to their homes. This means that
the success of the talks between the representatives
of the two communities on Cyprus, under the auspices
of the Secretary-General, must be ensured, with a
view to a political settlement. This means, finally,
that there must be an injunction on the interested
parties to refrain from any unilateral actions which
might aggravate the situation and jeopardize the talks
between the two communities, whose outcome-as
is particularly stressed in ‘Security Council resolution
360 (1974)-should
not be impeded or prejudiced

206. I should like to take this opportunity to say how
grateful we are to the representive of Sweden to the
United Nations, Mr. Rydbeck, who is leaving us, for
the useful and constructive contribution which he and
his country have made to the work of the Security
Council, and we wish him success in his new post.
207. The Security Council has once again been
considering the question of extending the mandate of
UNFICYP.
But this question cannot be considered in
isolation from the important political aspects of the
Cyprus problem as a who!e. For the situation in Cyprus
remains complicated and ttnse.
22

by the acquisition of advantages resulting from military
operations.
213. Unfortunately,

it must be noted that, far from
those fundamental principles
are constantly being violated.
being put into practice,

214. The delay in settling the Cyprus crisis and the
fact that United Nations decisions on Cyprus have not
been implemented are leading to an escalation of
the military confrontation
on the island and are
increasing the alienation between the two communities
and exacerbating the tension in that part of the Eastern
Mediterranean. Such a situation is intolerable; it cannot
be accepted. The Security Council must do everything
possible to ensure implementation
of the United
Nations decisions on Cyprus. That would enhance
the authority of the United Nations and would be in
keeping with the interests of the Cypriot people, as
well as the interests of ensuring international peace
and security.
215. The position of the Soviet Union with regard
to questions related to a settlement of the Cyprus crisis
is clear and consistent. The Soviet Union has always
argued, and still argues, that the solution of the Cyprus
problem should be based on the principle of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus and on the principle that the
internal affairs of Cyprus must be decided by the
Cypriots themselves, due account being taken of the
interests of both communities and without any attempt.
to impose on the Cypriots from outside decisions that
are not their own.

firmly in favour of the solution of the Cyprus problem
on the basis of the principles
I have outlined [set
s/12255, (IIIIIC.Y I]. These principles for the settlement
of the Cyprus crisis were also confirmed at the Fifth
Conference of Heads of State or Government
of
Non-Aligned Countries, at Colombo. They were confirmed, too, during the debate on the question of
Cyprus at the present session of the Genera1 Assembly.
219. In the present
circumstances,
the Soviet
proposal for the consideration
of the Cyprus problem
at a representative
international
conference within
the framework of the United
Nations is especially
timely. The present deadlock testifies eloquently to the
fact that there is no alternative
to such a solution if
the question of Cyprus ia to be approached from the
standpoint of the interests of the people of Cyprus,
the interests of security in the Eastern Mediterranean,
and the aim of easing
international
tension. The
present report oftbe Secretary.-General
on the situation
in the island testifies to the timeliness of another
Soviet proposal as well-namely,
the proposal to
send to Cyprus a Security Council mission with a view
to learning at first band whether the United Nations
decisions are being carried out and, if not, why they
are not being carried out.
220. The Soviet delegation
was not against extending
the mandate of UNFICYP
for another six-month
period, since it believes that such an extension has
the required agreement
of the Government
of the
Republic of Cyprus. In this respect, we have in mind
the fact that the stationing
of the Force in Cyprus
will, as in the past, be financed on a voluntary basis.

216. An important condition for a lasting settlement
is the demilitarization
of the island, including the
withdrawal of foreign troops and the dismantling
of all foreign military bases on the island.

221. In conclusion,
the Soviet delegation deems it
necessary to stress that the extension of the mandate
of TJNFICYP does not in itself mean progress towards
a solution of the Cyprus problem. The Security Council should intensify its efforts to put an end to the
unjustified delay in the settlement
Of the Cyprus
crisis. It should not countenanci
any developments
that would lead to a further exacerbation
of the
situation in that part of the world.

217. The Soviet Union is categorically against
attempts to seek a settlement of the Cyprus situation
behind the backs of the Cypriot people, in disregard
of the United Nations, and in the narrow interests of
this or that group of countries or military bloc. The
Soviet Union is firmly in favour of the immediate and
comprehensive implementation
of United Nations
decisions on Cyprus.

The

mweting

I-ose

at 7.40 P.m.

Notes

t United Nations, Trecrfy Series, vol. 75, No. 973, P, 287.
2 Official
Records
qf the GP~PIYI/ Assembly.
Thirty-Jirat
Session,
Plemry
Meetings, 61st meeting, para. 173.
3 United Nations, Trecrty Series.
vol.
382, NO. 3475, P9 5.

218. The States Parties to the Warsaw Pact, at the
recent meeting of the Political Consultative Committee
at Bucharest on 25 and 26 November 1976, came out

23

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
thruughottt
the
your bookstore
or write to: 1Jnitcd Nations.
Salts Section.
New York ur Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Lcs publications
des Nations
Units
sent en vcnte dans les libmirics
et Its agcnces
monde untier. Inl’ormez-vous
aupr&s dc votre libraire
ou adrrssez-vous
<I : Nations
des ventes. New York ou Gen6ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

I’UBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Nacioncs
todas partcs del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

DE

LAS

NACIONES

d@ositaircs
du
Units. Section

UNIDAS

Unidas
estBn en venta en librerias
y casns distrihuidoras
en
a XI librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Seccidn dc Ventas,

00400

83-60801-April

198%-2,200
