34

General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

1784 (XVII). The problem of Chinese refugees
in Hong Kong
The General Assembly,
Considering that for humanitarian reasons refugees
in various parts of the world require international
assistance,
Recalling its resolution 1167 (XII) of 26 November
1957, in which it recognized that the problem of the
Chinese refugees in Hong Kong is of concern to the
international community and pointed out the need for
emergency and long-term assistance,
Appreciating the efforts of Member States, the Government of Hong Kong, certain non-governmental organizations and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in endeavouring to meet the needs of the
refugees entering Hong Kong,
1. Reaffirms its concern over the situation of the
Chinese refugees ;
2. Appeals to the States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies and to
interested non-governmental organizations to increase
their contributions and to continue giving all possible
aid to those refugees ;
3. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to use his good offices, in agreement with the Governments of the countries concerned,
to provide assistance to the Chinese refugees in Hong

Decides to give priority to the items entitled "Draft
Convention on Freedom of Information" and "Draft
Declaration on Freedom of Information" and to devote,
at its eighteenth session, as many meetings as necessary
to the consideration of these items.
1198th plenary 111/'l'tino.
19 December 1967.

1841 (XVII). Implementation of the Supplementary Convention of 1956 on the Abolition of
Slavery, the Slave Trade and Institutions and
Practices similar to Slavery

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Third Committee has adopted the
preamble and article 1 of the draft Declaration on the
Right of Asylum,
Having been unable to complete the consideration of
the draft Declaration,
Decides to take up the item entitled "Draft Declaration on the Right of Asylum" as soon as possible at its
eighteenth session and, at that session, to devote as
many meetings as necessary to the completion of this
item.
1198th plenary meetinq,
19 December 1962.

The General Assembly,
Recallinq article 4 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which states :
";\Jo one shal1 be held in slavery or servitude :
s1averv and the slave trade shall be prohibitrd in a 11
their forms",
B elievinq that slavery, the slave trade and all instit11tions and practices simiiar to slavery shonld br rihoHshrd.
Belil'vinq further that the participation of all Statf'~
Members of the United Nations and members of th,-,
specialized agencies in the Tnternational Slaven, Convention of 192610 and the Final Act and Sunnlfmentarv
Convention of 1956 on the Abolition of Slavfn', tlw
Slave Trade and Institutions and Practicfs similar to
Slavery,11 and the full implementation of these instruments, would constitute an important advance towards
the achievement of this end,
N otinn that as vet fiftv-two States Mfmbers of tlw
United ~ations and memhers of the specialized agencifs
are not parties to the Convention of 1926. ancl that
seventy-eight are not parties to the Supplementarv Cnnvention of 1956,
1. Calls upon those States Members of the Unitfrl
;\J ations and members of the specialized agt>ncirs which
have not yet become parties to these Conventions to
do so;
2. Urges all States parties to the Conventions to cooperate fully in carrying out their terms. in particu Jar h"
furnishing to the Secretary-General, if they have not
already done so, the information called for undfr article
8, paragraph 2, of the Supplementary Convention of
1956.
1198th plenary meetinn,
19 December 196:!.

1840 (XVII). Draft Convention on Freedom of
Information; draft Declaration on Freedom
of Information

1842 (XVII). Measures designed to promote
among youth the ideals of peace, mutual
respect and understanding between peoples

The General Assembly,
Having made progress in the preparation of the draft
Convention on Freedom of Information at its fourteenth,
fifteenth and sixteenth sessions,
Bearing in mind that a draft resolution concerning the
future organization of work on this subject was submitted to the General Assembly at its seventeenth
session,9
Having been unable at its seventeenth session to consider the draft Convention and the draft Declaration on
Freedom of Information, as well as the above-mentioned
draft resolution,

The General Assembly,
Rec.alling its resolution 1572 (XV) of 18 December
19~ on measures designed to promote among yonth
the ideals of peace, mutual respect and understancling
between peoples,
Taking note of the report on this subject snbmitted
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to the Economic and Social Council, 12
as well as Council resolution 895 (XXXIV) of 27 Jnly
1962 requesting the General Assembly to take such
decision thereon as it may see fit,

Kong.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.

1839 (XVII). Draft Declaration on the
Right of Asylum

9 Jbid., Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 45 and
47, document A/C.3/L.1048/Rev.1.

lO Publications of the League of Nations, Vl.B.Slavery,
1926.VI.B.7 (document C.586.M.223.1926.VI).
11 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 57.XI\'.2.
1 2 Trammitted by a note of the Secretary-General (E/J638).
