V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the problem of remnants of war; 27
2. Regrets that no concrete measures have been taken
to solve the problem of remnants of war despite the various resolutions and decisions adopted thereon by the
General Assembly and the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme;
3. Reiterates its support of the just demands of the
developing countries affected by the implantation of mines
and the presence of other remnants of war in their territories for compensation and for complete removal of those
obstacles by the States that implanted them;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Environment Programme and
other organizations of the United Nations system, within
their mandates, to collect all information on expertise and
available equipment, so as to evaluate, on request, the
actual needs of the developing countries affected and to
assist those countries in their efforts to detect and clear
material remnants of war;
5. Calls upon all States to co-operate with the appropriate organizations of the United Nations system in
carrying out the task assigned to them in paragraph 4
above;

6. Also calls upon those developed countries directly
responsible for the presence of remnants of war to intensify bilateral consultations with the aim of concluding, without undue delay, agreements for the solution of those
problems;

7. Requests all States to inform the Secretary-General
of actions they have taken in the implementation of the
present resolution;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session a detailed and
comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/168. Plan of Action to Combat Desertification
A
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN OF ACTION
• TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/172 of 19 December 1977,
by which it approved the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification, 28
Recalling also paragraph 8 of its resolution 38/ 165 of 19
December 1983, by which it welcomed section VIII of
decision 11/1 of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme, 29 in which the Council
decided to devote two days, during its twelfth session, to a
detailed assessment of the implementation of the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/65 of 26 July 1984 on the Implementation of the
Plan of Action to Combat Desertification,
27 A/39/580.
28 Report of the Unued Nations ( ·onJcrenc,• on DeJemfu·atwn, Na,ro/>1, 29
AuN':,_t-9 Septeml>er 1977 (A/CONF.74i36), chap. I.
See Official Records of the General Asseml>lr. Tl11r11·-e1ghIh Ses.,io11,
Supplement No. 25 (A/38/iS), annex.
•

129

Having considered the views of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
general assessment of progress in the implementation of
the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification during the
period 1978-1984, 30
Having also considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 1984/72 of 27 July 1984 on environment and
development in Africa,
Bearing in mind the current serious problem of prolonged drought and desertification that has contributed to
the widespread economic catastrophe in a large number of
African countries south of the Sahara,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the views of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the general assessment of progress in the
implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification during the period 1978-1984;
2. Also takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Governing Council on the implementation of the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification; 31
3. Takes note with interest of Governing Council decision 12/ IO of 28 May 1984 on desertification; 32
4. Notes with great concern that, during the seven years
since the United Nations Conference on Desertification in
1977, desertification has continued to spread and intensify
in developing countries, particularly in Africa;
5. Welcomes the reconfirmation by the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
of the validity of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification, the reaffirmation of the central role of the Programme
in catalysing, co-ordinating and assessing the implementation of the Plan of Action at the international level, and
the approval by the Governing Council of concrete, timebound activities to comhat desertification over the next fifteen years;
6. Decides to expand the role of the Consultative
Group for Desertification Control, which is financed from
voluntary contributions, to include explicitly responsihility for advising the Executive Director on:
(a) The progress and effectiveness of activities implemented under the Plan of Action, identifying constraints
and possible solutions to problems, taking account of relevant evaluations and case studies;
(b) Programme priorities of the United Nations Environment Programme related to problems of desertification;
(c) Measures required to improve implementation of
the Plan of Action on a regional and world-wide basis;
7. Calls upon the Consultative Group for Desertification Control to intensify further its efforts to assist the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme in the mobilization of resources for the implementation of the Plan of Action;
8. Urges Governments of countries prone to or suffering from desertification to give priority to the establishment of national programmes to combat desertification
and to consider setting up appropriate national machinery
or assigning responsibility to existing national machinery,
where appropriate, to that end;
9. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to examine, at its thirteenth session, the possibility of:
30 l lNEP/GC.1219 and Corr I
.ll A,391433. annex I.

3 , See Official Records of the Urm•ral Asseml>l,1·. Thim•-11in1h Session, Supp!.•1111•nt :\'o. 25 (A/39125), ann~,.
•

130

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

=-=------------------(a) The inclusion of reference to the lJnited Repu~lic
of Tanzania in the terms of reference of the United
Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in order to enable that
country to receive assistance in the implementation of programmes for combating desertification;
(b) The expansion of the scope of the work of the
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office so as to enable 1t
to assist the States members of the Southern African
Development Co-ordination Conference in implementing
the recommendations of the United Nations Environment
Programme on combating desertification and drought, in
the same way as the Office is currently assisting the States
members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahe!;
10. Urges all Governments to increase their assistance,
inter a/ia, by financing regional and subregional programmes, through appropriate channels, including the
Special Account created under General Assembly resolution 32/172 of 19 December 1977. to countries suffering
from desertification;
11. Endorses the decision of the Governing Council in
paragraph 28 of its decision 12/ I 0 32 that a further overall
assessment of progress in the implementation of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification should be carried out
in 1992.
103rd plenary mecting
17 December 1984

B
IMPLEMENTATION IN THE SUDANO-SAHELIAN REGION
OF THE PLAN OF ACTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/190 of 17 December I 981.
37/216 of20 December 1982 and 38/164 of 19 December
1983,
Taking note of decision I 2/10 of 28 May 1984 of the
Governing Council of the lJnited Nations Environment
Programme 32 on desertification,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions
1984/65 of 26 July 1984 on the implementation in the
Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification and 1984/72 of 27 July I 984 on the environment and development in Africa,
Taking note also of the inclusion of Ghana and Togo in
the list of countries to be covered by the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office under the Plan of Action to
Combat Desertification, 28
Having considered the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification, 33
Bearing in mind the special review undertaken by the
Governing Council of the progress made in implementing
the Plan of Action, based, inter a/ia, on the general assessment by the Executive Director of progress in the implementation of the Plan of Action during the period 19781984, 30 and on the document on the assessment of desertification in the Sudano-Sahelian region, 34
Aware that the prime responsibility in the struggle
against desertification and the effects of drought rests upon
33 A/39/433, annex II.
34 UNEP/GC.12/INF.3 and Corr. I.

the countries concerned. and noting the efforts of those
countries to combat desertification and drought,
l. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification;
1
Notes with ,·,mcern:
(a) That the persistent drought in the Sahe! has intensified and spread into other parts of Africa, assuming the
catastrophic proportions of a generalized drought;
ih) That the inadequacy of financial resources contmues to place a serious constraint on the fight against
desertification;
(c) That struggle against desertification requires financial and human resources beyond the means of the affected
countries;
3. Expresses I1s appreciation of the progress made
towards overcoming these obstacles by the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office. on behalf of the United Nations
Environment Programme, as part of a joint action by the
United Nations Environment Programme and the United
Nations Development Programme to assist the Governments of the region in combating desertification;
4. Expresses Ifs appreciation also for the efficient and
co-ordinated manner in which the Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme and the
Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme have continued to develop this joint action
through the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office;
5. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
to continue to provide and increase their support to the
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in order to enable
it to respond fully to the urgent needs of the countries of
the Sudano-Sahehan region;
6. Expresses 1/s gratitude to the Governments, United
Nations bodies, intergovernmental organizations and
other organizations which have contributed to the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification;
7. Emphasizes the need to redouble the efforts in order
to implement in the Sudano-Sahelian region the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification and urges all Governments to respond favourably to the requests submitted by
the Governments of the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian
region for assistance in combating desertification;
8. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to make the necessary
arrangements at each session for submitting a report to the
General Assembly. through the Economic and Social
Council, on the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian
region of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/169.

Living conditions of the Palestinian people
in the occupied Palestinian territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements. 1976, 35 and the relevant recommendations for
l5 Report o/ llah11a1. l'nit,•d Nations Conference on Human Se11/ements.
I ancou,·er . .i'J .",fay- I I June I 976 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
f· 76.IV.7 and corrigendum), chap. I.
