44

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

States

Percent

Germany, Federal Republic of .......... .
Korea, Republic of .................... .
Liechtenstein
Monaco . . . : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : :
San Marino .......................... .
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . .
. .......... .
Viet-Nam ............... .

4.15
0.13
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.98
0.16
The following countries being called upon to contribute:
~a) To the International Court of Justice: Liechtenstein, San Marino and Switzerland ·
( b) To the International Control ,of Narcotic Drugs:
Germany _(Federal Republic of), Liechtenstein, Monaco,
San Marmo, Switzerland and Viet-Nam·
( c) To the Economic Commission for 'Asia and the
Far East: Korea (Republic of), and Viet-Nam;
(d) To the Economic Commission for Europe: Germany (Federal Republic of) ;
7_. Resol1:es that ~l?an, which participated in certain
U1;11ted Nations activities before admission to membership, shall not be required to contribute separately
towards the annual expenses of such activities for the
year 1957 onwards,. and that for the year 1956 the
amounts that Japan 1s called upon to contribute under
paragrap~ 4 of resolution 970 (X) shall be reduced
by one-mnth ;
~- Resolves that the Federal Republic of Germany,
which acceded to the Convention on the Declaration of
Death of Missing Persons on 30 January 1956 shall
be called ul!on to contribute towards the expen'ses of
the Internat10nal Bureau for Declarations of Death for
the years 1956 and 1957 at the rate of 4.61 per cent
pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 970 (X) and for
1958 at the rate of 4.15 per cent, pursuant to paragraph
6 of the present resolution;
9.. Ur[Jes Member States, within the limits of their
co11;stttutlonal processes, to seek appropriate measures
w~ich_ would ensure the payment of their annual con!rtbuttons to. the United Nations as early as possible
m the financial year ;
l~. R~quests t~e Secretary-General, under the authority given to him by paragraph 3 of resolution 970
(X), to continue in 1958 to make arrangements for the
P'.1-yment of part of Members' contributions in currencies oth~r than United States dollars as comprehensive
as practicable.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.

.J

1224 (XII). Offer by the Government of Chile
of land in Santiago to be used as office site
for the United Nations and other interna•
tional organizations
The General Assembly,
Having regard to the reports of the Secretary-General28 concerning the offer by the Government of Chile
to transfer ~o the _Dnited Nations, free of charge, a
plot of land m Santiago for the construction of a buildmg to house United Nations and specialized agency
offices located in Chile,
Tak~ng_ note of res_olution 138 (VII) of the Economic
Commiss101: for Latin America, of 28 May 1957, which
>:7as transmitted to the Secretary-General for consideration by the General Assembly at its twelfth session,
and the report of the ad hoe committee on a building
.. Ibid., agenda item 50, documents A/3641 and A/C.5/712.

for the Economic Commission for Latin America established within that Commission pursuant to the said
resolution,
Considering, in the light of the details given in the
Secretary-General's report, 29 the indubitable advantages
presented by the offer of the Government of Chile for
improved conduct of the work of the United Nations
in Latin America,
Considering that the construction of such a building
will make possible the establishment of common services
for the United Nations and the specialized agencies
having offices at Santiago, which has been repeatedly
requested at various meetings of United Nations organs
concerned with administrative matters,
Considering the need for effective measures to ensure
that this plan is executed in the most satisfactory manner possible,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to accept with
thanks the generous offer of the Government of Chile;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to open with
Governments of States members of the Economic Commission for Latin America such negotiations as may be
necessary with regard to the financing of the construction of the United Nations building at Santiago, and to
convene such meetings with representatives of those
Governments as he may deem desirable ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
General Assembly at its thirteenth session, in accordance
with the proposals he has made, detailed plans for the
construction of the building, together with final financial
arrangements and such observations thereon as may be
made by the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
1225 (XII). United Nations salary, allowance and
benefits system: amendments to the Staff
Regulations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General30 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions31 on certain outstanding questions relating to the United Nations salary, allowance
and benefits system,
Resolves that the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations shall be modified by the amendments annexed
to the present resolution, with effect from 1 January
1958:
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
ANNEX
Regulation 3.4 (Dependency benefits)
Add a new paragraph ( c), to rea,d :
"(i) With a view to avoiding duplication of benefits and in
order to achieve equality between staff members who receive
dependency benefits under applicable laws in the form of
governmental grants or income tax exemption and staff members who do not receive such dependency benefits, the Secretary-General shall prescribe conditions under which the
dependency allowance for a child specified in (a) (i) above
shall be payable to the extent that the dependency benefits
enjoyed by the staff member or his spouse under applicable
laws amount to less than such a dependency allowance. Where

..
Ibid., document A/C.5/712.
00
Ibid., agenda item 51, document A/3656
"'- Ibid., document A/3681.
·
