United Nations

A/RES/68/165

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 January 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 69 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2013
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/68/456/Add.2)]

68/165. Right to the truth
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,1 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949 3 and the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977, 4 and
other relevant instruments of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, as well as the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 5
Recalling article 32 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 relating to the protection of victims of international armed conflicts, which
recognizes the right of families to know the fate of their relatives, and article 33 of
Additional Protocol I, which provides that the parties to an armed conflict shall
search for the persons who have been reported missing, as soon as circumstances
permit,
Recalling also its resolution 60/147 of 16 December 2005, in which it adopted
the Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for
Victims of Gross Violations of International Human Rights Law and Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law,
Recognizing
the
universality,
indivisibility,
interdependence
interrelatedness of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights,

and

Taking into account Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/66 of
20 April 2005, 6 Human Rights Council decision 2/105 of 27 November 2006 7 and
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
4
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
5
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
6
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda
(E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53),
chap. I, sect. B.
2

13-44935

*1344935*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/165

Right to the truth

resolutions 9/11 of 18 September 2008, 8 12/12 of 1 October 2009 9 and 21/7 of
27 September 2012 10 on the right to the truth,
Welcoming the creation of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence of the
Human Rights Council by its resolution 18/7 of 29 September 2011, 11 and the
appointment of a mandate holder by the Council at its nineteenth session,
Taking into account Human Rights Council resolutions 10/26 of 27 March
2009 12 and 15/5 of 29 September 2010 13 on forensic genetics and human rights, in
which the Council recognized the importance of the utilization of forensic genetics to
deal with the issue of impunity within the framework of investigations relating to
gross human rights violations and serious violations of international humanitarian law,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 65/196 of 21 December 2010, in which
it proclaimed the International Day for the Right to the Truth concerning Gross
Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of Victims,
Recalling also the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
61/177 of 20 December 2006, in particular article 24, paragraph 2, thereof, which
sets out the right of victims to know the truth regarding the circumstances of the
enforced disappearance, the progress and the results of the investigation and the fate
of the disappeared person, article 24, paragraph 3, which sets forth State party
obligations to take appropriate measures in this regard, and the preamble, which
reaffirms the right to freedom to seek, receive and impart information to that end,
and welcoming the entry into force of the Convention on 23 December 2010,
Noting that the Human Rights Committee and the Working Group on Enforced
or Involuntary Disappearances have recognized the right of the victims of gross
violations of human rights and their relatives to the truth about the events that have
taken place, including the identification of the perpetrators of the acts that gave rise
to such violations,
Recalling the set of principles for the protection and promotion of human
rights through action to combat impunity, 14 and taking note with appreciation of the
updated version of those principles, 15
Stressing that adequate steps should also be taken to identify victims in
situations that do not amount to armed conflict, especially in cases of massive or
systematic violations of human rights,
Convinced that States should preserve archives and other evidence concerning
gross violations of human rights and serious violations of international humanitarian
law to facilitate knowledge of such violations, the investigation of allegations and
the provision for victims of access to an effective remedy in accordance with
international law,
_______________
8

Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/63/53/Add.1), chap. I.
Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/65/53 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A.
10
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
11
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
12
Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/64/53), chap. II, sect. A.
13
Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/65/53/Add.1), chap. II.
14
E/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/20/Rev.1, annex II.
15
E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1.
9

2/4

Right to the truth

A/RES/68/165

Recalling that a specific right to the truth may be characterized differently in
some legal systems as the right to know or the right to be informed or to freedom of
information,
Acknowledging, in cases of gross violations of human rights and serious
violations of international humanitarian law, the need to study the interrelationships
among the right to the truth and the right to access to justice, the right to obtain
effective remedy and reparation and other relevant human rights,
Emphasizing that the public and individuals are entitled to have access, to the
fullest extent practicable, to information regarding the actions and decision-making
processes of their Governments, within the framework of the national legal system
of each State,
Recognizing the fundamental role of civil society, through its engagement,
advocacy and participation in decision-making processes, in promoting and
achieving respect for the right to the truth,
1.
Recognizes the importance of respecting and ensuring the right to the
truth so as to contribute to ending impunity and to promote and protect human
rights;
2.
Welcomes the establishment in several States of specific judicial
mechanisms and non-judicial mechanisms, such as truth and reconciliation
commissions, that complement the justice system, to investigate violations of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law, and appreciates the
elaboration and publication of the reports and decisions of these bodies;
3.
Encourages the States concerned to disseminate, implement and monitor
the implementation of the recommendations of non-judicial mechanisms, such as
truth and reconciliation commissions, and to provide information regarding
compliance with the decisions of judicial mechanisms;
4.
Encourages other States to consider establishing specific judicial
mechanisms and, where appropriate, truth and reconciliation commissions to
complement the justice system to investigate and address gross violations of human
rights and serious violations of international humanitarian law;
5.
Encourages States and international organizations to provide requesting
States with necessary and appropriate assistance regarding the right to the truth by
means of, among other actions, technical cooperation and the exchange of
information concerning administrative, legislative and judicial and non-judicial
measures, as well as experiences and best practices that have as a purpose the
protection, promotion and implementation of this right, including practices
regarding the protection of witnesses and the preservation and management of
archives;
6.
Also encourages States and international organizations to acknowledge
the important role of civil society in monitoring the implementation of
recommendations of truth commissions, and encourages donors to make the
training, support and strengthening of civil society organizations a priority within a
comprehensive transitional justice approach;
7.
Urges all States that have not done so to consider signing, ratifying or
acceding to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance;

3/4

A/RES/68/165

Right to the truth

8.
Calls upon States to work in cooperation with the Special Rapporteur on
the promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence in
accordance with his mandate, including by extending invitations to the Special
Rapporteur;
9.
Welcomes the report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth,
justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence to the Human Rights Council at
its twenty-fourth session on selected challenges faced by truth commissions in
transitional periods, 16 and takes note of the recommendations contained in the
report;
10. Encourages States that have not yet done so to establish a national
archival policy that ensures that all archives pertaining to human rights are
preserved and protected and to enact legislation that declares that the documentary
heritage of the nation is to be retained and preserved and that creates a framework
for managing State records from their creation to their destruction or preservation,
and takes note in this regard of ongoing efforts by the Human Rights Council, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, regional organizations
and other stakeholders to systematize existing standards in the area of access to
information, the protection and preservation of records and the management of
archives;
11. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to continue to invite, from within existing resources, Member States,
United Nations organs, intergovernmental organizations, national human rights
institutions and non-governmental organizations to provide information on good
practices in the establishment, preservation and provision of access to national
archives on human rights, and to make the information received publicly available
in an online database;
12. Invites special procedures and other mechanisms of the Human Rights
Council, within the framework of their mandates, to take into account, as
appropriate, the issue of the right to the truth;
13. Encourages United Nations agencies, Member States and civil society
organizations to exchange experiences and good practices on the subject of the right
to the truth, with a view to improving the effectiveness of relevant mechanisms and
procedures empowered to seek information, assert facts and effectively reveal the
truth about what has happened in the aftermath of gross human rights violations and
serious violations of international humanitarian law;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to organize an event in observance of the
International Day for the Right to the Truth concerning Gross Human Rights
Violations and for the Dignity of Victims, subject to availability of resources, in
order to exchange experiences and good practices on the subject of the right to the
truth, with the participation of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth,
justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2013

_______________
16

4/4

A/HRC/24/42.
