S/2015/298

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 April 2015
Original: English

Sixth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2103) and covers developments pertaining to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, since the issuance of my previous report, dated 30 January 2015
(S/2015/70).
2.
During the reporting period, bilateral relations between Iraq and Kuwait
continued to improve. On 16 March, Kuwait took possession of its former consulate
premises in Basra, following the facilitation for the return of the property by the
Government of Iraq, which brought Kuwait a step closer to reopening its consulate.
On 29 March, the President of Iraq, Fuad Masum, met with the Emir of Kuwait,
Sabah al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah, on the margins of the twenty-sixth summit of the
League of Arab States, held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, to discuss issues of mutual
concern and ways of promoting effective relations. On 30 March, the Ministries of
Oil of Iraq and Kuwait signed two memorandums of understanding on the use of
joint oilfields.
3.
On 30 and 31 March, I visited Iraq and Kuwait. During my visits, I met with
the President of Iraq, the Prime Minister of Iraq, Haider al-Abadi, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Ibrahim al-Jafaari, the Speaker of the Council of
Representatives of Iraq, Salim al-Jabouri, and the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, Sabah Khaled al-Hamad al-Sabah. In those
meetings, I commended the enhancement of relations between the two countries,
while also reiterating the need for tangible results on the file of missing Kuwaiti
persons and property and encouraging the parties to exert all efforts, as well as
promising the assistance of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) on the file.
4.
In his first trip outside Iraq, my Special Representative visited Kuwait on
27 April. He met the Prime Minister, Jaber al-Mubarak al-Hamad al-Sabah, the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Director of the Followup and Coordination Department, Nasser Subeeh al-Subeeh, the Ambassador of
Kuwait to Iraq, Ghassan al-Zawawi, the head of the regional delegation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to the Cooperation Council for
the Arab States of the Gulf, Yahia Alibi and the Chairman of the National
15-06535 (E)

300415

*1506535*

S/2015/298

Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs, Ibrahim al-Shaheen.
The Prime Minister reiterated Kuwait’s abiding commitment to support Iraq and its
Government and its wish for Iraq’s unity, stability and security. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs reinforced these messages and pledged Kuwait’s humanitarian
support and its willingness to play a role in helping Iraq to improve its relations
with countries in the Gulf and the rest of the region. All the interlocutors stressed
that the issue of the missing persons was very emotional for Kuwaitis and that the
lack of tangible results was disappointing. They expressed their strong commitment
to the tripartite mechanism, while acknowledging the need to use it more effectively
for the achievement of tangible results. My Special Representative reassured them
that UNAMI, along with the other parties, would work with the tripartite mechanism
and proactively seek ways to make all efforts more effective. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs said that Kuwait looked forward to receiving Iraq’s Minister for
Human Rights and was open to any suggestion put forward by UNAMI to achieve
progress on this file.
5.
Despite the challenging security situation in the country throughout the
reporting period, the Government of Iraq persisted in the search for missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, reasserting its commitment to achieving tangible results.

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, or their remains
6.
During the reporting period, my Deputy Special Representative for Political
Affairs met with the Adviser to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and to the Minister
of Finance of Iraq to assess progress in the search for Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and explore new avenues to advance that search. My Deputy Special
Representative also met with the International Commission on Missing Persons and
academic institutions to discuss ways in which new technology could help to
identify mass graves. From 16 to 18 March, UNAMI participated, in an observer
capacity, in the meeting of the sub-advisory working group and the eighty-ninth
session of the Technical Subcommittee of the tripartite mechanism, which took
place in Kuwait.
7.
On 3 March, the Iraqi interministerial committee on missing Kuwaiti nationals
convened under the aegis of the Ministry of Human Rights of Iraq to assess progress
in the search for information on burial sites, as well as witnesses and informants. It
was agreed that the committee would adhere to its 2015 workplan to the best
possible extent, given the current security situation in Iraq.
8.
On 11 and 12 March, the Iraqi Ministry of Human Rights, in cooperation with
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, published an announcement in local daily
newspapers in an attempt to identify witnesses with knowledge of missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property. In an effort to reach a
wider audience, the announcement was also broadcast on local television channels.
Future advertisements will include the telephone numbers of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, as previously agreed.
9.
On 18 March, during the meeting of the Technical Subcommittee of the
tripartite mechanism, the parties agreed to take the framework on the protection of

2/4

15-06535

S/2015/298

witnesses as a non-binding set of guiding principles for their protection, provided
that those guidelines are not in contradiction with national legislation.
10. From 24 to 29 January, the Ministry of Human Rights, in collaboration with a
specialized team from Baghdad University, and with the participation of the
Ministry of Health and the Medico-Legal Institute, carried out a ground-penetrating
radar trial in the al-Khamisiya site of Thi-Qar governorate, in order to determine its
applicability for the localization of potential burial sites. Acknowledging difficulties
in detecting and determining radar marks for human remains buried for a long
period of time, the Government of Iraq stated that it would proceed with further
trials. The members have agreed to conduct forensic presentations on the use of
technology and forensic operations in challenging contexts, drawing on the
expertise of organizations with widespread experience in that field.
11. Following inconclusive mid-January operations on the border between Kuwait
and Saudi Arabia, where witnesses could not pinpoint the location of the alleged
burial sites of Kuwaiti missing persons, the Government of Iraq renewed contact
with the witnesses, who were able to provide further details. Consequently, the
Government of Iraq requested the assistance of Saudi Arabia in identifying the
location, as it may have been close to a military base during the war and Saudi
Arabia may have archived information on that base.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
12. On 5 March, my Deputy Special Representative was informed by the Adviser
to the Iraqi Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Finance that the Government had
collected a number of books belonging to Kuwait and that arrangements would be
put in place to hand over the property. In the light of the continued failure to unearth
the Kuwaiti national archives, my Deputy Special Representative has reiterated his
proposal of searching the archives of the different ministries with the assistance of
volunteers.

IV. Observations
13. I am encouraged by the enhanced ties and cooperation between Iraq and
Kuwait. The goodwill between the two States is at its strongest since 1990, as
demonstrated, in particular, by the agreement of the Government of Kuwait to a oneyear deferral of the reparation payments by the Government of Iraq. Progress on the
file of missing Kuwaiti persons and property is central to the full normalization of
relations between the two countries and will have far-reaching implications on other
aspects of mutual interest. I believe that this is a very opportune moment for Iraq
and Kuwait to review efforts on this important humanitarian issue and decide on an
enhanced course of action, notably within the tripartite mechanism.
14. I appreciate the efforts and commitment of the Government of Iraq,
particularly in view of the difficult security and economic situation in the country.
However, I remain concerned that no tangible results have been achieved in the
search for missing Kuwaiti persons and property, including the national archives. I
hope that the Government of Iraq will spare no effort to make progress on this issue

15-06535

3/4

S/2015/298

and bring solace to the grieving families of the missing persons, who have been
waiting for news for almost 25 years.
15. In this regard, I reiterate my call on Iraq to take advantage of scientific
advances and modern technology in the search for remains, including new forensic
and geological exploration techniques and infrastructure, and to continue building
the capacity of its institutions to improve the efficiency of the search. I welcome the
decision of the members of the Technical Subcommittee of the tripartite mechanism
to invite forensic experts to share their knowledge on available technologies and
their applicability and relevance. This knowledge-sharing opportunity may allow
Iraq to achieve progress on this important search.
16. I note with regret that no evidence or information has emerged with regard to
the Kuwaiti national archives. I reiterate my previous call on the Government of
Iraq to take into consideration the proposal by UNAMI of developing a targeted
information campaign focusing on the national archives and of receiving assistance
from volunteers to search the archives of different ministries. I strongly encourage
the parties to continue convening the Joint Property Committee every six months in
order to achieve progress on this issue.
17. I commend the longstanding dedication and work of ICRC in addressing the
issue of the missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, particularly through its
tireless efforts as the Chair of the Technical Subcommittee. This guidance and
leadership is allowing the parties to come together and jointly explore the best
possible avenues in the search for the missing persons.
18. I reiterate the unwavering commitment of UNAMI to moving forward the
issue of missing Kuwaiti persons and property, as well as its preparedness to
continue participating in the relevant Iraqi interministerial committees. Through my
Special Representative and my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs,
UNAMI will continue to provide its full assistance to promote, support and facilitate
Iraqi efforts. I encourage Iraq to use this expertise.

4/4

15-06535
