108

General Aatembly-Twenty-ninth Seaaion

gaged in exploiting the natural and human resources
of Namibia, in sorne ca5es to the point of foreseeing
the exhaustion of such natural resources;
9. Requests ali Member States to commemorate
and publicize Namibia Day on 26 August 1975 and
to issue special postage stamps for the occasion;
V
l. Requests the Secretary-General to direct and
make adequate provision for the setting up in an
African State of a United Nations radio transmitter
which would have the function of transmitting radio programmes in the various languages spoken in Namibia,
informing the people of Namibia of United Nations
policies in regard to the liberation of Namibia, the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
the fight against racism and the steps being taken to
achieve decolonization throughout the world;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the Office of Public lnformation of the Secretariat:
(a) To intensify its activities as regards dissemination of information in an effort to acquaint more fully
world public opinion and the mass media with the situation in Namibia and the struggle of its people for
independence;
( b) To provide for the expansion in scope and distribution of the Namibia Bulletin;
(e) To set up a photographic display in the public
arcas of United Nations Headquarters, with a view to
keeping visitors informed of developments in Namibia:
(d) To acquire ali television programmes produced
during the missions of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and to provide wide distribution to these
films as well as to the United Nations film, "Namibia:
A Trust Betrayed", and other appropriate films on
Namibia;
3. Requests all General Assembly committees and
sub-committees to invite a representative of the United
Nations Council for Namibia and the South West Africa
People's Organization to participate in their meetings
whenever the rights and interests of Namibia are discussed and to consult closely with the Council and with
that organization regarding any draft resolution which
may involve the rights and interests of Namibians;

VI
l. Requests ali specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to take
such necessary steps as will enable the representation
and participation of Namibia in the work of such
agencies and organizations;
2. Requests ali specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to ensure
that Namibians are eligible, on the same basis as citizens of member States, for scholarships offered by the
agencies and organizations, and that Namibians wherever possible are employed on the same basis as citizens of member States in the agencies concerned;
3. Requests ali specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia
and the South West Africa People's Organization, to
render, within thei r resn:::ctive spheres of competence,
ali pmsible nssistanc,.
:.he people of Namibia and
to thcir !iberation mm,·,,_ 1t in pa1ticular:

4. Requests the United Nations Development Programme, in consultation with the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, to establish an indicative planning figure for Namibia;
5. Calls upan ali specialized agencies and organizations in the United Nations system, especially the
International Monetary Fund and the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, to consult
with the United Nations Council for Namibia and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations _in ord~r _to
ensure that those organizations are observmg the1r mternational Jeoa] obligations in terms of the advisory
opinion of the° International Co~rt of Justic~ of ~ l June
1971 and relevant United Natwns resolutwns m programmes and activities which may involve collaboration with South Africa;
6. Requests ali intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, bodies and conferences to ensure
that the rights and interests of Namibia are protected;
in this connexion, the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the South West Africa People's Organization should participate, as appropriate, whenever
such rights and interests are involved;
7. Invites ali intergovernmental and non-govemmental organizations, bodies and conferences interested
in the liberation of Namibia to co-operate with the
South West Africa People's Organization and the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the elaboration of programmes of assistance to Namibians and
programmes for the dissemination of information;
Vil

Requests the President of the General Assembly, on
the basis of consultations to be undertaken by the Secretary-General with the regional groups, to nominate
during the current se5sion of the General Assembly
additional members to the United Nations Council for
Namibia with a view to ensuring a broader representation in the Council.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974

•

•

•

At its 2325th p/enary meeting. on 18 Decembu 1974, the
General Assembly, pursuant to :,·ection VII o/ the above resolution, con{irmed the nomination by its President o/ ALGERIA,
AUSTRALIA, BANGLADESH, BoTSWANA, FlNLAND, HAITI and
SENEG~L as members of the United Nations Council for
Namibia.
As a result, the Council is composed o/ the following Member States: ALGERIA, AUSTRALIA, BANGLADESH, 80TSWANA,
BURUNDI, CHILE, CHINA, COLOMBIA, EGYPT, FINLAND, GUYANA, HAITI, INDIA, INDONESIA, LIBERIA, MEXICO, NIGERIA,
PAKISTAN, POLAND, ROMANIA, SENEGAL, TURKEY, UNION OF
SoV!ET SOCIAL!ST REPUBLICS, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAMBIA.

3296 (XXIX). United Nations Fund for Namibia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 ( XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which the United Nations decided to terminate the Mandate of Sot,;th Africa over Namibia and
assume direct responsibility for the Territory until its
independence, and resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May
1967, by which it established the United Nations Council for Namibia,

Re1olution1 adopted on the report1 of the Foarth Committee

Reatfirming its determination to continue to discharge
that responsibility in regard to the Territory,
Mindful that, by assuming direct responsibility for
Namibia, the United Nations incurred a solemn obligation to assist the people of the Territory morally and
materially,
Recal/ing further its resolutions 2679 (XXV) of
9 December 1970, 2872 (XXVI) of 20 December
1971, 3030 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 and 3112
(XXVIII) of 12 December 1973,
Recognizing that South Africa's continued illegal
occupation of Namibia at present prevents the United
Nations from furnishing needed, large-scale assistance
within the Territory,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Fund for Namibia60 and the relevant sections of the report of the United Nations Council for Namibia, 61
1: Approves the guidelines prepared by the United
Nations Council for Namibia for the United Nations
Fund for Namibia; 62
2. Expresses its appreciation to ali those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Fund for Namibia;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to continue to appeal to
Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and private individuals for voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
4. Invites Governments to appeal once more to their
national organizations and institutions for voluntary
contributions to the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
5. Endorses the decision of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to establish an lnstitute for Namibia in Lusaka 63 to enable Namibians to undertake research, training, planning and related activities, with
special reference to the struggle for the freedom of
Namibia and the establishment of an independent State
of Namibia, and, to this end, invites Governments to
make available adequate financia] contributions to the
United Nations Fund for Namibia to finance the cost
of setti_ng up and running the Institute;
6. Decides to allocate to the United Nations Fund
for Namibia the sum of $US 200,000 from the regular
budget of the United Nations for 1975;
1. Expre.sses its appreciation of the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
8. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render
all necessary assistance to the Secretary-General and
the United Nations Council for Namibia in implementing the work programme of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia;
9. Ca/ls upon ali specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system-in
pa(ticular, the International Labour Organisation, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
60 A/9725 and Corr. l.
6! Offedal Records o/ the

General Assembly, Twenty-nintli
Supp/ement No. 24 (A/9624) and Supplement
No. 24A (A/9624/ Add. l).
02 /bid., Supplement No. 24A (A/9624/Add.l ), para. 81.
63 /bid., para. 73.
Session,

109

and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization, the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, the International Monetary Fund, the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations lnstitute for Training and Researchto assist the lnstitute for Namibia, particularly by providing specialists, lecturers and researchers;
1O. Decides, pending the entry into full operation
of a comprehensive programme, that Namibians shall
continue to be eligible for assistance through the
United Nations Eduaational and Training Programme
for Southern Africa and the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa;
11. Requests Member States to give consideration
to the employment of Namibians in their countries;
12. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974

3297 (XXIX). Question of Southern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 64
Having heard the statements of the representatives of
the Zimbabwe African People's Union and the Zimbabwe African National Union, 811 who participated in
an observer capacity in the Fourth Committee's consideration of the item,
Havi11g heard the statements of the petitioners,"
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of lndt!pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other resolutions relating to the question adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special
Committee,
Strongly deploring the failure of the Government of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to discharge its primary responsibility as the
administering Power and, in conformity with the relevant decisions of the United Nations, to put an end to
the critical situation in Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe)
wbich, as repeatedly affirmed by the Security Council,
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
Reaffirming that any attempt to negotiate the
future of Zimbabwe with the illegal régime on the
basis of independence befare majority rule would be in
contravention of the inalienable rights of the people
64 /bid., Suppleme1u No. 23 (A/9623/Rcv.1), chaps: I, IV-VI
341d Vlll.
ti5 Jbid., Twerity-ninth Session, Fourth Committu, 2093rd,
2094th and 2100th meetings.
66 /bid., 2092nd meeting.
