A/66/PV.123

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

123rd plenary meeting

Friday, 27 July 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency
Mr. John Evans Atta Mills, President of the
Republic of Ghana
The President: It is my sad duty to pay tribute to
the memory of His Excellency Mr. John Evans Atta
Mills, the late President of the Republic of Ghana, who
passed away on 24 July.
It is with deep sadness that we bid farewell to His
Excellency Mr. John Evans Atta Mills. On behalf of the
entire membership of the United Nations, I extend our
heartfelt condolences to his wife and bereaved family,
and to the Government and people of Ghana.
Before this difficult time of grief and mourning,
Mr. Mills had a most distinguished career as a professor
of law. He was an admirable public servant and a great
sports enthusiast. As President of Ghana, he was widely
regarded as a caring, principled and dedicated leader
who made lasting contributions to the advancement of
economic development and good governance. Millions
of Ghanaians will remember him as a man of peace who
was truly dedicated to democracy and who worked hard
for the unity and stability of his country. Thanks to his
leadership, Ghana remains today a model of democracy
in the region. Mr. Mills’s legacy of hard work, integrity
and sacrifice will remain bright and enduring for the
people of Ghana and of the world.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Mr. John Evans Atta Mills.

(Qatar)

The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana, who will speak on behalf
of the African States.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I have the honour and
privilege to deliver this fitting tribute on behalf of the
Group of African States in New York.
It was with a profound sense of shock and grief that
the whole of Africa received the sad and heartbreaking
news three days ago about the demise of the President
of the Republic of Ghana, Mr. John Evans Atta Mills.
In Mr. Mills, Africa has lost one of its shining stars.
As we look up to the skies and pray to the Almighty, it
is just too difficult to contend with the reality of that
irreplaceable loss.
Mr. John Evans Atta Mills was indeed a
distinguished son of Africa who had an unwavering
commitment to the improvement of the quality of life
and welfare of his people. Throughout his political
career, Mr. Mills fought for the social and economic
empowerment of the average Ghanaian. In that process,
he specifically targeted the less privileged and made
a conscious effort to reach out to them. Indeed, the
African continent has lost one of its illustrious sons,
a distinguished statesman, a patriot par excellence,
an agent of change, and above all, an embodiment of
integrity and humility.
Since assuming power in 2008, President Mills
devoted his energy and attention to the transformation

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-44423 (E)

*1244423*

A/66/PV.123

of Ghana and to promoting Ghana’s competitive
edge in the global market. Mr. Mills was also a man
of immense intellect who was highly admired and
respected throughout the African continent. In the legal
profession, Mr. Mills rose through the ranks to become
an accomplished academic and mentor, and also a
passionate scholar on taxation. He authored quite a
number of publications on the subject of taxation, which
were sources of reference throughout and outside of
Ghana. He served as Commissioner of Ghana’s Internal
Revenue Service.
The Professor, as he was popularly known in his
native country, firmly believed in the sanctity of
human dignity. He was a person who got along and
always enjoyed sharing his knowledge and experience
with people around him. He also had an extraordinary
temperament. Mr. Mills was the kind of person who
rarely showed emotion, even under the most trying
circumstances.
The best way that Africa and the international
community as a whole can continue to honour Mr. Mills’s
memory and legacy is to renew their commitment to
upholding human dignity, democracy and accountable
governance, freedom and justice, all of which he greatly
cherished during his lifetime.
On this solemn occasion, we convey our deepest
sympathies and heartfelt condolences to the Government
and people of the Republic of Ghana, and to the family
of the late President. May almighty God keep his soul
in eternal peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Timor-Leste, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mrs. Mesquita Borges (Timor-Leste): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Asia and Pacific small
island developing States as we pay tribute to the memory
of His Excellency Mr. John Evans Atta Mills, President
of Ghana. On behalf of the Group of Asia-Pacific States,
I should like to extend our deep and heartfelt condolences
and express our full sympathy and solidarity with the
people and Government of Ghana. The Asia-Pacific
Group would also like to offer its sorrowful condolences
to the President’s family.
History will remember the late President for his
dedication and long-standing service to his country and
people. From his role as a law professor to his work as
Vice-President and then President, he was instrumental
during a pivotal period in the history of Ghana and the
2

region. President Mills worked tirelessly to improve the
lives of the people of Ghana. His efforts bore fruit in
the economic growth that Ghana has seen and in the
progress it has made in building on and consolidating
its democracy. Under his stewardship, Ghana has been
hailed as a model of democracy and stability. His vision
for the future has seen results accrue from policies
focused on investing in local people to ensure that they
not only reap the benefits of economic growth, but are
also competitive nationally and internationally.
The untimely demise of President Mills, whose
qualities and characteristics were too numerous to list
here, is felt not only in the hearts of Ghanaians but
across the world, where he will be remembered with
affection.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Vukobratovič (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
In my capacity as Chair of the Group of Eastern
European States, I would like to express our most
sincere condolences to the Government and people of
the Republic of Ghana for the loss of President John
Atta Mills. Our deepest sympathy also goes to the late
President’s family.
President Mills was an outstanding political figure
on the African continent. He will be remembered for
his leadership and dedicated service to his country on
its path to democratic and economic success. His efforts
to improve the quality of life and human rights of his
people have been widely recognized. Under President
Mills, Ghana made notable progress in various areas
of economic development in the midst of a global
economic crisis. His dedicated work and tireless efforts
to strengthen democracy and good governance, as well
as the significant contribution he made to promoting
regional peace, have been praised by the international
community. We hope that the legacy of President Mills
will serve as an outstanding example in future efforts
to lead his country towards progress and prosperity.
We would like to ask the delegation of Ghana to
convey to the Government and people of Ghana and
the family of the late President Mills our sentiments of
solidarity and compassion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.

12-44423

A/66/PV.123

Mr. Cazeau (Haiti) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States to pay tribute to the
memory of a great visionary and statesman.
On 24 July, a baobab tree fell too soon, at the age
of 68, in a hospital in Accra, Ghana. The news of his
demise was quickly heard around the world. Here in New
York, we meet today to pay tribute to him — not a final
tribute, as has been said, but rather in celebration of his
life, which was full and dedicated to the advancement
of his country, his people, his great continent and of all
humankind.
I speak, of course, of President John Atta Mills, who
has gone ahead of us to the afterlife, three days after his
birthday. He was born on 21 July 1944 in Tarkwa, in
the west of the Gold Coast, which became Ghana after
independence was declared on 6 March 1957.
A graduate of the economic and political science
faculty of the University of London, a holder of a
doctorate in law from the University of London’s School
of African and Oriental Studies, and a Fulbright scholar
at Stanford University Law School, President Mills
devoted more than a quarter of a century of his life on
Earth to training the young people of his country. He
was also a visiting professor at Temple University Law
School in Philadelphia and at Leiden University in the
Netherlands.
President Mills, whose rare integrity was constantly
tested, in addition to his numerous intellectual
activities, become involved in public life and served his
nation at various levels and in various sectors until he
was elected to the State’s highest public office in 2009.
The President of Haiti, Mr. Michel Joseph Martelly,
paying homage to President Mills upon his demise,
said that President Mills, whose life will forever be
associated with a glorious chapter in Ghanaian history,
embodied in his own way the honour of our time. There
is no doubt that his memory leaves Ghana a great legacy.
Indeed, Ghana remains an example of political stability
and democracy that makes it an international lodestar.
Its robust economic and social health, development and
growth, which never cease to amaze, have made it a
showcase for West Africa and must be credited to great
visionaries of the calibre of President Mills.
To the successor to this great man — whom I
compare yet again to a great baobab tree — I would
like once more to offer the sympathies of the Group of

Latin American and Caribbean States. We are certain
that, under the leadership of the new President, His
Excellency Mr. John Dramani Mahama, President
Mills’s great projects and programmes will pursue their
forward march towards Ghana’s lasting development,
to the benefit of the whole of Africa. To his bereaved
family, the people of Ghana, his immediate colleagues,
friends and allies, his alma mater, we recall that this
great man, loving husband, good and caring father,
sincere friend and ally fought the good fight — a
fight that griots will long sing of unchallenged in the
galleries and public places and under baobab trees. Let
us follow in his footsteps, seek his shade and keep alive
his dreams for the future of a better world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Group of Western
European and other States. I wish to convey to the
people and Government of the Republic of Ghana our
deepest condolences for the loss of their Head of State,
His Excellency John Evans Atta Mills. With the death
of President Mills, we mourn the passing of a great
statesman, who led Ghana in times of prosperity and
made his nation an anchor of stability. In Ghana, we
have witnessed the stable development of a democratic
State.
Under the wise leadership of John Atta Mills,
Ghana has been a reliable partner for the United
Nations, with a balanced and prudent engagement in
the fragile region of West Africa. President Mills’s
passing will leave a huge emptiness in the hearts of the
Ghanaian people and his followers. We are convinced,
however, that Ghanaian democracy will overcome
this loss and that the elections in Ghana planned for
December of this year will again show the world the
mature state of Ghanaian political culture. We wish
President Mahama wisdom and courage to lead Ghana
towards the elections while promoting, in his tenure,
the prosperity of the great Ghanaian nation.
The members of the Group of Western European
and other States wish to voice our appreciation and
gratitude for the contribution President Mills made not
just to his country, but also to the African region and
the entire international community. President Mills
worked tirelessly for the well-being of the Ghanaian
people. Our thoughts and sympathies are with the loved

12-444233

A/66/PV.123

ones of President Mills, his family and the whole nation
at this difficult time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who will
speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): On
behalf of the host country and the American people,
I express our deepest sympathies on the passing of
President John Evans Atta Mills of Ghana.
President Mills led Ghana through a period of
remarkable growth and development. As President
Obama said in his message of condolence,
“President Mills tirelessly worked to improve the
lives of the Ghanaian people. He helped promote
economic growth in Ghana in the midst of
challenging global circumstances and strengthened
Ghana’s strong tradition of democracy.”
President Mills promoted regional peace and
reinforced Ghana’s reputation as a leader in Africa.
Prior to leading his country, President Mills served with
distinction as a Fulbright scholar in the United States
and, during his tenure as President, he forged a deeper
partnership between Ghana and the United States. Only
a few months ago President Obama hosted President
Mills in the Oval Office. His passing is a tremendous
loss for all of us in the international community. Today
our thoughts and prayers are with his family and with
all the people of Ghana.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mr. Kanda (Ghana): I address the Assembly this
morning with deep sorrow and a very heavy heart.
Ghana has lost an illustrious and indefatigable son, His
Excellency Mr. John Evans Atta Mills.
He was taken ill suddenly around noon on Tuesday,
24 July, and was rushed to the military medical facility
in the capital city. Unfortunately, he passed away around
2.15 p.m., barely one and a half hours after he was taken
ill. That day will go down in the history of Ghana as one
of its saddest days.
President Mills was in all respects honourable,
honest and, above all, extremely humble. He was
respectful and respected. He led a surprisingly simple
life for a man in his position. He had deep respect for
the Office and the people he served. He was a leader
par excellence.

4

He assumed leadership in Ghana during a period
in which Ghana needed peace and, above all, tolerance.
He was astute in that role and steered the affairs of
Ghana to the admiration of all.
President Mills was a scholar, a brilliant professor,
an avid sportsman and a distinguished teacher. I had
the singular opportunity and honour to serve him as
his Chief of Protocol both when he was Vice-President
and subsequently when he became President of the
Republic of Ghana. I developed a personal relationship
with him. He was a fine gentleman. He taught us the
glorious virtues of humility and simplicity. He would
always say to us, “Do sincere and honest work and you
will invariably be rewarded”. His death is a huge and
painful loss.
We are well-advised, however, not to emphasize
how we die, but how we have lived. His life’s legacy
can be summed up by the accolade bestowed on him
by Ghanaians — Asomdwehene. In the Ghanaian Akan
language, asomdwehene means “king of peace”. He
preached peaceful coexistence, eschewed divisiveness,
and lived and led as a father for all. Therefore, while
we mourn him, we should equally celebrate his
accomplished life. He will be laid in state on 7 and
8 August in Accra. His funeral and burial will then take
place on 9 August.
On behalf of President John Dramani Mahama,
the Government and the people of Ghana, I wish to
express our sincere thanks and profound appreciation
and gratitude to the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General for this morning’s event and for
the kind and warm tributes that have been paid to the
memory of the outstanding champion of democracy, the
rule of law and peace, Mr. John Evans Atta Mills.
The President: Before we proceed to the next item,
I shall now suspend the meeting for a short period in
order to await the statement of programme budgetary
implications for draft resolution A/66/L.56, to be
provided by the Department of Management.
The meeting was suspended at 11 a.m. and resumed
at 11.20 a.m.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution A/66/L.56
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the General
12-44423

A/66/PV.123

Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 19 to the
Second Committee. Members will also recall that, at its
108th plenary meeting, on 16 May 2012, the Assembly
decided to consider agenda item 19 directly in plenary
meeting, and adopted decision 66/561. And under the
same item, the Assembly adopted decision 66/544 (b) at
its 109th plenary meeting, on 21 May 2012.
We are about to adopt today a draft resolution
(A/66/L.56) that endorses the outcome document of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20), entitled “The future we want”. Let me first, on
behalf of the membership of the United Nations, reiterate
our sincere gratitude to the Government and people of
Brazil for hosting the Rio+20 Conference and for their
warm hospitality. Brazil spared no effort in providing
the support needed to ensure the success of that historic
Conference. I would also like to acknowledge the
leadership of the Government of Brazil, which helped
Member States to conclude the outcome document that
will chart a new way for sustainable development. I
would also like to acknowledge the noble leadership
of the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, throughout the process.
The meetings in Rio in 1992 and in Johannesburg
in 2002 put sustainable development on the map, but
Rio+20 has defined a new vision of development for
the future that is equitable and inclusive and that takes
into account the limits of our planet. We have defined
the future that we want. Now what is important is
implementation. A number of processes were launched
in Rio but, in order for them to be successful, we need
development cooperation.
International development cooperation must
continue to play a key role in promoting solutions
to our global challenges. Development cooperation
must become wider and deeper. It must go far beyond
development assistance. Technology transfer and
capacity-building need to be part of development
for it to be effective and sustainable. Commitments
should be honoured. I am very happy that my Office
and I personally were also able to contribute to the
preparatory process, including by organizing a retreat
and a high-level dialogue. I am also grateful for the
opportunity to be part of this historic conference and to
speak at its opening and closing.
I am very pleased to see that the General Assembly
will continue to play a central role in sustainable
development. Member States have their work cut out for

them as they discuss the definition of the sustainable
development goal, the establishment of a high-level
political forum, the crafting of an effective sustainable
development financing strategy, the creation of a
facilitation mechanism that promotes development, the
transfer and dissemination of clean and environmentally
sound technologies, and the adoption of modalities
for the third international conference on small island
developing States in 2014.
In that regard, I wish the Permanent Representative
of Brazil success in her role as facilitator of the
establishment of the open working group on sustainable
development goals. I am sure that my successor will
ably lead all such processes. Thus, by adopting draft
resolution A/66/L.56 today, we are opening a new
chapter. I am confident that it will be a successful
chapter as our Heads of State and Government have
committed to a path for a new sustainable future for
us all.
Let me conclude with what I said in Rio just a few
weeks ago. Rio+20 is not an end but a new beginning
and the promise of a better life for us and our children
and for future generations.
The Assembly will now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/66/L.56.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I wish to put on record
the following statement of financial implications on
behalf of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule
153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
In draft resolution А/66/L.56, the General Assembly
would endorse the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
entitled “The future we want”, which is annexed to the
draft resolution.
The United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio+20) took place from 20 to 22 June
2012, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The Conference adopted
an outcome document that defined agreements on
a common vision for the future, renewed political
commitment to sustainable development, key areas
related to the green economy in the context of
sustainable development and poverty eradication, the
institutional framework for sustainable development,
including the establishment of a high-level political

12-444235

A/66/PV.123

forum, a framework for action and follow-up in critical
areas, including sustainable development goals, and the
adoption of the 10-year framework of programmes on
sustainable consumption and production patterns and
means of implementation.
Under the terms of paragraphs 84, 86, 88, 180,
248, 249, 255, 256, 257, 273 and 283 of the outcome
document, the General Assembly would decide to
establish a universal intergovernmental high-level
political forum, building on the strengths, experiences,
resources and inclusive participation modalities of
the Commission on Sustainable Development, and
subsequently replacing the Commission. The high-level
political forum shall follow up on the implementation
of sustainable development and should avoid any
overlap with existing structures, bodies and entities in
a cost-effective manner;
The Assembly would decide to launch an
intergovernmental and open, transparent and inclusive
negotiation process, under the General Assembly, to
define the high-level forum’s format and organizational
aspects with the aim of convening the first high-level
forum at the beginning of the sixty-eighth session
of the General Assembly. It would also consider the
need for promoting intergenerational solidarity for the
achievement of sustainable development, taking into
account the needs of future generations, including by
inviting the Secretary-General to present a report on
the issue.
The Assembly would commit to strengthening the
role of the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) as the leading global environmental authority
that sets the global environmental agenda, promotes
the coherent implementation of the environmental
dimension of sustainable development within the United
Nations system and serves as an authoritative advocate
for the global environment. It would reaffirm resolution
2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, which established
UNEP, and other relevant resolutions that reinforce its
mandate, as well as the 1997 Nairobi and 2000 Маlmö
Ministerial Declarations.
In that regard, the General Assembly, at its
sixty-seventh session, would adopt a resolution
strengthening and upgrading UNEP in the following
manner: establish universal membership in the
Governing Council of UNEP, as well as other measures
to strengthen its governance and its responsiveness and
accountability to Member States; have secure, stable,
adequate and increased financial resources from the
6

regular budget of the United Nations and voluntary
contributions to fulfil its mandate; enhance UNEP’s
voice and ability to fulfil its coordination mandate
within the United Nations system by strengthening
UNEP engagement in key United Nations coordination
bodies and by empowering UNEP to lead efforts to
formulate United Nations system-wide strategies on the
environment; promote a strong science-policy interface,
building on existing international instruments,
assessments, panels and information networks,
including the Global Environmental Outlook, as one of
the processes aimed at bringing together information
and assessment to support informed decision-making;
disseminate and share evidence-based environmental
information and raise public awareness on critical
and emerging environmental issues; provide
capacity-building to countries and support and facilitate
access to technology; progressively consolidate
headquarters functions in Nairobi and strengthen
its regional presence in order to assist countries,
upon request, in the implementation of their national
environmental policies, collaborating closely with
other relevant entities of the United Nations system; and
ensure the active participation of all relevant stakeholders,
drawing on best practices and models from relevant
multilateral institutions and exploring new mechanisms to
promote transparency and the effective engagement of civil
society.
Building on the Barbados Programme of Action
and the Mauritius Strategy for Implementation, the
Assembly would call for the convening of the third
international conference on small island developing
States (SIDS) in 2014, recognizing the importance of
coordinated, balanced and integrated actions to address
the sustainable development challenges facing SIDS,
and invite the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session to determine the modalities of the conference.
The General Assembly would resolve to establish
an inclusive and transparent intergovernmental
process on sustainable development goals that is
open to all stakeholders with a view to developing
global sustainable development goals to be agreed
by the General Assembly. An open working group
would be constituted no later than the opening of
the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly
and would comprise 30 representatives, nominated
by Member States through the five United Nations
regional groups, with the aim of achieving fair,
equitable and balanced geographic representation. At
the outset, this open working group would decide on
12-44423

A/66/PV.123

its method of work, including developing modalities, to
ensure the full involvement of relevant stakeholders and
expertise from civil society, the scientific community
and the United Nations system in its work in order to
provide a diversity of perspectives and experience.
It would submit a report to the General Assembly at
its sixty-eighth session, containing a proposal for
sustainable development goals for consideration and
appropriate action and coordinate the process, which
needs to be coherent with the processes considering
the post-2015 development agenda. The initial input to
the work of the working group would be provided by
the Secretary-General in consultations with national
Governments. In order to provide technical support to
this process and to the work of the working group, the
General Assembly would request the Secretary-General
to ensure all necessary input and support to this
work from the United Nations system, including by
establishing an inter-agency technical support team and
expert panels as needed, drawing on all relevant expert
advice. Reports on the progress of work would be made
regularly to the General Assembly.
The General Assembly would agree to establish
an intergovernmental process under its own auspices,
with technical support from the United Nations system,
and in open and broad consultations with relevant
international and regional financial institutions and
other relevant stakeholders. The process would assess
financing needs; consider the effectiveness, consistency
and synergies of existing instruments and frameworks;
and evaluate additional initiatives with a view to
preparing a report proposing options on an effective
sustainable development financing strategy to facilitate
the mobilization of resources and their effective use in
achieving sustainable development objectives.
The General Assembly would implement the process
of an intergovernmental committee, comprising 30
experts nominated by regional groups, with equitable
geographical representation, and concluding its work
by 2014. The Assembly would consider this report and
take appropriate actions.
The General Assembly would request relevant
United Nations agencies to identify options for a
facilitation mechanism that promotes the development,
transfer and dissemination of clean and environmentally
sound technologies by, inter alia, assessing technology
needs of developing countries, options to address
them and capacity-building. It would request the
Secretary-General, on the basis of the options identified

and taking into account existing models, to make
recommendations regarding the facilitation mechanism
to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.
The General Assembly would welcome the
commitments voluntarily entered into at Rio+20
and throughout 2012 by all stakeholders and their
networks to implementing concrete policies, plans,
programmes, projects and actions to promote
sustainable development and poverty eradication. It
would invite the Secretary-General to compile those
commitments and facilitate access to other registries
that have compiled commitments, in an Internet-based
registry. The registry should make information about
the commitments fully transparent and accessible to
the public, and it should be periodically updated.
With regard to the financial implications of
the proposals, this statement of programme budget
implications identifies the key paragraphs in the
outcome document that may potentially lead to
additional resource requirements under the regular
budget and/or extrabudgetary resources. The
recommendations contained in the outcome document
would require further study and consultations with
all stakeholders in order to determine the modalities
on how the decisions contained in the outcome
document are to be implemented, following which
the Secretary-General would submit to the General
Assembly, at its sixty-seventh session, a detailed report
on programme budget implications, associated with
the implementation of the decisions of the outcome
document for the sections concerned, including
necessary revisions to the programme budget for the
biennium 2012-2013 and possible implications for the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 20142015. In addition, any implications for the biennial
programme plan for the period 2012-2013 and the
proposed biennial programme for the period 2014-2015
for the relevant programmes will be presented to the
Committee for Programme and Coordination at its
fifty-third session, in June 2013, in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 58/269.
Paragraph 88 of the outcome document invites
the General Assembly to adopt a resolution that would
strengthen and facilitate the upgrade of the United
Nations Environment Programme. In that regard, the
Secretary-General, in line with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, would revert on
possible financial implications at a time when the draft

12-444237

A/66/PV.123

resolution of the General Assembly on the outcome
document is tabled.
The implementation of the recommendations
contained in the outcome document would give
rise to additional resource requirements in the
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 and
in the forthcoming biennium 2014-2015. However,
in the absence of more detailed modalities of its
implementation, it is not possible for the Secretariat to
determine at this stage the full extent of the programme
budget implications arising from the draft resolution.
Should the General Assembly adopt the draft resolution,
the Secretary-General would submit a detailed report
on the programme budget implications to the General
Assembly for its consideration in the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly.
The President: I should like to remind members
that the report of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development will be considered by the
Second Committee at its sixty-seventh session in the
fall.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/66/L.56, entitled “The future we want”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/66/L.56 was adopted (resolution
66/288).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Daniel (Nauru): Nauru has the honour
to speak on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island
States (AOSIS), a group of 43 members that are most
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change and
whose particular needs and vulnerabilities were first
acknowledged at the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development in Rio in 1992.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Government
of Brazil and the people of Rio de Janeiro for being the
gracious hosts of these historic events. I would also like
to convey our thanks to the Bureau of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) and
in particular to acknowledge its co-Chairs, Mr. John
Ashe of Antigua and Barbuda, and Mr. Kim Sook of the
Republic of Korea.

8

“The future we want” (resolution 66/288, annex)
embodies commitments that will advance our common
aspirations to achieve sustainable development. Today,
I would like to highlight a few that are particularly
relevant to small island developing States (SIDS).
At Rio, leaders called for continued and
enhanced efforts to assist SIDS in implementing the
Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States and
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Programme of Action. These are the essential
blueprints for addressing the sustainable development
needs of SIDS. Recent assessments show that we are
falling short in our commitments under those outcome
documents. As long as such gaps remain, SIDS will
be unable to achieve the sustainable development for
which we all strive.
The time has also come for us to turn our attention
to the next SIDS conference. In the same way that
Rio+20 allowed us, as an international community, to
take stock, the twentieth anniversary of the original
Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States will give SIDS a timely
opportunity to take stock of how far we have come
and how much further we still have to go. We thank
the international community for its support, and look
forward to working together during the next session
of the General Assembly in order to put in place the
structure necessary to ensure a successful meeting.
As members of the Assembly are aware, climate
change is one of the greatest challenges of our time.
For AOSIS members, sea-level rise and other adverse
effects of climate change pose a significant threat to our
efforts to achieve sustainable development. For some
members, they represent the gravest threat to survival
and viability, including through loss of territory. We are
gratified to see the seriousness of that issue reflected in
the outcome document, and we look forward to seeing
real action to convert the concern expressed in the
Rio outcome to changes that will ensure the continued
existence of AOSIS members.
There can be no doubt that one of the most
important agreements to come out of Rio is the decision
to undertake work on sustainable development goals.
Developing such action-oriented goals, which will be
global in nature and universally applicable while taking
into account different national realities, capacities
and levels of development, and while respecting

12-44423

A/66/PV.123

national policies and priorities, is a task worthy of our
attention. If these goals are to reflect the rich diversity
of our global community, we believe it is essential that
there be adequate representation of SIDS within the
working group. Given the importance to SIDS of the
post-2015 framework, we would also suggest that the
Secretary-General contemplate inviting representatives
from the SIDS to be part of his high-level panel on post2015 development planning.
We now begin the real work of Rio+20, ensuring
implementation of our commitments so that our peoples
will see benefits on the ground. AOSIS looks forward to
working cooperatively with others to ensure the future
we want.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Pacific small island developing
States (SIDS) represented at the United Nations, namely,
Fiji, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Samoa, Solomon
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country,
Papua New Guinea.
We joined the consensus in the adoption today of
resolution 66/288, and collectively we also support the
statement delivered on behalf of the Alliance of Small
Island States by the representative of Nauru.
Our appreciation goes to the many different players
that worked very hard to make the process of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20) a success: first to the co-Chairs, the
Ambassadors of Antigua and Barbuda and the Republic
of Korea; to the United Nations Secretariat, under the
able leadership of Mr. Sha Zukang; and certainly to the
Brazilian presidency and the people of Rio de Janeiro
for hosting us during the Conference. And, not least, I
would like to pay special tribute on behalf of the Pacific
SIDS to our Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for
his tireless efforts.
The Pacific SIDS regard the outcome of Rio+20
as a success in the cause of advancing sustainable
development. The document we have just adopted
(resolution 66/288, annex) is very comprehensive, and
so in the interests of time I will focus only on two
aspects.
First, on oceans, the Pacific SIDS regard the Rio+20
outcome as a crucial step towards the preservation and
sustainable use of oceans. Our outcome document is
forward-looking and at the same time practical. The

world has recognized the importance that oceans play
in the everyday lives of all people. Many important
issues are covered in the section on oceans. We have
achieved a step forward on sustainable fisheries, the
protection of coral reefs and ocean acidification, ocean
fertilization, marine pollution, the introduction of alien
marine species, the transfer of technology, sea-level rise
and coastal erosion, subsidies and reform of regional
fisheries management organization. Most important,
we are giving countries the tools to help themselves in
identifying and developing their strategies in order to
derive the biggest benefit from their ocean resources.
The Pacific SIDS see the outcome as a solid basis for
defining sustainable development goals, particularly
on oceans. Indeed, we look forward to the work of the
sustainable development goal committee, and we note
the comments just made by the representative of Nauru
in that regard.
My second point is on the sustainable development
of small island developing States. The outcome of
Rio+20 is encouraging yet sobering. It highlights the
threat of lost territory for SIDS, and for some of us that
means the loss of our territory and the disappearance of
States. The document states correctly that it represents
“the gravest of threats to their survival and viability”
(resolution 66/288, annex, para. 178). At the same
time, Rio+20 is looking for a practical way forward.
In particular, the third global conference on small
island developing States in 2014 will provide us with
answers on our unique and particular vulnerabilities.
However, it will also provide us with an opportunity
to showcase our achievements, where we lead the
world on sustainable development and of which we are
rightly proud. The Pacific is proud to offer to host the
Conference.
There are also some grey areas where the outcome
document is unclear. For example, we do not know
what will happen to the review of the Barbados
Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy,
which were undertaken on a biennial basis at the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. We
are looking forward to discussing the subject at the
high-level political forum.
Lastly, Mr. President, I would like to pay tribute to
you for your tireless efforts in this regard.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to adopt

12-444239

A/66/PV.123

the outcome document, entitled “The future we want”
(resolution 66/288, annex) of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20), held
in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June. We would
also like to congratulate Brazil on its excellent work in
hosting that event.
The future we want is not very well mapped out in
this document, and it is missing a lot of what is needed
in order to ensure that humankind does not perish.
Since life is better than death, humankind will not
let it vanish without a struggle. Our planet and nature
can survive without us, but we cannot survive without
them. The worst-case scenario is that human life could
disappear; unfortunately, this is not a mere scenario.
All the available scientific data and relevant documents
of the United Nations tell a tale of the progressive
deterioration of ecosystems and the quality of life of
species. In the document we have adopted today, the
Earth is seen as a repository of resources, and humans
are not sufficiently appreciated for their qualities as
integral inhabitants of Mother Earth.
The speculative economy is the distinguishing
characteristic of the capitalism preying on the human
species and nature today. Those mainly responsible
for the climate change that is affecting the world and
every country in it have succeeded in ensuring that the
Kyoto Protocol is powerless to deal with the effects of
climate change. Sustainable development is missing
at least three dimensions: ethics, culture and ecology.
In that regard, Venezuela will continue to fight for the
Kyoto Protocol and its validity and against the perverse
policies of financial capitalism that are destroying
humankind and the planet. We must ensure that nature
is not seen as a commodity for the benefit of the few.
Regarding the adoption of resolution 66/288, entitled
“The future we want”, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela wishes to express its reservations concerning
paragraphs 125, 126, 127, 129, 162 and 225, as well as to
make a clarification concerning paragraph 162. We take
this opportunity to express our concern about statements
issued by certain bodies of the United Nations that are
attempting to implement in piecemeal fashion some
sections of the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, in particular
the section relating to the so-called green economy.
They attempt to ignore the fact that Heads of State and
Government have affirmed that every country uses
different approaches, models, visions and instruments

10

that depend on their individual national circumstances
in its efforts to achieve sustainable development.
The green economy is not the only available model
to that end, and our policies should be governed by all
the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development, Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation. Thus, all United Nations
entities, including those of the Secretariat, should
follow those parameters for sustainable development in
order to ensure achievement of internationally agreed
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals.
In conclusion, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela requests that its statement of reservations
and the previous explanatory statements to which I
have referred be included in the record of this plenary
meeting of the General Assembly, and that they form
an integral part of the document adopted today. To that
end, my delegation will provide the Secretariat with a
corresponding document.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand welcomes
the adoption today of resolution 66/288. The outcome
document (resolution 66/288, annex) of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20) was the product of weeks of work by States,
major groups and the Secretariat, both here and in
Rio de Janeiro, and we pay tribute to all that effort.
We would like to express particular appreciation to the
Preparatory Committee co-Chairs, Ambassadors Kim
Sook of the Republic of Korea and Ashe of Antigua
and Barbuda, for their work; and, of course, to Brazil,
which brought together the final text in a form that we
could all accept in Rio. That was no easy task.
Achieving consensus on such a complex document,
even before the high-level meeting, was positive not
only for the Conference but also demonstrated that
multilateral processes can and do work. New Zealand
was pleased that many of its priority areas were
reflected in the final text. The paragraphs on oceans
and fisheries represent real progress, and we hope the
proposed sustainable development goals will include
one on oceans, reflecting their critical role in the health
of our planet. We welcome the decision to hold a third
international conference on small island developing
States in 2014, hopefully, as has already been suggested
in the statement made on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States, in our own Pacific region.
We were also pleased with the reference to fossil fuel
subsidy reform, even though it is not as strong as we had

12-44423

A/66/PV.123

originally proposed. We see that reform as important to
free up the resources needed for financing sustainable
development.
There were, of course, some aspects about which
we were less happy, including the lack of a reference to
agricultural subsidy reform and to reproductive rights.
But let me be clear. Overall, New Zealand regards
Rio+20 as a success, and we will say that as often and
as loudly as might be necessary.
The outcome document is naturally not the end. It
is very much a work programme for the next few years
as it establishes ambitious processes and timetables, not
least on institutional reform. In seizing the opportunities
presented by the Rio Conference, we must keep at the
forefront the certain knowledge that, in this twenty-first
century, the only viable development is sustainable
development that integrates all three dimensions:
economic, social and environmental.
Rio+20 was also a landmark for private-sector
involvement. Indeed, it was one of the most participatory
conferences in history, assisted by new technologies.
That particularly helped engage young people, whose
future we were discussing. Sustainable development
is not just a matter for States. The private sector,
non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders
can make important contributions and must all be part
of the processes going forward. Overall, the road from
Rio will be as challenging as the road to Rio. New
Zealand will willingly play its part in the work that lies
ahead.
Finally, we must express sadness that it was not
possible for two very small Pacific countries — the Cook
Islands and Niue — to attend the critically important
sustainable development conference, as they did in
Rio in 1992 and in Johannesburg in 2002. I will not
rehearse again the reasons for that. Suffice it to say,
the whole Pacific family, of which they are an integral
part, regrets their exclusion and hopes that it will never
happen again. After all, when it comes to sustainable
development, he waka eke noa — we are all in this
canoe together.
Mr. Husain (Canada): Canada was pleased to
join the consensus on resolution 66/288, endorsing
the outcome of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development (Rio+20). We would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate our gratitude to the
Government and people of Brazil for hosting such a
successful conference. We would also like to reaffirm

Canada’s commitment to actively contribute to the
important work that was launched in Rio, including
the drawing up of sustainable development goals that
would be a key aspect of the post-2015 development
framework.
(spoke in French)
Following the resolution’s adoption, we would like
to underscore that Canada provided an explanatory
note on the outcome document of Rio+20 (resolution
66/288, annex), in which we stated our positions on the
right to drinking water and basic sanitation. That note
was submitted to the Secretariat of the United Nations
in order for it to be distributed as an official document
of the Conference.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Government of
Brazil for its excellent hosting of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20)
and for its decisive role in the summit’s success.
Furthermore, my thanks and congratulations also go to
the two co-Chairs of the process, Ambassadors John
Ashe and Kim Sook.
Switzerland welcomes the adoption of the outcome
document of Rio+20, entitled “The future we want”
(resolution 66/288, annex), in which we, the community
of States, reiterated our commitment to sustainable
development. Nevertheless, the success of the Rio+20
Conference will be measured not just by the outcome
document, but, above all, by the actions that we
undertake based on that declaration.
In Rio, we started several processes that have the
capacity to lead to significant progress. Switzerland is
ready to commit to those processes and looks forward
to working with all members in order to ensure
an effective follow-up to the Rio+20 Conference.
Switzerland particularly welcomes the commitment
made in Rio to further the sustainable development
goals. It is important that those goals take into equal
account the three aspects of sustainable development
and that the development of such goals be coordinated
beyond the 2015 process. We attach great importance
to the smooth functioning of the working group on
sustainable development goals and we welcome its
establishment.
Switzerland welcomes the fact that Rio+20
introduced the concept of the green economy into the
global agenda. The outcome document is a good basis

12-4442311

A/66/PV.123

for action and a starting point to accelerate the change
towards a green economy. Switzerland is convinced
that the green economy helps industrialized countries
as much as developing countries as an important
instrument for achieving sustainable development and
poverty eradication.
Ms. Patmore (Australia): Australia would like to
take this opportunity to thank the Government of Brazil
for its leadership as host and President of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20), as well as the co-Chairs of the Conference,
Ambassador John Ashe and Ambassador Kim Sook
and its Secretary-General, Mr. Sha Zukang, for their
commendable drive and commitment towards achieving
the outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex)
Australia welcomes the Rio+20 outcome document
and fully supports its endorsement. We believe that the
document sets a coherent forward agenda for sustainable
development, and we look forward to working with all
stakeholders to implement the future we want.
Australia welcomes the agreement to establish a
set of universal sustainable development goals. We
look forward to working with other Governments and
stakeholders on the process to develop those goals
in the coming year, particularly to ensure that they
are integrated in the post-2015 development agenda.
Supporting countries to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) remains a high priority
for Australia. We are glad that that commitment will
be further developed through the Secretary-General’s
MDG Advocacy Group, of which Australia’s Prime
Minister, Julia Gillard, is pleased to have been appointed
co-Chair.
Australia particularly welcomes the priority
given at Rio+20 to the conservation and sustainable
management of our oceans and seas. Australia worked
constructively with a range of States, including the small
island developing States and coastal States, to achieve
outcomes that encourage the elimination of harmful
fishery subsidies and the reduction of marine debris and
that recognize the significance of ocean acidification
and the need for enhanced action on biodiversity beyond
national jurisdiction. In that regard, Australia welcomes
the decision to hold the third international conference
on small island developing States in 2014, which will
be critical to advancing the sustainable development
agenda for those States.

12

Strengthening the international commitment to
gender equality is a high priority for Australia. We
are pleased that the importance of gender equality
and women’s economic empowerment to sustainable
development featured so prominently across the text.
We also welcome the agreement at Rio+20 to strengthen
the Economic and Social Council and the United
Nations Environment Programme and to establish a
high-level political forum for sustainable development.
As our Prime Minister Julia Gillard said at
Rio+20, the next step towards achieving sustainable
development must be turning those words into action.
Australia was pleased to announce some $180 million
in new funding towards that end. We look forward to
working with all stakeholders to implement the Rio+20
outcomes, which will lay the foundations for achieving a
sustainable future for all.
Mr. Archondo (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia would like to express its recognition and
thanks to the Government and people of the Federative
Republic of Brazil for having hosted the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio
de Janeiro from 20 to 22 June, and for their outstanding
work during the Conference.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia joined the
consensus on resolution 66/288, entitled “The future
we want”, in the context of the adoption of the outcome
document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, which we have just adopted.
In that regard, the Bolivian delegation reiterates its
position expressed on 22 June in Rio de Janeiro, which
is reflected in document A/CONF.216/8, in which we
express our reservations with regard to certain sections
of the outcome document of the Conference. We hope
that our position will be duly reflected in the record of
this plenary meeting.
With regard to our reservations, Bolivia raised
at the Conference and reiterates now the following
points on the green economy. The Plurinational State
of Bolivia rejects the consideration of the green
economy as a new model and tool for the privatization
of nature and society with the ostensible goal of
achieving sustainable development and the eradication
of poverty. Bolivia therefore reserves its position with
regard to all references to the green economy and any
interpretation arising from it that could be understood
as a commodification of the functions and cycles of

12-44423

A/66/PV.123

nature, payment for environmental services, ways
of avoiding commitments undertaken by developed
countries towards developing countries, obligations
for developing countries, and conditionalities on
technical, technological and financial cooperation with
reimbursable and non-reimbursable resources, including
those allocated by international financial institutions
for the sustainable development of developing
countries. Bolivia assumes and reaffirms, as expressed
in paragraph 56 of the Rio outcome document, that
“there are different approaches, visions, models
and tools available to each country, in accordance
with its national circumstances and priorities,
to achieve sustainable development” (resolution
66/288, annex, para. 56),
and that countries have the sovereign right to choose
their own sustainable development approaches, visions,
models and tools.
Bolivia, as a sovereign State, has opted for the vision
of good living through comprehensive development in
harmony and balance with Mother Earth in order to
build a fair and just society with solidarity, respecting
the rights of original indigenous rural people and the
Bolivian people as a whole.
Bearing in mind the principles of international law
such as the equality of rights, the self-determination
of peoples, the equal sovereignty of all States,
non-interference in the domestic matters of States, the
right to development in the context of the exercise of
competencies provided for by international law, Bolivia
understands that the means of implementation and
flexibility in the context of sustainable development are
critical. Therefore, no conditions should be applied to
various visions, approaches, models and tools adopted
by Governments to achieve sustainable development
and the eradication of poverty. At the same time,
Bolivia understands that the agencies and programmes
of the United Nations will implement this resolution
respecting the agreement of Member States and without
introducing elements that were not agreed upon at the
Conference in Rio.
However, Bolivia also reserves its position with
regard to paragraph 225 of the outcome document on
the rationalization of inefficient fossil fuel subsidies,
because it implies a restructuring of our tax and
regulatory system, and is contrary to the political
Constitution of the Plurinational State of Bolivia because
it affects decisions that are of a purely sovereign nature.

Furthermore, we affirm that the implementation of
that paragraph could involve an imposition, external
interference, a potentially binding commitment and
external conditionality for international cooperation,
which going forward should not be linked to the
so-called sustainable development goals. Similarly,
we will accept no kind of assessment, monitoring,
reporting or revision of our national energy measures
and policies that would affect our national sovereignty.
Bolivia also reserves its position with regard to
the notion of innovative forms of financing, included
in paragraphs 253 and 267, among others, of the
Rio outcome document, which could include or be
interpreted as being sources from coal markets, water
and water rights markets, payment for environmental
services and schemes to commodify natural functions
and cycles.
Secondly, Bolivia noted at the Conference and
notes again here its own interpretations of the document
itself. Bolivia interprets, for example, the term “food
security”, contained in the section entitled “Food
security and nutrition and sustainable agriculture”,
as being the achievement of food sovereignty in the
context of the process of learning to feed oneself in
order to live well. We derive this interpretation from
the definition of the World Forum on Food Sovereignty,
held in Havana, Cuba in 2001, namely,
“peoples’ right to define their own policies and
strategies for the sustainable production, distribution
and consumption of food that guarantee the right to
food for the entire population, on the basis of small
and medium-sized production, respecting their
own cultures and the diversity of peasant, fishing
and indigenous forms of agricultural production,
marketing and management of rural areas, in which
women play a fundamental role”.
With regard to paragraph 272 of the outcome
document, Bolivia interprets the phrase “strengthened ...
scientific and technological capacities” to include not
only academic and institutional knowledge, but also
as the forms of science, traditional technology, local
know-how and ancestral knowledge of original
indigenous rural populations and the Bolivian people
in the context of cultural exchange and a dialogue of
knowledge.
On this occasion, I recall that on the historic
date of 28 July 2010, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 64/292, entitled “The human right to water

12-4442313

A/66/PV.123

and sanitation”, which recognizes that “the right to safe
and clean drinking water and sanitation as a human
right that is essential for the full enjoyment of life and
all human rights”. Although the commitments relating
to the human right to drinking water and sanitation are
reaffirmed in paragraph 121 of the outcome document,
Bolivia also understands that the right to drinking
water and sanitation is an essential human right for
the full enjoyment of life and all human rights. In that
respect, Bolivia will take up that point once again at the
next session of the General Assembly, basing ourselves
on the resolution approved at this session. Similarly,
two years after the adoption of resolution 64/292, we
welcome the fact that commemorations to recognize
this process are being held by peoples and civil society,
including our proposed day to highlight the human right
to water and sanitation.
Mr. Souissi (Morocco) (spoke in French): Morocco
warmly thanks the President of the General Assembly,
the Secretary-General and the Ambassadors of South
Korea and Antigua and Barbuda for their tireless efforts
over the course of the negotiations on the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20).
Morocco welcomes the outcome of Rio+20, which
was a first step in building an irreversible process
of sustainable development. Rio+20 has laid the
groundwork for building the sustainable development
goals and a financial strategy that should take shape
through the two working groups. Morocco hopes that
Rio+20 will be followed up with concrete efforts. The
historic consensus adopted in Rio demonstrates the
international community’s willingness and commitment
to making the green economy and sustainable
development a reality, particularly through the 2015
process.
Morocco again thanks the President for his untiring
efforts.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I warmly
welcome the decision of the General Assembly to
formally endorse the outcome document (resolution
66/288, annex) of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development (Rio+20). I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the Government of Brazil
once more for its leadership and warm hospitality. I also
thank you, Mr. President, and the Secretary-General for
your strong leadership and initiative.
I join previous speakers in proclaiming the success
of Rio+20. In the document entitled “The future we

14

want”, we have reaffirmed our strong commitment to
sustainable development and laid a firm foundation
for a sustainable future for all. However, the success
of Rio+20 will not be complete until follow-up actions
are taken. We must live up to the promises in our
commitments and implement them in order to make
Rio+20 a lasting legacy.
To that end, the General Assembly’s role is crucial.
We have a lot of work before us, including developing
sustainable development goals and strengthening the
institutional framework for such development. In the
process, we should not forget the wisdom, good faith
and spirit of compromise and flexibility that we shared
during the long and tough negotiations on the outcome
document. The Republic of Korea is fully committed
to playing its part in the efforts towards sustainable
development, and looks forward to working with
Member States to implement the Rio+20 commitments.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): Brazil is proud
to have hosted and presided over the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20).
I would like to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, to the Secretariat as a whole, to the co-Chairs
of the preparatory process, Ambassadors John Ashe and
Kim Sook, and to all Member States and participants
for what we accomplished together.
The outcome document we have just endorsed,
“The future we want” (resolution 66/288, annex), is an
important landmark in our journey towards sustainable
development, which began in Rio in 1992. Together
we have taken a significant step towards a more
just, equitable and prosperous future. As President
Dilma Rousseff stated at the closing session, Brazil is
convinced that consensus decisions achieved through
multilateralism are the best foundations for progress
in our collective endeavours to achieve sustainable
development.
The outcome document reflects progress in many
important areas, and also paves the way for our future
work. We have brought poverty eradication to the centre
of the debate on the future we want. We have launched
the sustainable development goals to give focus and
direction to our collective efforts. The high-level political
forum we have established will coordinate the work we
do to advance sustainable development and implement
the sustainable development goals. The United Nations
Environment Programme was strengthened and will be

12-44423

A/66/PV.123

better able to help developing countries implement their
policies. Other important elements include the adoption
of the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable
consumption and production, the decision to launch a
programme of work on broader measuring standards
designed to complement that of gross domestic product
so as to better inform policy decisions, and agreement
on further steps regarding the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity in areas
beyond national jurisdiction.
Rio+20 was also a landmark for civil society
participation. Tens of thousands took part in the People’s
Summit. The dialogues on sustainable development
were an innovative way of engaging various segments
of society in the debate. More than a million people took
part in the online polls that chose recommendations to be
presented to the Heads of State and Government during
the Conference. The major cities forum, the women’s
forum and the more than 1,000 side events showed
the intense mobilization of stakeholders and captured
their contributions. The registry of commitments
gave concrete expression to the strong engagement of
Governments, the private sector, civil society and other
groups. Rio+20 helped raise awareness of the crucial
importance of sustainable development among young
people. That is why we believe that it will have lasting
impact. Future generations will have a basis from which
to push forward the construction of the sustainable
world we we envisaged in Rio.
The outcome document we have just endorsed
contains several mandates for the development of our
work, based on the decisions we took in Rio. Among
those are the formation of an open working group for
developing global sustainable development goals to be
considered by the General Assembly; the establishment
of an intergovernmental process, under the General
Assembly, to prepare a report proposing options on an
effective sustainable development financing strategy;
and considering a set of recommendations from the
Secretary-General for a facilitation mechanism to
promote the development, transfer and dissemination of
clean and environmentally sound technologies.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the confidence you
have placed in me by inviting me to facilitate the process
of setting up the open working group on sustainable
development goals. I trust we will be able to complete
the task within the stipulated time. Considerable work
lies ahead of us. Brazil will be actively engaged in it.

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Beviglia Zampetti (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. The acceding country Croatia;
the candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate countries Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
The Europ ean Union and its member States strongly
welcome the endorsement by the General Assembly of
the outcome document of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development (Rio+20), entitled “The
future we want” (resolution 66/288, annex). We wish
to express our sincere gratitude to the Government and
people of Brazil for having hosted the Conference and
provided all the necessary leadership and support.
As was stated at the highest level in Rio, we
consider the renewed political commitment to moving
towards sustainable development to be a key outcome
of the Conference. We are particularly pleased that
we collectively managed to address the challenge of
sustainable development governance. We welcome the
renewal of the institutional framework for sustainable
development and the creation of the high-level forum. As
regards environmental governance, we are pleased with
the decision to upgrade the United Nations Environment
Programme. We consider the enhanced role given to
civil society and local authorities in new governance
frameworks to be a significant development. The
European Union and its member States will contribute
actively to translating those commitments into reality.
We also welcome the recognition in Rio that an
inclusive green economy is a useful tool and a promising
pathway to achieving sustainable development. We
remain of the view that, after decades of creating wealth
through more conventional economic models, the
international community has not decisively addressed
resource depletion, environmental degradation,
economic inequalities or social marginalization. We
believe that an inclusive green economy should address
the economic, social and environmental dimensions,
thereby significantly contributing to achieving poverty
eradication, fair and decent jobs, food security and
ecosystem resilience.

12-4442315

A/66/PV.123

Both before and in Rio+20, the European Union
and its member States engaged constructively while
seeking an ambitious result. We would have liked to see
more, but the Rio outcome document offers a number
of opportunities for undertaking further substantive
work at the international level. In this connection, the
European Union and its member States underline the
importance of operationalizing and further developing
what was agreed in Rio within the United Nations
system.
Our commitment to engaging actively and
constructively with partners in the forthcoming
negotiations and processes established in Rio remains
undiminished. Our ambition also remains undimmed.
Our collective commitment to eradicating poverty and
to improving people’s lives while significantly reducing
pressures on the environment demands nothing less.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): Japan welcomes the
adoption of resolution 66/288 and the outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio+20) annexed to it. We would also
like to once again express our heartfelt appreciation
to the Government of the host country, Brazil, and to
the two co-Chairs and the Bureau of the preparatory
process for their leadership.
At Rio+20, we, the Member States, were given the
opportunity to deepen our understanding of the transition
to a green economy, and the international community
was able to send a positive message on moving forward
towards a green economy. Member States noted the
importance of ongoing efforts to recognize and promote
the notion of human security. We also emphasized
the importance of taking a people-centred approach
in efforts to achieve sustainable development. Japan
regards these as significant elements of the outcome
document.
We were able to reach an agreement on the
establishment of an intergovernmental process on
sustainable development goals, which we agreed should
be coherent with and integrated into the United Nations
development agenda beyond 2015. Japan believes that,
after 2015, the international community should strive as
one to achieve a single set of international development

16

goals that are simple, clear, measurable and easy to
understand.
With regard to the institutional framework, we also
agreed on the establishment of a high-level political
forum and the strengthening of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP). Regarding UNEP,
Japan will explain our position on the issue of increasing
financial resources from the regular budget during the
upcoming follow-up negotiations.
In his statement at Rio+20, the Foreign Minister
of Japan, Mr. Koichiro Gemba, announced Japan’s
green future initiatives, composed of the following
three initiatives for sustainable development: first,
promoting the future cities we want worldwide;
secondly, contributing to the global transition to a green
economy; and thirdly, building resilient societies. Japan
will steadily implement these initiatives on the basis of
human security.
Finally, allow me to assure the Assembly that Japan
is fully committed to contributing positively to the
Rio+20 follow-up process.
Ms. Kim (United States of America): The United
States wishes again to congratulate the Government
and people of Brazil on their leadership in making the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
a success. We would like to acknowledge the essential
contribution of our co-chairs, Ambassadors Ashe and
Kim Sook, all the representatives who stepped in to
facilitate key parts of the text, and all our colleagues for
the collective hard work needed to achieve the outcome.
As Secretary Clinton said at the Conference, the
outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex) marks a
real advance for sustainable development. In connection
with the outcome document, we would like to reiterate
that the United States has additional observations
and clarifications on several elements of the outcome
document. We have submitted these in writing for
inclusion in the official record of the Conference.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 19.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

12-44423
