S/2019/696

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 August 2019
Original: English

Progress made with regard to the stabilization and
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 33 of Security Council
resolution 2458 (2019), is my fifth report on the progress made with regard to the
stabilization and restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. It provides an
update on relevant developments since my previous report, of 28 August 2018
(S/2018/791), and includes recommendations on the continuation of the sanctions
regime in the post-electoral environment, in line with paragraph 12 of resolution 2048
(2012).
2.
In fulfilment of the request from the Security Council in its resolution, the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs undertook an assessment, in
consultation with the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea Bissau (UNIOGBIS). The key findings are set out below.

II. Key findings
3.
Since my previous report, there have been encouraging signs of progress
towards addressing the political impasse in Guinea-Bissau, following considerable
regional and international mediation and facilitation efforts. For the first time since
the country’s independence in 1974, a President was able to complete a fu ll term in
office. According to the Constitution of Guinea-Bissau, the presidential term of José
Mário Vaz ended on 23 June 2019. Despite the end of his constitutional mandate,
Mr. Vaz will remain in office, albeit with reduced powers, until the holding of the
presidential election, set for 24 November 2019. Meanwhile, the twice -postponed
legislative elections were held peacefully on 10 March 2019 and deemed credible by
international observers. A new Prime Minister, Aristides Gomes, and Government
have been appointed, and the National People’s Assembly has legally constituted its
executive bureau. A new attorney general has also been appointed, although the
majority coalition has complained that the appointment procedure was not in
conformity with the decision by the Authority of Heads of State and Government of
the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) at its summit of 29 June
2019.

19-14338 (E)

030919

*1914338*

S/2019/696

4.
It has been more than seven years since the Security Council adopted resolution
2048 (2012), under which a targeted travel ban was imposed on members of the
military who had played a leading role in the coup d’état of 12 April 2012. Since then,
throughout the legislative and presidential elections of 2014, the le gislative elections
of 2019 and the periods of political tension and impasse in the country, the military
has remained apolitical and has taken other steps to professionalize its personnel and
functions.
5.
In the course of this assessment, and in the light of the role played by the military
since 2014, there were calls for the Security Council or the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau
to positively consider reviewing the sanctions list, in the event of the peaceful
conclusion of the presidential election in November and the transfer of power to the
new President. Interlocutors also offered the view that such an approach would serve
as further encouragement to the current professionalization efforts of the military.
6.
However, the root causes of instability have not been fully addressed and the
political situation remains fragile, with the country facing continued challenges (see
S/2019/664). Continued vigilance is therefore required to ensure that no other security
force or civilian political actor in the country, regardless of political or institutional
affiliation, can exploit differences among the political parties and threaten the
constitutional order. For this reason, sanctions can and continue to play a positive
role.

III. Sanctions in Guinea-Bissau
7.
There have been no changes to the sanctions regime established by the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) since my previous report. The travel ban
measure remains in place and the sanctions list of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau contains
the names of 10 individuals, all members of the “military command”, responsible for
the coup d’état of 12 April 2012.
8.
During the past 12 months, the sanctioned individuals continued to perform their
functions as part of the armed forces of Guinea-Bissau. Since August 2018, there has
been no indication of those individuals travelling outside Guinea -Bissau. Since my
previous report, the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau has not received requests for travel ban
exemptions.
9.
As repeatedly noted in my previous reports, the impact of United Nations
sanctions in Guinea-Bissau has surpassed the travel ban restrictions imposed under
the resolution. All interlocutors continue to agree that sanctions have had, and
continue to have, a positive effect in deterring the direct involvement of the armed
forces in the political situation.
10. The swift imposition and lifting of ECOWAS sanctions on 19 ind ividuals, on
4 February and 31 July 2018, respectively, as part of efforts to restore democratic
governance and ensure respect for the rule of law were also effective.

IV. Progress made with regard to the stabilization and
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau
11. A significant political development since my previous report was the peaceful
conduct of legislative elections in March 2019. The elections resulted in six political

2/4

19-14338

S/2019/696

parties – the Partido Africano para a Independência da Guiné e Cabo Verde (African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde), the Movimento para
Alternância Democrática (Movement for Democratic Change), the Partido da
Renovação Social (Party for Social Renewal), the Assambleia do Povo Unido –
Partido Democrático da Guiné-Bissau (United People’s Assembly – Democratic Party
of Guinea-Bissau), the União para a Mudança (Union for Change) and the Partido da
Nova Democracia (New Democracy Party) – forming the new parliament, which was
sworn in on 18 April 2019. However, shortly after the elections, tensions emerged
between the majority coalition, comprising the Partido Africano para a Independência
da Guiné e Cabo Verde, the Assambleia do Povo Unido – Partido Democrático da
Guiné-Bissau, the União para a Mudança and the Partido da Nova Democracia, and
the opposition regarding the posts of Second Vice-President and First Secretary of the
Executive Bureau of the National People’s Assembly. Differences among the
President, political parties and other stakeholders also emerged around the
appointment of the Prime Minister, the Attorney General and the Government (see
S/2019/664).
12. I commend the Group of Five international partners represented in Guinea Bissau, in particular ECOWAS and the African Union, for the efforts and engagement
that helped the people of Guinea-Bissau to overcome the impasses relating to those
issues. The country visits by ECOWAS and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, along with the visit by the Security Council in mid -February 2019,
were instrumental in assisting all parties to resolve the political and institutional
deadlocks affecting the country. While those external efforts have helped to overcome
the impasses, the willingness and ability of the newly elected authorities to cooperate
independently remain to be seen, especially in the context of reforms of the
Constitution, the electoral law and political party framework, the defence and security
sectors and the justice system, and in the light of the fast-approaching presidential
election.
13. It is also noteworthy that the military did not interfere in politics during periods
of post-electoral tensions. Moreover, the Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces,
General Biaguê Na N’Tam, has taken steps to publicly communicate the army’s stance
of non-interference in politics while acting internally to maintain the discipline of
military personnel from commanders to rank-and-file members, including through
frequent meetings of the chain of command, messages delivered to country troops,
troop exercises, intensive patrolling in units, restricted access to weapons and
ammunition, and frequent professional and awareness training programmes (see
S/2019/664).
14. Beyond non-interference in the political arena, the military, with the support of
UNIOGBIS and its partners, has also engaged in professionalization activities. For
example, 30 members of the military, including 20 women, participated in the military
observers’ predeployment course of the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping
Training Centre from 13 to 24 May 2019 in Bissau to enhance their knowledge of
conduct and discipline, gender, human rights, the role of the military in democracy,
and negotiation and mediation skills. The course was aimed at providing military
advisers in Guinea-Bissau with skills for future participation in peacekeeping
operations. Furthermore, 132 members of the military, including 17 women,
participated in four training sessions in April and May 2019 to develop the capacity
of the armed forces to conduct human rights training within the ranks.
15. As in previous years, the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau maintained its
presence and vigilance throughout the reporting period and continues to play a crucial
stabilizing role in the country, as a deterrent to possible spoilers. On 29 June, the
ECOWAS Authority extended the mandate of the Mission for an additional six
months, beginning on 1 October 2019.
19-14338

3/4

S/2019/696

V. Recommendations on the continuation of
United Nations sanctions
16. Five years have passed since the restoration of constitutional order in Guinea Bissau. During that time, the military has remained apolitical throughout the
legislative and presidential elections held in 2014 and 2019. Moreover, the military,
with the assistance of UNIOGBIS and its partners, has taken steps to revitalize and
professionalize its personnel and functions. As a result of the non -interference of the
military in politics, Mr. Vaz became the first President to complete his constitutional
term in office since the country’s independence. At the same time, over the past five
years, the country has continued to witness cyclical political and institutional crises
resulting from differences among political actors, including the President, the
Government, the legislature and political parties, which have the potential to
politicize the defence and security forces.
17. The Security Council may wish to maintain the sanctions regime fo r a limited
period, taking into account the political situation in the country, as a deterrent to
potential spoilers, regardless of their political or institutional affiliation, who seek to
endanger the constitutional order. With regard to the military, in the event of a
peaceful presidential election and transfer of power, the Council and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning
Guinea-Bissau may wish to consider reviewing the sanctions list accordingly.
18. Should the constitutional order be at risk and the situation during and after the
presidential election warrant it, the Council may then wish to consider my previous
recommendations concerning the sanctions regime (see S/2018/791).

4/4

19-14338
