18

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

in their international relations from the threat or use of force
against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of any State,
Reaffirming further the inalienable right of all peoples to
determine their own form of government and to choose their
own economic, political and social system free from outside
intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind
whatsoever,
Gravely concerned at the continuing foreign armed intervention in Afghanistan, in contravention of the above
principles, and its serious implications for international
peace and security,
Noting the increasing concern of the international community over the continued and serious sufferings of the
Afghan people and over the magnitude of social and economic problems posed to Pakistan and Iran by the presence
on their soil of millions of Afghan refugees, and the continuing increase in their numbers,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need for a political solution of the grave situation in respect of Afghanistan,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 25 particularly of the appointment of his Personal Representative,
Recognizing the importance of the initiatives of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the efforts of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for a political solution
of the situation in respect of Afghanistan,
1. Reiterates that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and non-aligned
character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful solution
of the problem;
2. Reaffirms the right of the Afghan people to determine
their own form of government and to choose their economic,
political and social system free from outside intervention,
subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind whatsoever;
3. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Afghanistan;
4. Calls upon all parties concerned to work for the urgent achievement of a political solution, in accordance with
the provisions of the present resolution, and the creation of
the necessary conditions which would enable the Afghan
refugees to return voluntarily to their homes in safety and
honour;
5. Renews its appeal to all States and national and international organizations to continue to extend humanitarian
relief assistance, with a view to alleviating the hardship <,i'
the Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General in the search for a solution to the problem
and requests him to continue those efforts with a view to
promoting a political solution, in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution. and the exploration of
securing appropriate guarantees for non-use of force. or
threat of use of force, against the political independence.
sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of all neighbouring States, on the basis of mutual guarantees and strict
non-interference in each other's internal affairs and with full
regard for the principles of the Charterof the United Nations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council concurrently informed of
the progress towards the implementation of the present rP,solution and to submit to Member States a report on the
situation at the earliest appropriate opportunity:

25

A/36/653-S/14745. For the printed text. see Official R,•cords o/ 1h1•
Security Council, Thirtv-sixth Year. Supp/emem fi,r Oc10ber. Nm•emh,·r
and December I 98 I .
·

8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
security·'.
62nd plenan· meeting
rn Novemher 1981

36/38.

Twenty-fifth anniversary of the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Committee

The General Assemhlv,
Noting with appreciation the contribution of the AsianAfrican Legal Consultative Committee in the field of progressive development and codification of international law.
Considering that the co-operation during the last twentyfive years between the United Nations and the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Committee has been highly fruitful.
Desiring to strengthen further and to widen the scope of
this mutually beneficial relationship between the two
organizations.
I. Extends its congratulations to the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee on its twenty-fifth anniversary
for its highly commendable work in promoting interregional
as well as international co-operation supportive of the efforts
of the United Nations in this regard:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out consultations with the Secretary-General of the Asian-African
Legal Consultative Committee with a view to further
strengthening the co-operation between the two organizations and widening the scope of this co-operation;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled ''Co-operation between the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee··.
63rd plenary meeting
/8 November 198/

36/39.

Enlargement of the International Law Commission: amendments to articles 2 and 9 of the
Statute of the Commission

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of the International Law Commission as the main permanent subsidiary organ of the General Assembly entrusted with the promotion of the progressive
development of international law and its codification.
Recalling its resolution 1647 (XVI) of6 November 1961.
by which the membership of the International Law Commission was established at twenty-five members.
Noting that the membership of the United Nations has
grown substantially since the adoption of that resolution,
Conscious of the increased interest shown by Member
States, particularly those admitted to membership in the
Organization since 1961. in the Commission's work on the
progressive development of international law and its
codification,
I. Decides to amend article 2, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International Law Commission to read as follows:
"The Commission shall consist of thirty-four members
who shall be persons of recognized competence in international law":
2. Also decides to amend article 9. paragraph I. of the
said Statute to read as follows:
"Those candidates. up to the maximum number prescribed for each regional group. who obtain the greatest
