S/PV.8520

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8520

th meeting
Tuesday, 30 April 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Goolab
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-12403 (E)
*1912403*

S/PV.8520

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council for the second time. I have
spent the past eight weeks shuttling between the Syrian
Government and the opposition and consulting with key
players. I am doing everything I can to move forward on
rebuilding trust and confidence and opening the door
to a political process in Geneva between the Syrian
Government and the opposition, a process that can
begin to build a new future for all Syrians — women
and men — and between Syria and the international
community. After eight years of conflict, that process
will be long and difficult, but I think that it is possible
to move forward step by step. To that end, I have been
seeking to advance the five priorities I outlined to
the Council in February (see S/PV.8475), which are
grounded in a comprehensive approach to my mandate
pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015).
I remain absolutely committed to engaging the
Syrian Government and the Syrian Negotiation
Commission in a sustained comprehensive dialogue.
Such a dialogue is the very foundation of a Syrianled and Syrian-owned process, in line with resolution
2254 (2015), that fully respects Syria’s sovereignty,
unity, independence and territorial integrity. In March
and April, I engaged in positive shuttle consultations.
Foreign Minister Al-Moualem hosted me twice in
Damascus; he demonstrated a positive attitude and we
were able to advance certain issues. I also met twice
with the Syrian Negotiation Commission’s leadership in
Riyadh and Geneva; they also demonstrated a positive
attitude that enabled us to advance the issues.
In both sets of interactions I stressed the
importance of working on the full range of issues
addressed in resolution 2254 (2015). I stressed the need
2/18

30/04/2019

to make a tangible difference in Syrians’ lives. Both
the Government and the opposition remained open
to discussing a broader range of issues. It is my hope
that such regular engagement will continue to build
trust and confidence and will evolve into a sustained
dialogue that leads towards building a safe, calm and
neutral environment and brings about peace.
That has also been my message to international
stakeholders in recent weeks, but I would like to
reiterate — action and tangible progress, not just
dialogue, are needed. I need not remind the Council
that the situation for Syrians remains dire.
We have seen a very troubling surge in violence
in recent weeks in and around the Idlib de-escalation
zone, some of which led to civilian casualties and
further displacement. I welcome the recommitment
of the Astana players to fully implement the Idlib
memorandum,
including
through
coordinated
patrols, but more must be done. De-escalation must
be consolidated.
Idlib is not the only part of Syria that remains
heavily militarized or where Syrians continue to suffer.
The situation in the north-east is calmer for now but
its underlying dynamics remain unresolved. We have
also received reports of growing tensions and violence
in the south-west. Many threats of renewed escalation,
and even threats to international peace and security,
remain outstanding in Syria. I would like to remind
the Council that resolution 2254 (2015) calls for a
nationwide ceasefire.
Terrorist groups listed by the Council remain
a major threat. Only last week, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant took credit for attacks on Syrian
Government forces in the desert. Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
still controls large swathes of territory. I would like
to stress, however, the Secretary-General’s reminder
that counter-terrorism operations cannot override the
responsibility to protect civilians.
Even where violence has abated, the toll of suffering
remains staggering. There is a desperate need to meet
the humanitarian and protection needs of Syrians,
whose suffering is not limited to refugees and displaced
persons — millions of Syrians all across the country
face a critical shortage of commodities, including fuel,
that is approaching crisis levels. The 73,000 people in
Al-Hol, 92 per cent of whom are women and children,
are facing a terrible situation. Humanitarian needs and
protection concerns remain acute.
19-12403

30/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

I remain deeply concerned about the situation in
Rukban. We continue to pursue principled and durable
solutions, in coordination with all stakeholders. Most
civilians who have recently left have been able to
relocate from temporary shelters. Most residents of
Rukban remain in the settlement and are in dire need of
assistance, including food and essential medicines. The
deployment of a third humanitarian convoy to Rukban
remains urgent in order to avoid the further suffering
of more people in the camp. As I have remarked to all
stakeholders, the more steps we see taken to address
the issues of which I speak, in coordination with the
United Nations, the more momentum is created to build
confidence within Syria and internationally.
I have discussed in depth with the Syrian
Government and the opposition the specific need for
concrete action on the release of detainees/abductees
and the clarification of the fate of missing persons.
Meaningful progress on that key humanitarian issue
would send a positive signal to Syrians and would be an
important confidence-building measure. I appreciated
the openness to consider more meaningful actions in
my dialogue.
In parallel with my bilateral engagements, my
Office participated in two additional meetings of the
Working Group on the subject, held in Moscow and
in Nur-Sultan. The Working Group was made up of
representatives from Iran, Russia and Turkey, with the
United Nations and the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) also represented. I am ready to host
the next meeting of the Working Group in Geneva.
The Working Group was able to secure the release
of a small group of detainees/abductees in northern
Syria on 22 April. For the first time, members of my
team were present on the ground as observers, which
enabled us to make an assessment of how the operation
was to be conducted and share recommendations with
the Working Group. My team’s observations included
some positive elements. However, there is considerable
room for improvement in terms of the procedures to
be followed during future release operations to ensure
consistency with international humanitarian law.
We need to scale up and speed up the release of
detainees/abductees, particularly vulnerable ones, such
as women, children, the elderly and the sick. The Syrian
Government and the opposition should ensure the
detainees/abductees’ protection prior to, and following,
their release. They should move away from the one-for-

S/PV. 8520

one exchange framework and address the issue on a
larger scale.
The fate of the tens of thousands of persons
who have gone missing since the beginning of the
conflict must be clarified. In close coordination with
the ICRC, my Office is developing procedures for
compiling, consolidating, safeguarding and exchanging
information, as well as conducting searches for missing
persons. The scale of the issue is of unprecedented
proportions that oblige us to continue our collective
attempts to make progress — months, if not years, of
meticulous and committed work will be required to
complete the process.
For any political solution to be durable, it must
meet the aspirations of the Syrian people. I have made
it a priority to engage a wide spectrum of Syrians in
recent weeks. In calling for concrete action, I recollect
the voices of those many Syrians, from refugees in
neighbouring countries to people living in shelters in
Homs. The appalling scale of Syrian’s suffering and the
uncertain future of millions weighs heavily on me, as it
should, of course, on us all. I believe that most people
will judge a political process on the basis of its ability
to deliver improvements on the ground and to take into
consideration the needs and priorities of all Syrian men
and women.
I strongly believe in the importance of engaging a
wide range of Syrian interlocutors. I intend to further
my outreach and engagement with Syrian refugees, civil
society, women’s organizations and other Syrian actors,
including through the Civil Society Support Room. The
Women’s Advisory Board continues to remind us of the
specific security, economic and human rights concerns
of Syrian women, who bring diverse experiences and
views to the table and share the right to have a voice at
the table.
Clearly, much hope rests on at last convening a
constitutional committee. It could be the first sign of
real progress. It could, if approached in the right spirit,
help unlock a broader political process that leads to
the holding of United Nations-supervised elections in
a safe, calm and neutral environment. I will continue
to work towards a final agreement on the composition
and terms of reference of a credible, balanced, inclusive
and viable constitutional committee. Many earlier
differences have indeed been narrowed down.
While nothing is agreed until everything is agreed,
we have a clear understanding on balanced co-chairing

19-124033/18

S/PV.8520

The situation in the Middle East

arrangements, a formula for decision-making, a shared
acceptance of the United Nations facilitation role and a
political commitment to ensure the safety and security
of all those who will be involved. Both the Syrian
Government and the opposition have been constructive
on those points, and I am grateful to them. I believe that
the final terms of the mandate can be agreed on with a
modicum of goodwill.
It is now agreed that six specific names on the
earlier so-called civil society list need to be removed.
Work continues to identify a set of names that, when
viewed in totality, will have the support of all concerned
in order to enhance the quality and credibility of the
list. Efforts are being made to achieve the objective of
at least 30 per cent female participants.
Those are all the elements of the process on which
I believe it is now possible to advance. I have expended
a lot of effort to build buy-in. If everyone is prepared to
compromise just a little, the process can move forward.
For my fifth priority I spoke of the need to improve
international dialogue on Syria. Yes, a credible and
sustainable political settlement must be Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned. Yet the process and its outcome must
enjoy international support and legitimacy. The conflict
is highly internationalized, and external intervention
is one of its hard realities. Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity must be
respected and restored — but saying so will not make
it so.
In that context, let me emphasize once again that
the United Nations position regarding the occupied
Syrian Golan will continue to be determined by the
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
on that issue. I will discharge my mandate while fully
respecting Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015).
External intervention poses real threats to
international peace and security. Five international
armies operate across Syria’s land and airspace,
in tension or even in conflict, generating risks for
dangerous escalation. Those risks must be contained
and ultimately removed.
Different formats of international cooperation
for resolving the Syrian conflict exist at present. I
had useful conversations with the Astana guarantors
in Nur-Sultan on 25 and 26 April. I will hold formal
4/18

30/04/2019

consultations with them in Geneva in May. I will
consult with the members of the small group in Geneva
on Friday.
I remain convinced that key international players
agree on much more than might be apparent. I believe
that they all understand the need for international
cooperation on Syria. I will continue to use my good
offices to help the key players with influence to join in
one active conversation to provide common support to
a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process under
United Nations facilitation.
As we approach agreement on the constitutional
committee, I would like to use the opportunity to
facilitate a revitalized and broad-based international
process of cooperation. To realize my mandate, a
common forum supporting the Geneva process must be
found. I believe that we are making progress. I hope
that the next time I brief the Council I will be able to
report tangible achievements on the long road towards
a political settlement of the conflict in Syria.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): At the
outset, the United States is compelled by the urgency
of the humanitarian conditions in the Rukban camp
to reiterate in the strongest terms our call on the
Al-Assad regime and the Russian Federation to permit
deliveries of United Nations assistance from Damascus
and lift its restrictions on commercial routes to the
encampment immediately. The last United NationsSyrian Arab Red Crescent convoy delivery reached
the camp in February. People are starving. We count
on Special Envoy Pedersen’s assistance to secure the
approvals from Damascus and Moscow as soon as
possible. A third convoy to Rukban could represent
a gesture by Damascus and its allies of goodwill and
seriousness towards United Nations efforts to relaunch
the political process.
Unfortunately, and despite the Special Envoy’s
intense diplomacy, the political process remains
stalled by the Russian Federation and its supporters,
as evidenced by the latest round of Astana process
meetings held in Nur-Sultan on 25 and 26 April. Once
again, the so-called Astana process has failed to produce
tangible steps towards securing serious commitments
to advance the political process, the release of civilian
19-12403

30/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

detainees, the approval of a humanitarian convoy to
deliver food and medicine to thousands of starving
people in Rukban or a nationwide ceasefire.
The Russian Federation and the Al-Assad regime
have consistently sought to stall United Nations efforts
to launch a credible political process. The Al-Assad
regime seems determined to end the conflict by waging
war on the Syrian people, rather than by implementing
principled political reform. The Security Council and
the international community are united, and must
remain united, in our recognition of the United Nationsled political process in Geneva as the sole legitimate
forum for achieving a lasting, inclusive and credible
political solution to the conflict. That is why the United
States and our Syria small group partners — Egypt,
France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the
United Kingdom — will convene in Geneva on 3 May
for consultations with the Special Envoy on the way
forward towards implementing resolution 2254 (2015).
The United States also continues to support
Special Envoy Pedersen’s focus on constitutional
reform. We commend the Special Envoy and the
Syrian opposition for their efforts to ensure that any
committee formed to draft a new constitution will be
balanced and credible. The United States position on the
constitutional committee is clear. First, the committee,
if formed, would represent only a symbolic first step
towards achieving the political solution envisioned in
resolution 2254 (2015), and could potentially serve as
a confidence-building measure upon which the parties
could secure progress on other benchmarks.
No matter how close the parties may be to agreement
on a constitutional committee, the United States
expects United Nations diplomatic efforts to continue
along the other tracks established for detainees and
missing persons, counter-terrorism, elections and the
creation of a safe, calm and neutral environment. The
United States insists that the Syrian opposition and the
United Nations reach agreement on the membership and
procedural elements of the constitutional committee
before it is formally established, which is the only way
to ensure its credibility and legitimacy.
The political transition outlined in resolution 2254
(2015) cannot succeed as long as violence remains an
ever-present threat in northern Syria. The United States
reiterates its calls on Russia and the Al-Assad regime to
halt their recent military escalation in Idlib province and
uphold the September 2018 Russian-Turkish ceasefire.

S/PV. 8520

Despite Russia’s claim to be targeting terrorists,
since February those operations have killed more
than 200 civilians and targeted first responders as
they attempted to save lives on the ground. More than
120,000 people have fled their homes, moving closer
to the Turkish border in order to seek safety. That
must end.
In north-eastern Syria the United States is working
hard to guarantee the security of our NATO ally
Turkey, while also securing the enduring defeat of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). It is
vital that security conditions remain stable in order to
consolidate our hard-won gains and ensure that ISIL
is not able to regain momentum or control of territory.
Finally, progress on the release of civilian detainees
and missing persons is a vital component in achieving a
political solution under resolution 2254 (2015). However,
the token prisoner swaps between the Al-Assad regime
and Syrian opposition groups brokered by the socalled Astana guarantors do not represent credible or
significantly meaningful steps towards building the
trust and confidence necessary to achieve a political
solution. Hundreds of thousands of innocent men,
women and children remain imprisoned without cause,
and the regime continues to arbitrarily arrest, torture
and execute detainees. The United States believes
that the United Nations is the only appropriate arbiter
for ensuring progress on the release of detainees and
missing persons from the Al-Assad regime’s prisons.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his briefing. We share many of his views.
Russia is taking active measures to advance
the political process and restore trust among the
conflicting Syrian parties. Intensive work with Iran
and Turkey is under way within the Astana format, in
cooperation with the Special Envoy and in coordination
with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
the opposition. On 25 and 26 April we held the twelfth
high-level international meeting on Syria in Nur-Sultan,
which resulted in the adoption of a joint statement by
the guarantor countries. Incidentally, I want to point
out to the United States representative that we are not
the “so-called” guarantor countries, we are simply the
guarantor countries.
Today we circulated the joint statement as an
official Security Council document. The Astana troika
reaffirmed its steadfast commitment to the sovereignty,

19-124035/18

S/PV.8520

The situation in the Middle East

independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic, as well as to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. In that
context, it was noted that in accordance with Council
resolution 497 (1981), the Golan is still Syrian territory
under Israeli occupation. Special attention was paid
to the situation in the Idlib de-escalation zone, where
tensions persist. Militants from the terrorist group
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham are intensifying their attacks on
Syrian armed forces’ positions while simultaneously
attempting to reorganize themselves into a so-called
moderate opposition and unite the various armed
groups operating in Idlib into a single one under their
command. The fight against organizations that the
Security Council recognizes as terrorist must continue.
The guarantors are determined to fully implement the
agreements on stabilizing Idlib.
In the most recent exchange of views in NurSultan on north-eastern Syria, it was acknowledged
that stability and security in that region can be ensured
only on a basis of respect for the country’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and by rejecting separatist
plans that undermine the national security of Syria and
its neighbours.
Substantive consultations were held both in the
trilateral format and with the participation of Special
Envoy Pedersen on accelerating the launch of the
constitutional committee, which will enable the start of
a viable process for settling the Syrian crisis. Like the
Special Envoy, we are optimistic that the preparatory
work on this front can be completed very soon.
We held the eighth meeting of the Working Group
on the release of detainees/abductees, the handover of
bodies and the identification of missing persons. We
welcomed the success of the efforts in November 2018
and February and April 2019 to release people, 82
altogether, who had been forcibly detained, representing
a unique contribution to building trust and confidence
among the Syrian parties.
We also remain optimistic about the future
development of the situation in Syria. We can all see that
as the situation is normalized, major terrorist hotbeds
are eliminated and the country returns to peaceful
life, issues related to post-conflict reconstruction and
the provision of humanitarian assistance come to the
fore. Humanitarian assistance must be extended to all
Syrians throughout the country without preconditions.
We are pleased that the United States delegation has
6/18

30/04/2019

finally taken an interest in the fate of the residents
of Rukban camp, as we have long been calling on
them to do. We urge it to include them in the overall
resettlement efforts, which regrettably the United
States has prevented for a long time.
We once again urge everyone to recognize the
harm that has been done by the unilateral sanctions that
a number of Western countries have imposed and that
only exacerbate the humanitarian situation in Syria.
Ordinary citizens are suffering. To a great extent it is
because of those restrictions that we have witnessed a
large-scale fuel and energy crisis in Syria in the past
few days.
Syria is one of the key States in the Middle East
and an integral part of the Arab world. It should not
be artificially ripped from the regional context in the
interests of short-sighted, politicized, opportunistic
aims. We therefore support Damascus’s speedy
restoration to the Arab family, which will help rebuild
inter-Arab harmony and improve the general situation
in the Middle East. I believe that our partners in the
Astana format will agree with me that we are open to
honest interaction without hidden agendas. We should
point out that at the meeting in Nur-Sultan the troika
agreed to invite Syria’s neighbours Iraq and Lebanon
to join the Astana process as observers. We call on all
those who are genuinely interested in restoring peace in
Syria to engage constructively in our efforts. Together
we can help end the war and focus on the political
process and national reconciliation.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his informative briefing and for his tireless
efforts since he assumed his post. The State of Kuwait
reiterates its full support for his efforts to revive the
Syrian political process in order to arrive at an equitable
political Syrian-led and -owned settlement, under the
auspices of the United Nations and in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). That resolution laid out practical
steps for a political transition period, including several
phases such as the drafting of a constitution and
the holding of free and fair elections that enable the
participation of all elements of Syrian society, including
those living abroad, in line with the new constitution
and under the auspices of the United Nations.
With the Syrian crisis entering its ninth year as of
last month, we support the Secretary-General’s four
recommendations. The first urges all parties to preserve
19-12403

30/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the Russian-Turkish ceasefire in Idlib. The second calls
for all military operations to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights. The third stresses
sustained access to humanitarian assistance. The fourth
seeks to promote international support with a view to
reaching a political solution that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and supporting the
Special Envoy in implementing resolution 2254 (2015)
and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
In February the Special Envoy indicated in his
briefing (see S/PV.8475) the five objectives he wished
to focus on, and we believe that achieving them would
advance the Syrian political process. All the parties
should work to support the Special Envoy in fully
realizing his mandate.
We have taken note of the twelfth meeting of the
Astana guarantors in Nur-Sultan, as well as the small
group’s meeting with the Special Envoy in Geneva. We
note in that regard the importance of making progress
on the constitutional committee. We stress that it
should be balanced and credible, and should include
representatives of all sectors of the Syrian society. We
also emphasize the importance of working to make
greater progress in securing the release of Syrian
detainees and determining the fate of missing persons,
especially given the humanitarian aspect of our work.
We reiterate that the return of Syrian refugees must
be safe, voluntary and dignified. Measures such as
arbitrary detention and expropriation would obstruct
the efforts to enable their return, and in that regard we
reject any demographic changes in Syria.
On the issue of accountability, we stress the
importance of ensuring accountability for those who
violate international humanitarian law and human
rights law in Syria. We reiterate our support to the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. We stress that it will not
be possible to achieve a sustained and comprehensive
peace in Syria without justice and without ensuring that
there is no impunity for the perpetrators of such crimes.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that there is no military
solution to the Syrian crisis. The only solution is a
political one that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people. That would be done through a political
settlement in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)

S/PV. 8520

and the Geneva communiqué of 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex), with a view to preserving unity, independence
and sovereignty of Syria.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We wish to express our appreciation for
the briefing provided today by Mr. Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, following
his extensive consultations in the framework of finding
an inclusive and sustainable political solution to the
conflict in Syria. We reiterate our support for his
practical and direct approach, as well as the five pillars
that underpin his diplomatic mediation efforts and the
establishment of credibility in the process.
Despite the apparent inertia in which we find
ourselves, we believe that both the international
community and the Syrian population are watching
attentively, and perhaps with some apprehension, to
see whether the ongoing political process will produce
results. Coupling that with the tense calm being
experienced by the population of northern Syria, who
live in fear of yet another humanitarian catastrophe,
we believe it is imperative to redouble efforts to avoid
a military escalation, which would affect the lives of
millions of civilians, endanger the credibility of the
political process and bring into question the ability of
the United Nations to prevent further suffering and come
up with a credible and sustainable political solution.
The political process and the situation in Idlib are
not mutually exclusive. On the contrary, we believe that
the success of one depends upon the capacity of the
international community — and of the Security Council
in particular — to avoid an even greater tragedy. In that
regard, we deplore the recent attacks in the demilitarized
zone in Idlib, which have claimed the lives of hundreds
of civilians, including children, and we urgently call
on the parties involved to maintain their commitment
to the ceasefire and the full implementation of the
agreement between the Russian Federation and Turkey.
We hope that all the necessary steps will be taken to
avoid violations of the agreement and of international
humanitarian law.
We take note of the recently concluded round of
talks held last week in Nur-Sultan, where the Astana
guarantors expressed their commitment to the
advancement of a Syrian-owned and United Nationsfacilitated political process under the guidelines of
resolution 2254 (2015). We recognize the progress,
albeit insufficient, towards the establishment of the

19-124037/18

S/PV.8520

The situation in the Middle East

constitutional committee and its terms of reference.
We hope that the forthcoming consultations, facilitated
by the United Nations and to be held in Geneva on a
date not too far in the future, will produce satisfactory
results and demonstrate concrete progress. That would
provide renewed vigour and impetus to the political
process towards the definitive resolution of the Syrian
conflict. We urge the parties to exercise the greatest
possible degree of flexibility and show a constructive
spirit in those consultations. We invite them not to lose
sight of the need to alleviate the suffering of a people
stricken by years of conflict and to steer their course
towards a new future. For the Dominican Republic,
the success of the consultations lies in agreeing on an
inclusive constitutional committee that leads to the
meaningful and significant participation of women as
agents of peace, progress and well-being for all.
In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to
resolution 2254 (2015), and we urge the full respect and
implementation thereof. In that context, we advocate
the consolidation of the role of the United Nations in
the facilitation, mediation and rapprochement between
the Syrian Government and the opposition, with a
view to building the necessary political will for the
establishment of the constitutional committee and its
terms of reference. We are hopeful that the committee
will be able to convene at a not-too-distant date as a
concrete step towards a renewed, credible and inclusive
political process.
I express our desire to see more meaningful
progress with regard to the release of detainees, a factor
that is vital to the building of trust and credibility in the
political process from a holistic point of view.
We assure Ambassador Pedersen of our determined
support for his work and his conclusions from the
efforts thus far, the lessons learned and the shared
commitment to end the conflict. We urge the parties
to move decisively towards bringing about concrete
results that unequivocally put a new face on the Syrian
conflict — one that speaks of a transition towards a
future of hope and justice.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria. I am going to
be brief, but I do not want my brevity to be construed
as a lack of interest. Simply, I think that many of the
previous speakers have spoken very eloquently. Our
colleague from the United States, for example, spoke
8/18

30/04/2019

about the political process. Therefore, if I may, I will
start with some points about the security situation.
What the Special Envoy said about the troubling
resurgence of violence worries us. There have been
reports this morning that the Syrian authorities have
deployed multiple barrel bombs in attacks in northern
Hama, which I think is the first time such weapons
have been used in over seven months. Such use of
indiscriminate weaponry is unacceptable, but what is
particularly worrisome is that it seems to be a signal that
the Syrian regime is not serious about the protection of
the Syrian people. It would therefore be good to hear
from the Special Envoy whether he thinks that calls into
question the commitment to the political settlement.
We have also seen some recent correspondence from
the Syrians to the Security Council alleging activity
by armed terrorist groups with the support of “foreign
intelligence agencies”. This is about chemical-weapon
attacks, and there are more allegations that the White
Helmets are involved. I have been very categorical in this
Chamber — and I regret the need to be so again — but
the White Helmets are a humanitarian organization.
They are purely a humanitarian organization. They
are very brave people. They are Syrians. And to date
they have saved 115,000 lives. We therefore look to
the Syrian authorities to abide by their international
obligations in relation to chemical weapons and to
refrain from using them.
I would like to say something briefly about Idlib.
Like others, we are very concerned by the frequent
reports of the regime shelling areas in the demilitarized
zone, and we understand that over 120,000 people have
been displaced since February as a result. We look to
Russia and Iran, which — along with Turkey — are the
Astana guarantors, to ensure that the ceasefire agreed
at Sochi is fully respected and that the current actions
cease immediately. Let me be clear: not only do we
want to see the ceasefire respected, we want to see
those Member States with influence use that influence
to ensure that the ceasefire is respected.
Turning to the political process, I think the Special
Envoy has made very good efforts, and I thank him for
those efforts. We support him as he continues onward,
and I think he was right to say that he should work on
the full range of issues under resolution 2254 (2015). I
wish to recall that resolution 2254 (2015) was adopted
in December 2015, which was 40 months ago. Forty
months ago, the resolution set a deadline of six months.
19-12403

30/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

That is, 34 months ago, a schedule and process for
drafting a new constitution was to have been set up. We
really cannot allow the Syrian authorities to drag that
process out indefinitely. We therefore definitely and
strongly support the Special Envoy’s drive to get that
matter sorted out in the coming months. Paragraph 4 of
that resolution calls for the establishment of a credible,
inclusive and non-sectarian governance. If I could ask,
what is the Special Envoy’s assessment of the Syrian
authorities’ progress in responding to the Council’s
request contained in that resolution?
What has been done on the constitutional committee
is a good step forward. Anything that can convene the
international players in Geneva is to be welcomed. I can
promise the Special Envoy that we will be supportive
and pragmatic about that. But, again, we would call
on those with influence over the Syrian regime to
encourage it to engage seriously and constructively in
the political process, including by creating conditions
for humanitarian access.
I would like to look ahead to a point when the current
Syrian authorities will want to be reintegrated into the
international community. Without such reintegration,
Syria will never be stable or fully prosperous, which
is all the more reason that there needs to be a credible
political process. But I would remind the Council that
the United Kingdom has been clear, and is still clear,
that we will not consider providing reconstruction
assistance absent that credible political settlement.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Since
this is, I believe, the last public meeting we have
together, allow me also to warmly congratulate
you, Mr. President — indeed, you and your entire
team — for the outstanding work of the German
presidency throughout this month of April, and, if I
may also allow myself to mention it, the particularly
close — I would even say unprecedented — cooperation
that has united our two countries and our two
presidencies during the joint presidencies in March and
April. I thank you very much, Sir.
I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Geir Pedersen, for his insightful
briefing on the actions he has undertaken to implement
the five priorities he presented to the Security Council
two months ago (see S/PV.8475). I would like to
reiterate to him France’s full support for his mission,
the extreme complexity of which we all know. Today I

S/PV. 8520

will focus on two points— the situation on the ground
and the political process.
To all those who claim that the war in Syria is
over, I would like to remind them of the grim reality
of the situation in that country. The terrorist threat
is still present, whether from Da’esh or Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham. The humanitarian situation is catastrophic.
The situation on the front lines remains very volatile. In
that context, the urgency, in our view, is to secure a real
ceasefire across the entirety of the territory of Syria.
A ceasefire is essential to enable us to save lives and
focus our efforts on the two inseparable priorities that
unite us — the fight against terrorism and the active
search for a political solution.
However, I would like to highlight in particular
the seriousness of the situation in the north-west. The
intensification of the regime’s strikes in recent days
is extremely worrisome. The presence of thousands
of terrorist fighters in the area and the risk of a
humanitarian disaster are a source of deep concern
for all. In that particularly difficult context, France
calls on Russia specifically to honour its commitments
to maintaining the ceasefire in Idlib and to putting
pressure on the regime to stop its strikes.
Similarly, we are all aware of the considerable
efforts that remain to be made in the north-east to
ensure Da’esh’s complete and definitive defeat. In
that regard, we welcome the continued presence of the
United States. Any military offensive against the area
must be avoided at all costs.
Across the country, and especially in the areas
under the regime’s control, the information we are
receiving is particularly worrisome. The Syrian regime
is continuing its policy of repression. We condemn
the obstacles imposed by the regime to prevent safe,
continuous and unhindered humanitarian access, in
particular its refusal to allow the delivery of a third
convoy to Rukban. France calls on Russia to use its
influence to ensure that that convoy can be authorized
as soon as possible, which would be an important
symbolic gesture before Ramadan.
We would also like to recall that the return of
refugees requires the Syrian regime to make firm,
concrete and verifiable commitments with regard to the
security of persons and the restitution of property and
land. The information we are receiving on that subject
is appalling. The restrictions on access to populations
seeking to return to their homes imposed by the regime

19-124039/18

S/PV.8520

The situation in the Middle East

on the United Nations are unjustifiable. They are proof
that the regime wants to leave its hands free to pursue its
repressive strategy without hindrance and that in reality
it is hostile to the return of refugees to their homes.
The United Nations must be able to provide objective
follow-up on that essential subject. France warns the
international community against the exploitation of the
refugee issue by the regime and its supporters, which in
the face of all the evidence seeks to reverse the burden
of proof.
Turning now to the political process, I would like
to stress the urgency of moving forward despite the
inertia and delaying tactics. On behalf of France, I
would like to welcome the Special Envoy’s efforts to
reach an agreement on a constitutional package through
numerous contacts with Syrian and international actors.
We will support any agreement on the constitutional
committee that is credible and balanced, both in its
composition and in the operating regulations it provides
for. It is up to the Special Envoy — and him alone — to
tell us when he considers that those two conditions are
met. Such an agreement seems to us to be within reach.
However, the political solution cannot be reduced
to the constitutional committee alone. In that spirit, we
also support the Special Envoy’s efforts to implement
all the elements of resolution 2254 (2015). A credible
political process requires three complementary
elements in particular — a national ceasefire, which I
just discussed; confidence-building measures to create a
neutral and secure environment; and the holding of free
and transparent elections. It is crucial for the Special
Envoy to continue to be proactive on all those elements.

30/04/2019

to impose sanctions on the regime and refuse to finance
the reconstruction of the country or normalize relations
with Damascus until there is credible and irreversible
progress towards a political solution, which alone will
put an end to the Syrian tragedy.
With social anthropologist Laëtitia Atlani-Duault, I
expressed here in the Chamber the fear that the Syrian
tragedy would be the downfall of the United Nations
and everything it represents (see S/PV.8434). I continue
to think that. After all those years of Security Council
failures in Syria, it would be yet another grave moral
and political failure to turn the page today and look
elsewhere out of fatigue or cowardice. First, it would
be a serious error in judgement to think that the Syrian
tragedy is behind us. Secondly, for perhaps the first
time in eight years, we believe that we have a narrow
but real window of opportunity to put an end to the
conflict. We cannot allow that window to close. We
have therefore a responsibility as members of Security
Council to switch off our automatic pilots, build on our
points of convergence and finally seize hold of peace
in Syria.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Since
this is the last open meeting under your presidency,
Mr. President, we would like to take this opportunity
to express our gratitude and congratulations on the
outstanding manner in which you presided over our
work during the month of April. We are also grateful
for the convening of this meeting and we convey our
thanks to Mr. Pedersen for his important briefing. We
wish him the best in finding a political solution in Syria.

I would like especially to stress the urgency of
implementing confidence-building measures, including
unilateral measures, such as measures that would result
in progress regarding prisoners and missing persons,
forced conscription and the reform of property laws.
The third release of prisoners under the auspices of the
Astana group underscores once again the need to go
beyond the strict reciprocity imposed by the regime and
move to a new level under the auspices of the United
Nations. We welcome the priority given by the Special
Envoy to that issue.

We would like to begin by welcoming the
developments described by the Special Envoy on the
possible upcoming establishment of a constitutional
committee that the Syrian people and the international
community could recognize as legitimate, balanced and
consistent with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). We
note the sense of urgency in making tangible progress
on that issue, because further delays would have a very
negative impact on the process in terms of its credibility
and legitimacy, especially because today marks 15
months since the Sochi meeting.

It is our collective responsibility to continue to exert
pressure on the Syrian regime to encourage it to really
engage in a credible political process. That is primarily
the responsibility of Damascus’ sponsors. For its part,
France, together with the European Union, will continue

We stress the importance of ensuring that the
committee be representative and include all sectors
of Syrian society, in particular Syrian women, and
that it be provided with transparent and democratic
mechanisms for its functioning and decision-making.

10/18

19-12403

30/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We wish to express our full support for the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General in his efforts to move
in that direction. To that end, we believe it is essential
that the parties continue to work on measures that
foster greater understanding, such as on the release of
detainees, the identification of missing persons and the
return of remains, as Mr. Pedersen noted.
The serious situation faced by the millions of
refugees and internally displaced persons poses another
serious challenge, in response to which not only are
financial resources required but, more important, the
political will to assure them a safe and dignified return
under internationally accepted parameters.
I conclude by stressing the importance for the
Council to remain attentive to developments on the
ground in order to ensure the maintenance of the Idlib
ceasefire, which was brokered in September 2018 and
recently reaffirmed by the Russian Federation and
Turkey. The prospects for the success of any effort
to achieve sustainable peace in Syria, such as the
constitutional committee, to a large extent depend upon
preventing Idlib from becoming the scene of further
violence and another humanitarian tragedy.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): At the outset, I would like to thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing and
his commitment.
The situation on the ground in Syria remains
worrisome, and we are particularly concerned about the
escalation of violence in Idlib. We call on all parties,
in particular the Astana guarantors, to strengthen their
commitment to the agreement signed in September. A
military offensive would lead to a humanitarian crisis
with disastrous consequences, not only for the 3 million
inhabitants of Idlib but also for the entire region. We call
for the ceasefire to be implemented throughout Syria.
After eight years of conflict, millions of people are
still in need of humanitarian assistance and millions are
still displaced. Syrian citizens must remain at the centre
of our concerns. In the current context it is difficult to
describe the developments as positive, but it is our duty
to keep hope alive and work together as members of
the Security Council towards a political solution. We
encourage the Special Envoy in the implementation of
his five objectives.
We support the Special Envoy in pursuing his
specific actions in favour of detainees, abductees and

S/PV. 8520

missing persons. We note the recent exchange of 18
prisoners, but we still have a long way to go. Much
progress remains to be made in that area, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. Thousands and
thousands of Syrians are waiting for a sign of life
from their loved ones. We call on all Member States
to use their influence on the parties to the conflict to
promote the release of arbitrarily detained persons. I
would like to ask the Special Envoy what prospects
he sees for moving beyond the one-for-one exchange
that has existed so far in order to be able to expand the
prisoner exchange.
Belgium calls for the convening of a constitutional
committee as soon as possible, as a first step towards
a more in-depth dialogue and genuine negotiations
on the implementation of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015) under
the auspices of the United Nations.
However, the United Nations can confer its seal of
legitimacy only if the composition of the committee
meets the necessary criteria of credibility, balance and
inclusivity. In addition, its procedures and working
methods are not just technical details but must also be
an integral part of each agreement. The parties should
work diligently and constructively towards a solution.
A successful agreement must reflect a real commitment
by all parties. We support the Special Envoy in his
regular exchanges with the parties to the conflict to
deepen dialogue and build trust.
In conclusion, Syria and its citizens deserve a
peaceful and inclusive future. The path to lasting peace
is through reconciliation and justice. Only when the
conditions for a safe, dignified, voluntary and well
informed return are met will refugees be able to go home.
Only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive
political transition is firmly under way will Belgium be
ready to support the country’s reconstruction.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Envoy Pedersen for his very
comprehensive briefing. My delegation appreciates
his efforts in engaging with all relevant parties and in
facilitating a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis.
We note with appreciation the meeting between
the Astana guarantors and Special Envoy Pedersen in
Nur-Sultan last week. Indonesia has always supported
all efforts aimed at advancing the political process,
through negotiations and peaceful means, within the
framework of the Geneva process and resolution 2254

19-1240311/18

S/PV.8520

The situation in the Middle East

(2015). Indonesia sincerely hopes that the dialogue
among all relevant stakeholders will continue, with
a view to contributing to a credible and sustainable
solution to the Syrian conflict. My delegation wishes to
highlight two pertinent points.
First, on the constitutional committee, Indonesia
is of the view that the ongoing dialogues are indeed
promising. We share the view that establishing a
constitutional committee would serve to open the way
for a lasting political solution in Syria. However, all of
us in the Chamber are also fully aware that that is not
an easy task. Various actors are involved, with different
views, interests and understandings. The international
community needs to do its part by always ensuring its
support towards advancing the political process in Syria
and finding ways to create a middle ground among all
the parties involved.
Building trust is key. Distrust and suspicion are
clearly not going to lead us anywhere. My delegation
supports the establishment of an inclusive and credible
constitutional committee that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people on the basis of respect
for Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. In that
regard, I would specifically like to commend the Special
Envoy’s tireless efforts in building the confidence of
all parties in order to advance the process. The whole
process of political settlement must be implemented by
the Syrians and cannot be imposed from outside. There
is no way to restore peace in Syria except through a
political solution.
Secondly, on the way forward, my delegation
believes that the international community needs to
invest further in maintaining the ceasefire and in
creating a concrete road map to comprehensively
resolve the Syrian conflict in a way that is acceptable
to all. The situation in Idlib needs our special attention.
The Council must continue calling on all parties to the
Syrian conflict to abide by the ceasefire agreements and
to prevent more civilian casualties. We must prevent a
military escalation in Syria, which would disrupt any
progress on the political front. Moreover, the issue of
safe, voluntary and dignified refugee returns, including
the post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation of
Syria, require serious discussions if we want to bring
about stability and genuine peace.
I think that it is fair to say that after many years, there
is now a glimmer of hope for realizing a comprehensive
political solution to the conflict. Compromises are
12/18

30/04/2019

required and delays would bring only more suffering
and lives lost.
Indonesia stands ready to support the Special
Envoy’s mandate and to contribute constructively in the
process of achieving sustainable peace in Syria.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing.
I also appreciate his active consultation and extensive
mediation activities since assuming office.
The Syrian conflict has entered its ninth year and
brought unprecedented suffering to the entire country.
The Chinese side deeply sympathizes with the Syrian
people for such suffering. The international community
should continue to intensify its efforts to promote
the political process in Syria, strive to achieve peace
as soon as possible, help the Syrian people return to
and rebuild their homeland and resume their lives in
peace. The Special Envoy has for some time been in
close contact with the various parties regarding the
formation of a Syrian constitutional committee. A few
days ago, the twelfth round of the Astana diaolgue
was successfully held in Astana, now called NurSultan. Russia, Turkey and Iran issued a joint statement
expressing their intention to speed up the establishment
of the constitutional committee. China appreciates and
supports the active efforts of the United Nations and
relevant parties to promote a political settlement of the
Syrian issue.
Regarding to next phase, I wish to emphasize the
following imperatives. First, we must continue to leverage
the role of the United Nations as the main channel of
mediation and advance the political settlement process.
The United Nations should strengthen its coordination
with the Syrian Government and push for the early
formation of a representative constitutional committee
acceptable to all by balancing the legitimate concerns
of both the Syrian Government and the other parties in
order to set in motion a sustained and effective political
process. The international community should support
the mediation work of the Special Envoy, back the
Astana process in continuing to play its role and help
foster synergies among the many diplomatic efforts.
The Council members of should remain united and
speak with one voice in an effort to create an enabling
climate and conditions conducive to a political solution
to the Syrian issue.
Secondly, the international community must act
determinedly to combat the terrorist forces in Syria
19-12403

30/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

and create safe conditions for the political process.
Terrorism threatens Syria’s security and stability.
Counter-terrorism is therefore an important aspect
of settling the Syrian issue. Both the north-western
and north-eastern parts of Syria face serious counterterrorism challenges, with terrorist groups entrenched
in Idlib and some terrorist fighters moving freely.
in keeping with the new trends and characteristics
of the counter-terrorism landscape in some regions,
the international community should strengthen
coordination and cooperation and unify standards
in fighting all terrorist organizations designated by
the Security Council, consolidate the achievements
of counter-terrorism and continuously improve the
security environment in Syria.
Thirdly, the Syrian parties must prioritize the
future of the country and the fundamental interests of
the people, meet each other half way and continue to
resolve differences through dialogue and consultation.
The international community should encourage and
support the Syrian parties to build mutual trust through
prisoner exchanges among other measures and continue
to promote national reconciliation. Political negotiations
are the only realistic way to resolve the Syrian issue in
a lasting way. The Syrian must seek a solution that is
acceptable to all parties through an inclusive political
process based on the Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
principle and the spirit of resolution 2254 (2015).
Ultimately, the future of Syria must be decided
by the Syrian people themselves. The sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Syria must be upheld in moving the political
settlement forward. China stands ready to enhance
its communication and coordination with the relevant
parties, including the United Nations, jointly advance
the Syrian political process, vigorously improve
the humanitarian situation in Syria and support the
Syrian Government in conducting refugee returns and
economic and social reconstruction.
Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Allow me to join other
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for the able
and fair manner in which you have presided over the
Security Council in the month of April. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his briefing today and for the work he and his team
have done towards bringing about an end to the crisis
in Syria and finding a long-term, sustainable political
solution in the country.

S/PV. 8520

South Africa welcomes the continued engagement
between Special Envoy Pedersen and both the Syrian
Government and opposition groups in pursuing his
and the international community’s objective towards
establishing credible, inclusive and non-sectarian
governance, setting a process for drafting a new
constitution and the conduct of free and fair elections.
Such engagement is essential to ensuring that
any political agreement reached between the parties
benefits from the positions and views of all and reflects
the will of the Syrian people.
In that regard, my delegation would like to reiterate
that the only sustainable answer to the situation
remains the realization of a political solution through
an inclusive Syrian-owned and Syrian-led process.
In order to achieve this, the constitutional committee
must be established without delay. We welcome the
Special Envoy’s efforts to finalize the composition
of a credible and balanced committee and its rules of
procedure. In that regard, South Africa also calls upon
all parties to maintain their commitment to ensuring a
30 per cent representation of women in the Committee,
as it is well established that women offer a unique
perspective in matters of peace and reconciliation that
cannot and should not be ignored.
My delegation has taken note of the recent meeting
of the Astana guarantors in Nur-Sultan and their
commitment to the United Nations-facilitated political
process in line with resolution 2254 (2015), which
contains all the provisions necessary for ensuring a
viable political solution for Syria. We hope that these
discussions will aid in achieving the goals set by the
Special Envoy for achieving a political settlement
in Syria.
It should be noted that some parties have taken
advantage of the situation in Syria to advance their own
interests and lay claim to territory occupied illegally.
This cannot be allowed, and the United Nations, and
its Security Council in particular, must honour its
responsibilities and condemn such actions.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
international community must support a political
solution to the situation in Syria as a matter of urgency
as well as support the United Nations and Special
Envoy Pedersen as the main channel for negotiations
and mediation.

19-1240313/18

S/PV.8520

The situation in the Middle East

Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea): We thank
the Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, for his updated
briefing on the work he has done since his most recent
report to the Council (see S/PV.8475).
We are aware that much remains to be done in
Syria. As we seek a way to put an end to the terrorist
groups operating in Idlib based on the Russian-Turkish
agreements and defeat the main terrorist forces, it is
necessary to focus on fully stabilizing the situation
on the ground and on promoting a political solution
pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015). We must therefore
be fully determined to step up efforts to form the
constitutional committee so as to give genuine impetus
to the political process aimed at putting an end to the
eight years of war in Syria.
We welcome the meetings held recently by the
Special Envoy in Damascus and Geneva and in the
framework of the Astana process to discuss the
formation and launch of the work of the constitutional
committee. We would recall that the bilateral and
trilateral rounds of talks held on 25 and 26 April in
Nur-Sultan were focused primarily on ensuring that
progress is made in the efforts of the parties to reactivate
the political process, the need for constitutional
reform and the holding of free and fair elections, and
on the reaffirmation of Geneva as the venue for the
achievement of a permanent political solution to the
conflict in Syria, as agreed in January 2018 in Sochi.
In the current context, we must be objective and
recognize that there is no longer room for eventualities
or expectations, and that the constitutional committee
should be formed as soon as possible.
The political process in Syria would begin only
after the formation of the constitutional committee,
and, as we have stated recently, we are fully aware of
the fact that it remains difficult to set specific dates for
the formation of the committee and the launching of its
work. For that reason, we once again urge the parties,
especially the Syrian authorities, to take the necessary
measures, give priority to their cooperation with the
Special Envoy and actively expedite the culmination of
the process.
In that same vein, it would be advisable to take
measures to further strengthen the Astana process, with
the incorporation of additional States as observers. We
share the view that the participation of additional States
in this negotiating process will make the solutions

14/18

30/04/2019

reached in the rounds of consultations even more robust
at the international level.
I would conclude my statement by encouraging
the Special Envoy once again to continue investigating
all possible opportunities to overcome the obstacles
standing in the way of the formation of the committee
and by reiterating the firm commitment of my
Government to a political solution to the conflict in the
framework of resolution 2254 (2015).
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive and
insightful briefing. I would also like to assure him of
our full support.
As we heard last week from the representative of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(see S/PV.8515), the humanitarian situation in Syria is
particularly worrying. Let me stress that our actions
aimed at protecting the population and providing a
collective response to the humanitarian challenges
should be of the utmost priority. We must prevent any
military hostilities from bringing about disastrous
humanitarian consequences. This is a sine qua non for
reaching a sustainable peace agreement.
The demand for accountability for war crimes
cannot override the simultaneous responsibility to
protect civilians. In this context, all parties to the conflict
should refrain from and condemn arbitrary detention,
the taking of hostages and forced disappearances.
We must be resolute in implementing effective
measures to prevent and combat terrorism. In that
regard, we would like to encourage the parties involved
to make efforts to ensure that military escalation is
avoided at all costs, especially in north-east Syria,
where it could easily lead to the re-emergence of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
I would like to underline that the only way towards
durable peace is an intra-Syrian framework political
agreement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
We hope that the coordinated efforts of Russia
and Turkey, based on their agreement on the Idlib
de-escalation zone, will help to stabilize the tense
situation in that area. We ask them to follow through
on their commitment and protect civilians as a matter
of priority.

19-12403

30/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We look forward to the establishment of the
constitutional committee. Let me underline that
the success of this undertaking requires the full and
constructive engagement of all parties to the conflict.
It can succeed only when the Syrian authorities
participate in the negotiations in good faith and
without preconditions.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the European
Union common position on the reconstruction of Syria.
We fully support the safe return of Syrian refugees.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, for his detailed briefing
on the political process in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Côte d’Ivoire, which is deeply committed to
dialogue as the best way of resolving conflict, is willing
to support any initiative aimed at bringing the parties to
the conflict together so as to restore peace and stability
and create conditions conducive to shared prosperity.
My country therefore welcomes the holding on
25 and 26 April in Nur-Sultan, the capital of Kazakhstan,
of peace talks on the political process aimed at emerging
from the crisis. That twelfth round of negotiations, the
Astana process and all the other peace initiatives will
be conducive to the establishment of a framework for
consultations in which all the parties to the Syrian crisis
can agree on issues related to relaunching the political
process, combating terrorism, returning refugees and
beginning post-crisis national reconstruction.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomed the joint communiqué
issued after the talks, which stressed the importance of
accelerating the operationalization of the constitutional
committee and affirmed the participants’ willingness
to support the Special Envoy’s efforts. My delegation
also believes that the initiatives to advance the political
process for ending the crisis must be supported by
confidence-building measures among the parties to
the conflict. We therefore welcome the steps taken to
release detainees in November 2018 and subsequently
in February and April. In that regard, we urge the
Working Group and the Syrian parties to continue their
cooperation with a view to consolidating the developing
atmosphere of trust.
While the Astana process and the United Nationsled peace initiatives have enabled us to hope for lasting
peace in Syria, my delegation nevertheless remains

S/PV. 8520

concerned about the negative impact of the resumption
of hostilities in the de-escalation zones in northern
Syria, particularly in Hama, Idlib, Aleppo and Latakia
governorates. We are particularly concerned about the
serious repercussions of the resumption of fighting in the
midst of an already worrisome humanitarian situation
in the region, where the escalation of hostilities since
February has reportedly left more than 200 people
dead and another 120,000 displaced, according to the
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and the Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
We want to take this opportunity to reiterate our call
to the actors in the Syrian crisis to cease hostilities
immediately and work to create the conditions
necessary for providing humanitarian assistance to the
populations affected by the conflict.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire affirms its continued
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and encourages him to continue his mediation efforts
among the Syrian parties. We also urge the warring
parties to prioritize a path of dialogue and comply with
resolution 2254 (2015), which outlines a road map for
the political process in Syria.
Lastly, Mr. President, I would like to join others
in commending you for the quality of Germany’s
presidency of the Council during the month of April.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Germany.
I too would like to express our full support for
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen. We welcome his five
priorities and hope that when he briefs the Council
next time, he will be able to report on tangible results.
We are particularly concerned about the escalation of
violence, which runs counter to what he said, especially
in the north-west. With regard to the United Kingdom
representative’s comments about the recent dropping of
barrel bombs, perhaps he can shed some light on the
reports he alluded to. We also support Mr. Pedersen’s
efforts with regard to the detainees. It represents
some progress, but we need to see significantly
higher numbers. We also need to see a greater level of
mutual releases.
With regard to the refugees and all the refugee
camps, I need not repeat what we said in our last meeting
(see S/PV.8515), when we concentrated on humanitarian
issues. Where Rukban and other camps are concerned,

19-1240315/18

S/PV.8520

The situation in the Middle East

the return of refugees can take place only when it is safe,
well-informed, voluntary and dignified. Mr. Pedersen
is working to achieve a credible political settlement and
political support, and we need that and a balanced and
inclusive constitutional committee. I want to underline
and repeat what he said with regard to ensuring that it
includes 30 per cent women at a minimum. As other
colleagues have made clear, Germany will not consider
providing reconstruction support until a credible,
inclusive and genuine political process is under way.
I want to highlight one aspect that has been
somewhat ignored, which concerns prisoners and
crimes committed. The regime continues to arrest
people in the south-west, for instance, and Al-Assad’s
prisons remain full, with 10,000 still incarcerated
under the flimsiest of accusations. We do not know
the numbers because so far the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross have not
had access to those prisons. I would like to urge the
representative of the Russian Federation to impress on
the Al-Assad regime that it should provide access to
all who are in detention facilities, in particular those
controlled by the intelligence agencies. I have said
before that the crimes and the unspeakable atrocities
that have been committed by all sides during the Syrian
conflict remain an issue. There are horrific accounts of
murders, torture and crimes of sexual violence against
children that must be investigated and their perpetrators
brought to justice.
While making sure that that happens is of course
a goal in itself, accountability is also a precondition
for peaceful development and sustainable peace. It is
needed for the justice for the victims, but it is also needed
for national reconciliation, without which there can be
no peace in Syria. With regard to accountability and
impunity, I want to highlight the importance of making
use of the Impartial and Independent Mechanism to
Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, which we support. We are
very grateful for the Secretary-General’s commitment
to including sufficient means in his budget proposal for
the Mechanism to be able to do its job, which as I said
is key to achieving sustainable peace in Syria.
I also want to join others in asking Mr. Pedersen
about the constitutional committee, which I think is
key. I do not know if at this stage he can say anything

16/18

30/04/2019

more with regard to the six or seven names still under
dispute. I would like to ask him if he could comment
further on the mandated timeline rules of procedure of
the constitutional committee. With regard to the point I
have highlighted, perhaps he could also say something
from his perspective on the importance of accountability
for reconciliation and peaceful development in Syria.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen to respond to the
comments and questions that have been raised during
our discussion.
Mr. Pedersen: I would like to thank all the
members of the Security Council for their firm support
for my mission and for the work that I and my team are
trying to do in delivering a new Syria. As I said, that
must obviously be a Syrian-led and -owned process, but
we also need strong international support in order to
move forward. I am encouraged by what I have heard
here today. I am, of course, looking for what unites us
and not what highlights Council members’ differences.
I have been asked several questions. Let me start by
emphasizing that I think that we all share the concern
about the increased violence, which I mentioned in my
briefing, not just in the north-west but elsewhere too.
In the past few weeks, as was rightly stated, we have
seen attacks on Government positions and on civilians
by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, and we have also seen the
Government respond by striking various targets in Idlib
governorate. As I said in my briefing, that has led to
increased civilian casualties and further displacement.
However, I think it is also important to remind ourselves
that the situation has been relatively more stable in the
wake of the ceasefire agreed on through Turkey and
Russia. As I said in my briefing, we encourage Turkey
and Russia to continue to uphold the ceasefire and to
increase the patrolling in the area, which we believe is
key. I also emphasized in my briefing to the Council
that all counter-terrorism activities must respect
international humanitarian law, and I want to repeat
that once more.
With regard to the constitutional committee, I
want to emphasize that I do believe we are making
progress. As I said, it is a package. It is a discussion of
names and the rules of procedure. As I tried to make
clear in my briefing, we have made what I believe to
be tangible progress on the rules of procedure, and it

19-12403

30/04/2019

The situation in the Middle East

should be possible to come to some kind of agreement
in that regard. When it comes to the names there is still
some work to be done, but what we have achieved is
also good, I believe. As I said, we have agreed that six
names have to be replaced. We are currently discussing
how we can establish a format that could be agreeable to
all parties in the Government and the opposition so that
we can move forward on it. I have emphasized from day
one that I think the constitutional committee could be
a door-opener for the political process. In itself it will
not mean much if there is no political will to use that
door-opener, and of course it should be the beginning
of a process. We need the Council’s support to continue
that work. Listening to everyone today, I am confident
that I will have it.
From day one, one of my top priorities has been
the issue of detainees, abductees and missing persons.
As I highlighted to the Council, both in my briefing
in March (S/PV.8475) and today, that has been one
of my key messages to both the Government and the
opposition. I have emphasized to the Government that
in my view unilateral action is needed when it comes
to the issue of detainees and missing persons. As I
said, I have received good responses, but what I need
is tangible results. I will therefore continue that work,
together with my team and hopefully also with the
support of relevant international actors. I hope to be
able to report more on that when I return to the Council
next month.
I want to emphasize that after eight years of war, it
is difficult for the warring parties to take the first step.
That is why I believe it is extremely important that the
Syrian parties, the Government and the Syrian National
Council continue to hear from the Security Council that
it is united behind my mandate and supports a political
process, and that hopefully we can soon start to work
seriously in Geneva.
Once more, I want to thank the members of the
Council warmly and offer my congratulations to
Germany, as I understand that this may be the last
meeting under the German presidency.
The President: As April comes to an end, let me put
on my German hat. I think Geir Pedersen is right that
this is the last meeting during the Germany presidency,
as I have not heard any requests for a night meeting. I
would therefore like to take this opportunity to thank
my colleagues around the table for all their support,

S/PV. 8520

patience, constructive criticism and encouragement,
and I would also like to ask them to convey that message
to their wonderful teams.
I would like to thank the Secretariat, the
Director and her team and the representatives of the
Secretariat, including the conference service officers,
interpreters — who I am afraid will not have good
memories of the German presidency — translators,
verbatim reporters and security staff.
I want to say that it is neither ordinary nor routine
for Germany to be on the Security Council. Germany
believes in a multilateral, rules-based international
order, with the United Nations at its helm, and the
Security Council is one of its most important organs,
if not the most important. In our view it is therefore
vital to strengthen the United Nations, with the Charter
of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights as its key documents. Our objective
this month was not to promote any specific German
interests but rather to strengthen the United Nations
and the Security Council, and we hope that we have
been able to contribute to that in some innovative
ways, such as the German-French presidencies, greater
interaction, greater transparency with the curtains,
more civil-society briefers and more women among the
briefers. The issue of women was actually the highlight
of our presidency, with women in peacekeeping and
discussions of sexual violence in conflict and the
participation of women.
I would like to return my French colleague’s
compliments. I am very appreciative of our joint
presidencies, which were not only part of our innovation
efforts but represent something that is very deeply
rooted in France and Germany. We are not teenagers
anymore. After decades of war that did not end until
the second half of the previous century, for us working
together is in our DNA. We work together bilaterally
and within the European Union, and we were very
pleased to bring that spirit into the Security Council.
Maybe it will inspire some others as well, and I thank
all the members of the Council. Last but not least, I
would like to thank my own team. They have worked
extremely hard and provided lots of ideas, and their
engagement and constructive criticism have also been
very important. I thank them all.
I believe I speak on behalf of all the members of
the Council in wishing the delegation of Indonesia

19-1240317/18

S/PV.8520

The situation in the Middle East

good luck in the month of May. We hope it will keep
the curtains open, and we are also ready to pass on
the hourglass, but we will quite understand if it does
not carry on with that. I have to share a secret here.
Halfway through our presidency, we reset the hourglass
to measure only four minutes rather than five and a

18/18

30/04/2019

half. I did not tell Council members, in the hope that we
could speed up our discussions. But we have refilled it
back to five and a half minutes, and Indonesia can take
it over.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

19-12403
