IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(d) Calls upon Governments to ensure co-ordination in
respect of the work programmes of the various international
organizations in which they are represented;
(e) Welcomes the invitation by the Hague Conference
on Private International Law to all States to participate in
the extraordinary session to be held in 1985 to revise the
1955 Hague Convention on the Law Applicable to International Sales of Goods, 8 and also to States members of the
Commission to attend a session, to be held in 1982, of the
Special Commission which will consider the preparatory
work for the revision;
(j) Welcomes the invitation by the International Institute
for the Unification of Private Law to States members of the
Commission that are not members of the Institute to participate in its Committee of Governmental Experts which
considered a draft Uniform Law on Agency of an International Character in the International Sale of Goods at a
meeting held from 2 to 13 November 1981;

6. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for the developing countries, of the work of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law concerned with training
and assistance in the field of international trade law and.
in this connection:
(a) Expresses its appreciation to the States which contributed to fellowships for participants from developing
countries at the Second Symposium on International Trade
Law, held by the Commission from 22 to 26 June 198 I.
and to the Commission for the success of the Symposium;
(b) Stresses the desirability of the Commission sponsoring symposia and seminars, including those organized
on a regional basis, to promote training and assistance in
the field of international trade law. and recommends that
the Commission should continue to sponsor such symposia
and seminars;
(c) Welcomes the initiatives being undertaken to sponsor regional seminars jointly with regional organizations.
such as the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee
and the Inter-American Juridical Committee;
(d) Invites Governments, relevant United Nations organs, organizations, institutions and individuals to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in financing and organizing
symposia and seminars;
7. Stresses the importance of bringing into effect the
conventions emanating from the work of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law for the global unification and harmonization of international trade law;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the Convention on the Limitation Period in the International Sale of
Goods, of 12 June 1974, 9 the Protocol amending the Convention on the Limitation Period in the International Sale
of Goods, of 10 April 1980, 10 the United Nations Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea, of 30 March 1978, 11
and the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods, of I 0 April 1980, 12 to the notice
of all States that have not ratified or acceded to them, and

• United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 510, No. 7411, p. 147.
Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Prescription
(Limitation) in the International Sale of Goods, New York, 20 May-14
June /974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.74.V.8), p. IOI.
10 Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Contracts for
the International Sale of Goods, Vienna, JO March-I I April 1980 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.V.5), p. 191.
11
Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the Carriaf<e
of Goods by Sea, Hamburg, 6-31 March 1978 (United Nations publication.
Sales No. E.80.VIII.l), document A/CONF.89/13. annex I.
2
' Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Contracts for
the International Sale of Goods. Vienna, JO March-I I April 1980 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.82. V.5). p. 178.
9

237

to provide those States with appropriate information as to
the mode of their entry into force and the current status of
ratifications and accessions, and to draw the attention of
those States to the views of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law contained in its decision of 22
June 198 I, u in which the Commission emphasized that an
early entry into force and a wide acceptance of the instruments mentioned would be of great value for the unification
of international trade law;
9. Affirms the importance of the participation of observers from all States and interested international organizations at sessions of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law and its Working Groups;
10. Recommends that the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law should continue its work on the
topics included in its programme of work;
11 . Reaffirms the importance of the programme of work
of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law and of the increased role of the International Trade
Law Branch of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat
as the substantive secretariat of the Commission;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law the
records of the discussion at the thirty-sixth session of the
General Assembly relating to the report of the Commission
on the work of its fourteenth session.
57th plenary meeting
13 November /981

36/33.

Consideration of effective measures to enhance
the protection, security and safety of diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General

submitted under this item. 14
Reaffirming its resolution 35/168 of 15 December 1980,
Emphasizing the duty of States to take all appropriate
steps to protect the premises of diplomatic and consular
missions and prevent any attacks on diplomatic and consular
representatives.
Recognizing the necessity to ensure the protection, security and safety of missions and of representatives to international intergovernmental organizations. as well as of
officials of such organizations.
Deeply concerned about the continued large number of
violations of, and failures to respect, the inviolability of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives,
Noting that only a small number of States have so far.
in response to the call by the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session, become parties to the relevant conventions
concerning the inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives.
Convinced that the reporting procedures established under
resolution 35/168 arc an important step in the efforts to
enhance the protection, security and safety of diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives,
Desiring to maintain and strengthen those reporting
procedures.
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Strongly condemns acts of violence against diplomatic and consular missions and representatives as well as

'' Official Records of th<' Ge11aal Assemblv. Thirry-sixth Session. S11ppler11,•11r No. 17 (Ai.101171. para. 118.
'' 1\1.10/445 and Corr I ,tnJ Add.1-.1.

238

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

against missions and representatives to international intergovernmental organizations and officials of such organizations;
3. Urges States to observe and to implement the principles and rules of international law governing diplomatic
and consular relations and, in particular, to take all necessary
measures in conformity with their international obligations
to ensure effectively the protection, security and safety of
all diplomatic and consular missions and representatives
officially present in territory under their jurisdiction, including practicable measures to prohibit in their territories
illegal activities of persons, groups and organizations that
encourage, instigate, organize or engage in the perpetration
of acts against the security and safety of such missions and
representatives;
4. Recommends that States co-operate closely, inter
alia, through contacts between the diplomatic and consular
mission and the receiving State, with regard to practical
measures designed to enhance the protection, security and
safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives;
5. Calls anew upon States that have not yet done so to
consider becoming parties to the instruments relevant to the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and consular
missions and representatives, inter a/ia, the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961, 15 the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963, 16 and the respective
optional protocols thereto, as well as the Convention of
1973 on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic
Agents; 17
6. Calls upon States, in cases where a dispute arises in
connection with a violatim, of the principles and rules of
international law concerning the inviolability of diplomatic
and consular missions and representatives, to make use of
the means for peaceful settlement of disputes, including the
good offices of the Secretary-General;
7. Invites all States to report to the Secretary-General
serious violations of the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives, invites the State in which the violation took place and, where
applicable, the State where the alleged offender is present
to report also on measures taken to bring the offender to
justice and eventually to communicate, in accordance with
its laws, the final outcome of the proceedings against the
offender, and further invites the State in which the violation
took place to report also on the measures aimed at preventing
a repetition of such violations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate to all
States upon receipt the reports received by him pursuant to
paragraph 7 above, unless requested otherwise by the reporting State;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to invite States to
inform him of their views with respect to any measures
needed to enhance the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, when a serious
violation has been reported to him pursuant to paragraph
7 above, to draw the attention, when appropriate, of the
State where the violation occurred and, when applicable,
of the State where the alleged offender is present to the
reporting procedures established in resolution 35/168 and
reaffirmed in paragraph 7 above;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on
the state of ratification of, and accessions to, the instruments
"United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
16 Ibid., vol. 596, No. 8638, p. 261.
17
Resolution 3166 (XXVIII), annex.

referred to in paragraph 5 above, as well as the reports
received and views expressed pursuant to paragraphs 7 and
9 above, and invites him to submit any views he may wish
to express on these matters;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Consideration of
effective measures to enhance the protection, security and
safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives: report of the Secretary-General".
57th plenary meeting
13 November /98/
Report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting
of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of
Mercenaries
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need for strict observance of the
principles of sovereign equality, political independence, territorial integrity of States and self-determination of peoples,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and developed in the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, 18
Recalling its resolutions, particularly resolutions 2395
(XXIII) of 29 November 1968, 2465 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, 2708 (XXV)
of 14 December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973
and its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well
as Security Council resolutions 405 (1977) of 14 April 1977
and 419 (1977) of 24 November 1977, in which the United
Nations denounced the practice of using mercenaries against
developing countries and national liberation movements,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 35/48 of 4 December 1980, by which it established an Ad Hoe Committee on
the Drafting of an International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries,
composed of thirty-five Member States,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee, 19
Recognizing that the activities of mercenaries are contrary
to fundamental principles of international law, such as noninterference in the internal affairs of States, territorial integrity and independence, and seriously impede the process
of self-determination of peoples struggling against colonialism, racism and apartheid and all forms of foreign
domination,
Bearing in mind the pernicious impact that the activities
of mercenaries have on international peace and security,
Considering that the progressive development and codification of the rules of international law on mercenaries
would contribute immensely to the implementation of the
purposes and principles of the Charter,
Taking account of the fact that the Ad Hoe Committee
has not completed the mandate entrusted to it,
Reaffirming the need for the elaboration at the earliest
possible date of an international convention against the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries,
I. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Drafting of an International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries;
2. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall continue
its work with the goal of drafting at the earliest possible
'36/76.

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session. Supplement No. 43 (A/36/43).
1

•

19
