A/RES/74/82

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 December 2019

Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 49 (a)
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer
space: international cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 13 December 2019
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/74/408)]

74/82.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004, 61/110 and 61/111 of 14 December 2006, 62/101 of
17 December 2007, 62/217 of 22 December 2007, 65/97 of 10 December 2010, 65/271
of 7 April 2011, 66/71 of 9 December 2011, 67/113 of 18 December 2012, 68/50 of
5 December 2013, 68/74 and 68/75 of 11 December 2013, 69/85 of 5 December 2014,
70/1 of 25 September 2015, 70/82 of 9 December 2015, 70/230 of 23 December 2015,
71/90 of 6 December 2016, 72/77 and 72/78 of 7 December 2017, 73/6 of 26 October
2018 and 73/91 of 7 December 2018,
Emphasizing the significant progress in the development of space science and
technology and their applications that has enabled humans to explore the universe,
and the extraordinary achievements made in space exploration efforts, including
deepening the understanding of the planetary system and the Sun and the Earth itself,
in the use of space science and technology for the benefit of all humankind and in the
development of the international legal regime governing space activities,
Recognizing, in that regard, the unique platform at the global level for
international cooperation in space activities represented by the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and Legal
Subcommittee and assisted by the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of all humankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all humankind,
for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to a ll Member States the

19-21891 (E)

070120

*1921891*

A/RES/74/82

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

benefits derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in
this field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of international law, including the relevant norms of international space law and their
important role in international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space
for peaceful purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to in ternational treaties
that promote the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new
challenges, especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies, 1
Recognizing that all Member States, in particular those with major space
capabilities, should contribute actively to the prevention of an arms race in outer
space with a view to promoting and strengthening international cooperation in the
exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Deeply concerned about the fragility of the space environment and the
challenges to the long-term sustainability of outer space activities, in particular the
impact of space debris, which is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the development of peaceful space explo ration
and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space projects, and the
importance of further developing the legal framework to strengthen international
cooperation in space,
Convinced that space science and technology and their applications, including
satellite communications, Earth observation systems and satellite navigation
technologies, provide indispensable tools for viable long-term solutions for
sustainable development and can contribute more effectively to efforts to promote the
development of all countries and regions of the world, and stressing in that regard the
need to harness the benefits of space technology towards implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, 2
Seriously concerned about the devastating impact of disasters, 3 and desirous of
enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster
management and emergency response through greater access to and use of space based services and geospatial information for all countries and facilitating capacity building and institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in
developing countries,
Firmly convinced that the use of space science and technology and their
applications in areas such as tele-health, tele-education, disaster management,
environmental protection, natural resources management and ocean and climate
monitoring contribute to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the
United Nations that address various aspects of economic, social and cultural
development, particularly poverty eradication,
Deeply concerned about the devastating effects of infectious diseases, including
Ebola virus disease, to the detriment of human life, society and development, and
urging the international community to enhance the role of space -based solutions, in
particular tele-epidemiology, in monitoring, preparedness and response activities,
__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
Resolution 70/1.
3
The term “disasters” refers to natural or technological disasters.
1
2

2/8

19-21891

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/74/82

Recalling the fact that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, recognized the
important role that space science and technology play in promoting sustainable
development, 4
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its sixty-second session, 5
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
on the work of its sixty-second session; 5
2.
Welcomes with appreciation the adoption by the Committee of the preamble
and 21 guidelines for the long-term sustainability of outer space activities, as contained
in annex II to the report of the Committee, and the establishment, under a five -year
workplan, of a working group under the agenda item on the long-term sustainability of
outer space activities of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the Committee,
notes that the Committee encouraged States and international intergovernmental
organizations to voluntarily take measures to ensure that the guidelines were
implemented to the greatest extent feasible and practicable, and emphasizes that the
Committee serves as the principal forum for continued institutionalized dialogue on
issues related to the implementation and review of the guidelines;
3.
Agrees that the Committee, at its sixty-third session, should consider the
substantive items and convene the working group recommended at its sixty -second
session, 6 including holding intersessional consultations as necessary, taking into
account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
4.
Notes that, at its fifty-eighth session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee continued its work, 7 as mandated by the General Assembly in its
resolution 73/91;
5.
Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee, at its fifty-ninth session, should
consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups recommended by
the Committee, 8 including holding intersessional consultations as necessary, taking
into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
6.
Urges Member States that have not yet become parties to the international
treaties governing the uses of outer space 9 to give consideration to ratifying or
acceding to those treaties in accordance with their national law, as well as
incorporating them into their national legislation;
7.
Notes with satisfaction that the space law curriculum developed by the
Office and published in all official languages of the United Nations could encourage
further studies within Member States in cooperation with relevant entities in support
of capacity-building efforts in space law and policy;
__________________

Resolution 66/288, annex, para. 274.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20).
6
Ibid., para. 374.
7
Ibid., chap. II, sect. C; see also A/AC.105/1203.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20),
paras. 261–262.
9
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843);
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects
Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574); Convention on
International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (United Nations, Treaty Series,
vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (United
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020); and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on
the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1363, No. 23002).
4
5

19-21891

3/8

A/RES/74/82

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

8.
Takes note of the report of the Working Group on the Review of
International Mechanisms for Cooperation in the Peaceful Exploration and Use of
Outer Space on the work conducted under its multi-year workplan, 10 as finalized at
the fifty-sixth session of the Legal Subcommittee, and notes that the report pro vides
an important source of information and useful guidance for further joint undertakings
by spacefaring nations and emerging space nations, as appropriate;
9.
Notes that, at its fifty-sixth session, the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee continued its work, 11 as mandated by the General Assembly in its
resolution 73/91;
10. Agrees that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its fifty-seventh
session, should consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups
recommended by the Committee, 12 including holding intersessional consultations as
necessary, taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of
developing countries;
11. Reiterates the importance of information-sharing in discovering,
monitoring and physically characterizing potentially hazardous near-Earth objects to
ensure that all countries, in particular developing countries with limited capacity for
predicting and mitigating a near-Earth object impact, are aware of potential threats,
emphasizes the need for capacity-building for effective emergency response and
disaster management in the event of a near-Earth object impact, and notes with
satisfaction the work carried out by the International Asteroid Warning Network and
the Space Mission Planning Advisory Group to strengthen international cooperation
to mitigate the potential threat posed by near-Earth objects, with the support of the
Office, serving as the permanent secretariat of the Advisory Group; 13
12. Notes with appreciation that some Member States are already
implementing space debris mitigation measures on a voluntary basis, through national
mechanisms and consistent with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the
Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee and with the Space Debris
Mitigation Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 14
endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 62/217, and invites other States
to implement, through relevant national mechanisms, the Space Debris Mitigation
Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
13. Considers that it is essential that Member States pay more attention to the
problem of the gradually increasing probability of collisions of space objects,
especially those with nuclear power sources, with space debris, and other aspects of
space debris, calls for the continuation of national research on this question, for the
development of improved technology for the monitoring of space debris and for the
compilation and dissemination of data on space debris, also considers that, to the
extent possible, information thereon should be provided to the Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee, and agrees that international cooperation is needed to
expand appropriate and affordable strategies to minimize the impact of space debris
on future space missions;
14. Urges all Member States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
to contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
__________________

A/AC.105/C.2/112.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20),
chap. II, sect. B; see also A/AC.105/1202.
12
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20),
para. 184; see also A/AC.105/1202.
13
See A/AC.105/1138, paras. 205–210.
14
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20),
paras. 117–118 and annex.
10
11

4/8

19-21891

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/74/82

essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
15. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, and agrees that the
Committee should continue to consider the broader perspective of space security and
associated matters that would be instrumental in ensuring the safe and responsible
conduct of space activities, including ways to promote international, regional and
interregional cooperation to that end;
16. Emphasizes the central role of the Office in promoting international
cooperation in the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space for economic, social
and scientific development, in particular for the benefit of developing countries;
17. Notes with satisfaction the programme of work undertaken by the Office
in 2019 to strengthen international cooperation in the conduct of space activities for
peaceful purposes and the use of space science and technology and their applications
towards the achievement of the internationally agreed Sustainable Developm ent
Goals, including the workshops and symposiums conducted to build capacity, the
assistance provided to developing countries, at their request, in the development of
national space policy and legislation in conformity with international space law, and
actions implemented to strengthen institutional capacity in space activities;
18. Welcomes, in this regard, the activities being carried out by the Office to
promote gender equality and the increased role of women in space activities,
including through targeted capacity-building and technical advisory activities, and
efforts to encourage enhanced involvement of women and girls in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics education, and invites Member States to
make voluntary contributions to those activities;
19. Requests the Office to continue to apprise the Committee and its Scientific
and Technical Subcommittee and Legal Subcommittee, at their respective sessions in
2020, of the status of its capacity-building activities;
20. Recognizes the capacity-building activities under the United Nations
Programme on Space Applications, which provide unique benefits for Member States,
in particular developing countries, participating in those activities; 15
21. Notes with satisfaction the activities carried out under the United Nations
Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency
Response (UN-SPIDER), and recognizes the significant achievements made and the
advisory support provided to Member States within the framework of UN -SPIDER
since its establishment in 2006 16 with the valuable contributions of its network of
regional support offices, and encourages Member States, on a voluntary basis, to
provide the programme with the additional resources necessary to address the
increasing demand for support successfully and in a timely manner;
22. Reiterates the importance of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030, 17 in which the value of space-based technology and Earth
observation for disaster management and emergency response is recognized, and
notes with satisfaction the efforts of the Office and its UN -SPIDER programme
towards promoting international cooperation as a way to enhance the use of space __________________

See A/AC.105/1202, sect. II.
See resolution 61/110.
17
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
15
16

19-21891

5/8

A/RES/74/82

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

based technologies and related services at the national and local levels in contributing
to the implementation of the Sendai Framework and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development; 2
23. Notes with satisfaction the continuous progress made by the International
Committee on Global Navigation Satellite Systems with the support of the Office, in
its capacity as executive secretariat of the International Committee, towards achieving
compatibility and interoperability among global and regional space-based positioning,
navigation and timing systems and in the promotion of the use of global navigation
satellite systems and their integration into national infrastructure, particularly in
developing countries, and notes with appreciation that the International Committee
held its fourteenth meeting in Bengaluru, India, from 8 to 13 December 2019;
24. Notes with appreciation that the regional centres for space science and
technology education, affiliated to the United Natio ns, namely, the African regional
centres for space science and technology education in the French and English
languages, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, the Regional Centre for
Space Science and Technology Education for Asia and the Pacific, located in China,
the Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific,
located in India, the Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology Education
for Latin America and the Caribbean, with campuses located in Brazil and Mexic o,
and the Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology Education for Western
Asia, located in Jordan, have continued their education programmes in 2019,
encourages the regional centres to continue to promote greater participation of women
in their education programmes, and agrees that the regional centres should continue
to report to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on their activities;
25. Emphasizes that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of
space activities is essential to strengthen the peaceful uses of outer space, assist
Member States in the development of their space capabilities and contribute to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to that end requests
relevant regional organizations and their groups of experts to offer the assistance
necessary so that countries can carry out the recommendations of regional
conferences, and in that regard notes the importance of the equal participation of
women in all fields of science and technology;
26. Recognizes, in that regard, the important role played by such organizations
as the Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization and the European Space Agency
and by conferences and other mechanisms, such as the African Leadership Conference
on Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development, the Asia -Pacific
Regional Space Agency Forum and the Space Conference of the Americas, in
strengthening regional and international cooperation among States;
27. Notes with satisfaction the adoption of the African Space Policy and
Strategy by the Assembly of the African Union at its twenty-sixth ordinary session,
held in Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 January 2016, notes that this achievement marks
the first step towards the realization of an African outer space programme within the
framework of the African Union Agenda 2063, and welcomes in this regard the
establishment of the African Space Agency, to be hosted by Egypt;
28. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
strengthening sustainable spatial data infrastructure at the regional and national levels
and building resilience to reduce the consequences of disasters, in particular in
developing countries;
29. Reiterates the need to promote the benefits of space technology and its
applications in the major United Nations conferences and summits for economic,
6/8

19-21891

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

A/RES/74/82

social and cultural development and related fields, and recognizes that the fundamental
significance of space science and technology and their applications for global,
regional, national and local sustainable development processes should be promoted in
the formulation of policies and programmes of action and their implementation,
including through efforts towards achieving the objectives of those conferences and
summits and in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
30. Encourages Member States, to that end, to promote the inclusion in those
conferences, summits and processes of the relevance of space science and technology
applications and the use of space-derived geospatial data, and in general, space-based
data and infrastructures, with the involvement of the Office;
31. Encourages the Office to take active part in those conferences, summits and
processes and other activities in support of their objectives, as appropriate, and to
conduct capacity-building activities, hold lectures and participate in academic and
research activities to foster international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space;
32. Urges the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities (UN-Space),
under the leadership of the Office, to continue to examine how space science and
technology and their applications could contribute to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and encourages entities of the United Nations system to participate, as
appropriate, in UN-Space coordination efforts;
33. Encourages the Office to continue to conduct capacity-building and
outreach activities associated with space security and transparency and confidence building measures in outer space activities, as appropriate, and within the context of
the long-term sustainability of outer space activities;
34. Also encourages the Office to continue to explore existing avenues and
new opportunities to increase its capability to meet the growing demand for support
to strengthen the capacity of countries, in particular developing count ries, in using
space science and technology and their applications and to inform the Committee of
those efforts;
35. Agrees that the Office should pursue greater engagement with industry and
private sector entities to further their support for and contrib utions to the overall work
of the Office; 18
36. Appeals to Governments, the relevant entities of the United Nations
system, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, institutions, industry
and private sector entities and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the trust
fund in support of the United Nations Programme on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
in order to support the efforts of the Office to secure additional resources to facilitate
the full implementation of its programme of work, including, where appropriate, the
financing of special projects, and otherwise to assist the Office in carrying out
technical cooperation and assistance activities, in particular for developing countries;
37. Reiterates, with regard to the composition of the bureaux of the Committee
and its subcommittees for the period 2020–2021, 19 that the Committee and its
subcommittees should elect their officers at their respective sessions in 2020 in
accordance with that composition;
38. Decides that the Dominican Republic, Rwanda and Singapore shall
become members of the Committee; 20
__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/72/20),
para. 326.
19
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/73/20), paras. 365–370.
20
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20), paras. 365–367.
18

19-21891

7/8

A/RES/74/82

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

39. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant the status of observer to
the Moon Village Association, in accordance with the procedures of the Committee; 21
40. Encourages the regional groups to promote active participation in the
work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies by the States members of the
Committee that are also members of the respective regional groups.
47th plenary meeting
13 December 2019

__________________
21

8/8

Ibid., paras. 368–370.
19-21891
