TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

MEETING: 3/4 JULY 1969

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agendd/ 1485) . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

page
1

Adoption of the agenda , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 June 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9284) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1485

-~~
--

/

\,‘,
,.’
( !i’ ‘X!”,., ”I.,’
.; 8’

r
I
!I
1
II*

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

I

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted iri ‘1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

I

‘.

.
i
.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIFTH MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 3 July 1969, at 4 p.m.
President: Mr. Ibrahima BOYE (Senegal).

wishes to address the Council, he will be invited to take a
place at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, A, R. Pazhwak
(Afghanistan), Mr. M. Fakhreddine (Sudan,l, Mr. M. S.
Alattar (Yemen), Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia) and Mr. S. Y.
Shammas (Kuwait) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l485)
3. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): The Security COUnCil
will now continue its consideration of the item
before it. The first speaker on my list is the representative
of Afghanistan. I now invite him to take a place at the
Council table, and I give him the floor,

1. Adoption of the agenda.
‘2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 June 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9284),

4. Mr. PAZHWAK (Afghanistan): Mr. President and members of the Security Council, I wish to thank you for
acceding to my request of this morning to participate in the
deliberations of the Security Council on the issue before it.
I should explain-because I owe the Council such an
explanation-why I made that request at such a late stage.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
The situation in the Middle East

5. I listened most carefully and closely to the statements
made by members and non-members of the Council.
Almost all the points that I wished to be brought to the
attention of the Council were made by the participants in
the discussion much more ably than I could have done, and
I was satisfied to take note of those points. For example,
the representative of the United Kingdom stated:

letter dated 26 June 1969 from the Permanent Represeb
tative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9284)
I. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decisions previously taken by the Council, if
the Council agrees, I intend to invite the representatives of
Jordan, Israel, the United Arab Republic, Saudi Arabia, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Morocco, Iraq, Indonesia, Lebanon
and Malaysia to participate in the debate without right to
vote,

“It is essential, so I believe, for the Council to require
that nothing should or can be done by unilateral action to
prejudice the future of Jerusalem.
“Above all, the Council has a legitimate interest in a
permanent peace. To suggest otherwise would be to deny
the whole conception of international responsibility for
peace and security” (2483rd meeting, paras. 33 and 361.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table, and Mr. A. El-Erian (United Arab Republic),
Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria),
Mr. A. 2”. Benhima (Morocco), Mr. A. Raouf (Iraq), Mr. H.
R. Abdulgani (Indonesia), Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon) and
Mr. M. Hashim (Malaysia) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

6. I was satisfied to hear the representative of France refer
to resolution 252 (1968) of 21 May 1968’ as cQnstituting
the legal basis for the complaint before the Council and to
hear him quote the relevant parts of that resolution as
follows: “all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, inclu,ding expropriation of land and
properties thereon, which tend to change the legal status of
Jerusalem are invalid”-and-“urgently
calls upon Israel to
rescind all such measures already taken and to desist
forthwith from taking any further action”-of this kind
(ibid., para. 431. And I was also satisfied when he went on
to say: “It seems incontestable that all the legislative or
other measures taken by the Israeli authorities with a view
to facilitating and accelerating by virtue of a de facto

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have just
received communications from the representatives of
Afghanistan [S/9305], the Sudan (S/9304/, Yemen fS/
93061, Tunisia (S/9307] and Kuwait [S/9310] requesting
permission to participate without right to vote in the
Council’s debate on the question before it. If I hear no
objections, I shall invite them to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber, on the
understanding that when one of these representatives
1

,

(
I’
I

and also, in a sense, as representatives of fhose Member
States that have selected you and thus have put their
confidence in YOU.

occupation-the process of integration of part of JeruSalem-are contrary to all the resolutions of the United
Nations. Some of these measures are also contrary to the
rules of international law governing armed occupation and
to the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. But the
problem is a political, religious and legal one and not only
an administrative and social one. Obviously, the future of
Jerusalem cannot be decided unilaterally.” [Ibid., paras. 51

10. I also realize how valuable the time of each member of
the Council is and how important it is to the Council
collectively to deal with the most important situations
without any waste of time and still with all precision in the
decisions reqiired of highly responsible people who haveso
many considerations to keep in mind in connexion with all
matters.

and 52.1

7. I felt satisfied when the representative of the Soviet
Union stated: “In order to arrive at a peaceful settlement in
this area, it is essential that Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 is complied with in all its
parts and provisions; it is essential that Israel withdraws its
armed forces from all the Arab territories. . . . The Security
Council, discharging its duty in conformity with the United
Nations Charter, must take the necessary measures to
ensure implementation of its decisions.” [Ibid., paras. 68

11, I have not requested the Council to allow me to
appear before it at this meeting as an adviser. Nor am I in a
position to advise any of the parties directly involved. I am
here as a representative of a country believing in the fact
that nothing could happen any more in any part of the
world that would not affect all peoples and nations
everywhere. I am here as a representative of a small country
having no “lust or hate”-the words used by one of the
speakers-or ambitions that could possibly be interpreted as
against anyone. I represent a country that could not
possibly think of fulfilling its own aspirations for peace,
progress and happiness in any other condition than the
condition of peace, understanding and co-operation among
the peoples and nations of the world. Our position on the
situation in the Middle East has been repeatedly stated in
the United Nations, But since this is the first time I am
making a statement on this issue in the Security Council, I
should like to recall parts of statements I have made in the
past on this problem, particularly at the fifth emergency
special session of the General Assembly on 17 June and
5 July 1967. I have to recall these stntcments becausethey
were made two years ago, at a time when emotions were
very high. I want to remind you of these statements and I
should like to draw your attention to the fact that evenat
the height of emotion there is no emotion involved in what
I said two years ago.

and 70.1

8. Then we heard the representative of the United States
state :
“The expropriation or confiscation of land, the construction of housing on such land, the demolition or
confiscation of buildings, including those having historic
or religious significance, and the application of Israeli law
to occupied portions of the city are detrimental to our
common interests in the city. The United States considers
that the part of Jerusalem that came under the control of
Israel in the June 1967 war, like other areasoccupied by
Israel, is occupied territory and hence subject to the
provisions of international law governing the rights and
obligations of an occupying Power. . . . I regret to say
that the actions of Israel in the occupied portion of
Jerusalem present a different picture, one which gives rise
to understandable concern that the eventual disposition
of East Jerusalem may be prejudiced, and that the private
rights and activities of the population are already being
affected and altered.” [Ibid., para.97.1

i>

12. This is the first statement:
“The situation in the Middle East, which is not
confined to that area but represents a crisis of world
proportions, must be of immediate concern to the United
Nations because of the widely recognized and very direct
and continuing responsibility of the United Nations in
that area.“’

9. Then I listened to the statements by the representatives
of the non-Arab, non-member countries of Indonesia and
Malaysia /348&h meeting/, who expressedthe feelings r,&
only of the many millions of Moslems whom they represent
in the United Nations but of hundreds of millions of
Moslems all over the world, including the people of
Afghanistan. And what made me feel that it was my duty
to request to be allowed to participate was the last
statement of the representative of Israel, after he had heard
the statements of the non-Arab Moslem countries which are
not directly involved in the Arab-Israeli conflict. The
answer of the representative of Israel, as a responsible
spokesman of his Government to ,those statements was,in
fact, in five words: “Jerusalem is Israel’s eternal capital”
[1484th meeting,para,2431. This is why I venture to take
up the time of the Council at this meeting. I fully realize
the importance of your duties and your responsibilities as
a members of the Security Council in m@ters dealing with
the maintenatlce of peace and the prevention of situations
‘, that may disturb it. I realize that you have undertaken this
respohsibility as representatives of your own Governments

The second statement is as follows:
“ . . . the major Powers , , . have special responsibilities
and are in a position to influence such situations in the
interest of peace. Those States which are not directly
involved, and therefore can act objectively to influence a
just peace, are likewise Members of this Assembly. Thus it
is natural and proper that because of their shared
membership in this world body, all parties should turn to
the United Nations and should consider that it has an
obligation to them to take action.“1
Thirdly, I stated:
“It is evident that if this crisis is not brought to an end
through the use of all the peaceful methods at the
1 officio1 Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Emergency
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1525th meeting, par%8.

special

2

disposal of the international community, we shall allevery one of us-be confronted with very grave consequences.“z

The eighth statement was:
“There was in addition a broad consensus that the
political sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
allow them a rightful freedom from threat of betligerency .“I

13. I come now to the fourth statement. After having
asked the permission of the body I was addressing to recall
that there were certain obligations which affected us all, I
said:
“ . . . there is the obligation assumed by each Member
under the Charter to ensure that international peace,
security and justice shall not be endangered; and there is
the responsibility placed upon each of us to conduct our
affairs keeping always in view the impact of our deliberations on the effectiveness of the United Nations, the good
name of this forum and the satisfactory progress of its
proceedings; there is also the obligation shared by all
Members to respect the decisions of this Organization.“s

15. In recalling those statements I have one point in mind,
and that is that they were made two years ago. I hope that
you will be good enough to understand exactly what I
mean when I mention the time at which they were made
and when I remind you of the atmosphere at that time, and
of what the world expected to happen in the two years that
have elapsed since then.
16. The five words I quoted from the statement of the
representative of Israel, if taken seriously, mean much
more. The meaning goes further than mere occupation of
territory by military force. It procIaims “eternal” annexation. More than that, it takes the matter out of the
Arab-Israeli conflict and extends it in an alarming way to all
Moslems of the world and believers of all other faiths than
Judaism. While it perpetuates a political war, it sounds a
prelude to a religious war, which is far more dangerous. I
should like to state, therefore, that if one day such a
conflict takes place, history will mark last night’s meeting
of the Security Council as the place where Israel made this
proclamation.

The fi’fth statement, concerning the question of the Middle
East conflict, was the following:
“The question before the Assembly has, with all its
ramifications, never been a Council case or an Assembly
case, but the problem of the United Nations as a
whole.“4
Sixthly, I said:
“With virtual unanimity, Heads of State, Heads of
Government, Foreign Ministers and Permanent Representatives have agreed that the crisis merits the”attention of
all Member States in every part of the world, and indeed
requires the full participation of all Members in the
earnest labours to achieve results. That wide agreement
has shown that the Member States have risen to the
challenge. They have agreed that the problem is no longer
a limited confrontation of two parties, but an issue of
regional dimensions which threatens to spread to other
areas and other major political alignments. They have
accurately taken the measure of this crisis.“s

17. However, the Middle East situation, including the
situation in Jerusalem, remains basically and primarily a
political situation to us. The Security Council also remains
a political body of the United Nations, Fully recognizing
the place of the Holy City in the hearts and minds of
millions of people, and particularly in the minds and hearts
of my own people, the Afghan people, I should like to
emphasize the fact that every inch of a nation’s territory is
sacred.

14. I come now to the seventh statement:

18. From the political and legal points of view, we base
ourselves, before anything else, on the principles of
international law, as they should be interpreted in our time,
the law under which international order should be
observed. In accordance with this conviction, we cannot
allow ourselves to accept the occupation or acquisition of
territory by military force, whether it is a sacred city or any
other territory that does not have such holy shrines.

“There has been a. broad consensus that the effort to
achieve final peace and final solutions to this problem can
be hoped for only within the framework of the United
Nations.
“Finally, there is virtual unanimity in upholding the
principle that conquest of territory by war is inadmissible
in our time and under the Charter, The affirmation of this
principle was made in virtually all statements and-1
should add with some empliasis-by none more emphatically than all of the big Powers, which bear the primary
responsibility in the United Nations for the peace and
security of the world. In this sense, virtually all speakers
laid down the corollary that withdrawal of forces to their
original position is expected.“6
2 Ibid.,
3Ibid.,
albid.,
5 ibid.,
6 Ibid.,

Ninthly, I mentioned that the General Assembly had
adopted a resolution rejecting any measures to annex the
Old City of Jerusalem.

19. In the fifth emergency special session coriv&ed to deal
with the situation in the Middle East, and in the regular
sessions of the General Assembly that followed it, and also
in all the meetings of the Security Council and everywhere
else that this situation has been discussed, no one has ever
had the courage to approve of the pr@ciple of the
acquisition of occupied territories by military force. I do
not think that anyone can do so now. I should like to
challenge anybody to say that he approves of this principle
and this conception. Even at this series of meetings of the
Security Council, if there is agreement on anything it is

para. 12.
para. 14.
1549th meeting,para. 2.
para. 8.
para. 11.

7 Ibid.,

3

para. 13.

item before the Council. And although it might have
appeared to some to be out of context or perhaps out of
order, it had such a bearing on the rights of the representatives of sovereign States that I thought it was my duty to
take up a few minutes of the Council’s time last night, with
your permission, Mr. President.

agreement-and a unanimous one-that such a conception
should be rejected.

1)

20. I must make it clear that I am not here to defend the
Arabs. Afghanistan is not an Arab country. I should like
you, Mr. President, and everybody else present, to know
that this is a matter in which the direct interests of my own
country and countries like mine-I mean the small
countries, which make up the majority of the Members of
the United Nations, and also the majority of the nations of
the world-are
involved. As a small country, we are not
immune to the forces of occupation. In a world so insecure,
we have to be constantly conscious of all that can take
place. How can any small country in the world allow such a
conception to rule the behaviour of nations in relation with
other nations?

26. But all of a sudden the atmosphere was electrified:
“Baroody is going to make another speech; perhaps he is
going to nake us stay here until midnight”. I made it clear
that I wanted five minutes, and none other than our
gracious Secretary-General, who met me after the meeting
had been adjourned, can attest to the fact that my
statement would not have taken more than five or at most
seven minutes. I read it to him in the antechamber. But 1
had never thought that my good friend the representative
of the United States would use his axe so skilfully against
what I had it in mind to say. All of a sudden, instead of my
being given those five minutes, the meeting was abruptly
adjourned. I went to the United States representative while
the consecutive interpretation was being given and asked
him if he would extend me the courtesy of modifying his
motion for adjournment. He refused, and I do not blame
him. But that is why it will take me more than five minutes
today.

21, As far as Afghanistan is concerned, I have a little more
to say. No nation in the world has suffered more from war
than we have in our history, so we know what war is. We
have suffered from occupation, so we know what the
occupation of one’s territory means. We have suffered from
annexation of our territory by force, so we know what
annexation is. When we speak about this principle, we do
not intend it to apply, as it would seem to, only to the
situation created by the Arab-Israeli conflict. We shall
express the same views, the same fears and the same feelings
if at any time an Arab country occupied the territory of
another Arab country and claimed its right of conquest in
the acquisition of the territory of the defeated. That would
also be the case if such action were taken bv one Moslem
country with regard to another Moslem country; let me put
it this way: if it were taken by any nation with regard to
any other nation whatsoever.

27. Arab States have no mass media of information like
the Zionists nor have they excelled in ways and means of
wielding world influence or exerting pressureon other
States.If we are still in the United Nations, and now I am
speakingparticularly of SaudiArabia, it is becausewe hope
to make our opinionsheard through this Organization. All
smallStates,I believe,have the samehope. I bear no grudge
againstmy friend from the United States.

22. Before concluding, I wish to give expression to our
profound concern at the situation, and particularly at the
recess-for most unfortunate but understandable reasonsin the exertion of positive efforts by the Secretary-General
and his representative, Mr. Jarring. Also, we are discouraged, if not disappointed, at the relaxation of negotiations by the four permanent members of the Security
Council for a peaceful settlement of the Middle East
conflict.

28. Now I come to the reasonwhy I wantedto speaklast
night.
29. A flagrant breachof the code of ethicshas occurredin
the United Nations Headquartersin connexion with the
unwarranted interference of a foreign correspondentin
publicly confronting members of the Office of Public
Information of the United Nations Secretariat with questions calculatedto criticize overtly and by implication the
representativeof a sovereignState of this Organization. In
the pressbriefing of the Office of Public Information held
on I July 1969 on the third floor of the Secretariat
building at United Nations Headquarters,that correspondent, in the presenceof many of his colleagues,asked
Mr. William Powell of the Secretariatto requestMr. Nosek,
the Under-Secretary-General,or the Controller of the
United Nations “to give an estimate in overtime costs,
paperetc. involved in the statement of Mr. Baroody of
Saudi Arabia before the Security Council yesterday. . I I
Mr. Powell said that on several occasionsMr. Nosek had
told correspondentsthe formula of how many dollarsa
page reproduction of speechescosts. He would get the
formula and correspondentscould apply it to the number
of pagesin the verbatim record for any speech”. I have
quoted from the pressbriefing of the Office of Public
Information. Advisedly, Mr. Powell said “for any speech”.
He did not say “Baroody’s speech”. I must say that
Mr. Powell acted correctly and in the best tradition of an
international servant of the Organization. But who is this

23. To conclude, I should like to appeal to the members
of the Council, particularly the permanent members, which
by having a privileged position have a primary responsibility
in the solution of problems that threaten peace and
security, to enhance their efforts. This appeal, of course,
goes also to the Secretary-General, who has never hesitated
to do his best to bring about all that can be brought about
in the interest of peace,
24. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Saudi Arabia, I
now invite him to take a place at the Council table, and I
call on him to speak.
25. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Thank you, Mr, President, for allowing me to speak again. You may recall, Sir,
that last night I asked your aides and members of the
Secretariat to grant me a few minutes to make a short
statement about a question that was not germane to the
4

Mr. Leichter to this post at the United Nations, West
Germany saw fit to mollify Zionists who have persistently
accused the whole German people of alleged collective guilt
during the Nazi era, that is their own business. However, on
account of the pervasive influence which Zionists exercise
over large segments of the press in the Western world, the
United Nations, including the Security Council, can ill
afford to accept this kind of subtle practice that may
constitute a precedent for other correspondents to wave
aside the unwritten code of,ethics.

tori-espondent,
you may be wondering, and why did he
single out the representative of Saudi Arabia in connexion
With the cost of speeches that that representative has made
in the Security Council? There has been a whispering
campaign against the representative of Saudi Arabia, to the
effect that he takes the floor quite often and is embarrassing because he tells the truth as it should be told, not
embellishing it with all those antiquated diplomatic phrases,
that were used a century and a half ago in the Congress of
Vienna, where diplomats said things that they did not mean
and meant things that they did not say.

33. Who has pyramided the cost of the General Assembly
and Security Council meetings? It has been the Zionists,
who have brought pressure to bear on the world community ever since the inception of the Organization,
thereby creating an insurmountable problem that has
necessitated the holding of hundreds of meetings of the
Security Council and the General Assembly.

30.
I am the representative of a small State and I stand on
my rights. I challenge any representative of any State to
take issue with me as to how I should speak and for how
long.
3 1. Who is that correspondent? What is his name? He is
none other than a certain Mr. Leichter, of the German Press
Agency, I feel sorry for him, I did not know him before
they pointed him out to me today. He is older than I am.
He must have a grudge against the Arabs, anyway, and that
is why I feel sorry for him, We bear no grudge towards
anyone, no malice towards our fellow human beings; that is
in the best tradition of Arabism. But out of all the
correspondents,
he is the one who is deeply concerned
about how much it costs the United Nations to listen to the
Saudi Arabian speeches in the United Nations-the correspondent
of West Germany. If he had asked for an
estimate in dollars of the cost: of ‘any speech without
mentioning a particular representative, that would have
been understandable and quite permissible. But again, who
is this Mr. Leichter? Is he a Nazi? Oh, no, I doubt it. Is he
a Zionist? I have a suspicion that he is. But anyway,
whatever
the persuasion to which he belongs, I think he
should have observed the unwritten code of ethics that
regulates the conduct of United Nations correspondents.
Why is he interested in the expenses entailed in speeches of
Member States? West Germany is not a Member of the
Organization. I do not think that prosperous West Germany
is counting the dollars that it would have to pay were it one
day to seek admission to the United Nations. I doubt that
that is the reason. Did Mr. Leichter pose such a mischievous
question because I have revealed that West Germany, under
great pressure from a certain big Power, surreptitiously sold
arms to Israel? Is it for this reason that Mr. Leichter has
seen fit to raise the inappropriate question of the cost to
the Organization when the Saudi Arabian representative
takes the floor on this important question of Jerusalem?
This is a very subtle and dangerous approach which abuses
the freedom of the press. This is licence. It is just like
pornography
masquerading as art-smut,
incestuous
pictures that are called art.

34. Therefore, the Security Council may well be advised
to find out, through the channels available to the Secretary-General, whether or not persons like Mr. Leichter are,
under the guise of freedom of information, abusing their
privileges as United Nations correspondents. Respect for
freedom of information was never meant to confer upon
any person the licence for wanton behaviour.
35. Now, I would like to address a few words to our suave
friend and colleague Ambassador Yost who, last night, by
resorting to the provisional rules of procedure, successfully
manoeuvred to prevent the representative of Saudi Arabia
from making a statement, which he perforce had to delay
until today’s meeting. What a waste of the Security
Council’s time. Overnight my five-minute statement has
been compounded tenfold. Our mild-mannered friend,
Ambassador Yost, noted for his succinct and well-trimmed
statements in the Council, may not personally relish what
he considers to be the prolix and discursive interventions of
the Saudi Arabian representative. In a friendly manner,
other colleagues have suggested that I should speak more
succinctly, like the representatives of the great Powers. The
great Powers do not have to be prolix and discursive. They
act; they do not have to speak much. The Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole are just a window
dressing for them.
36. My good friend, Mr. Yost, like every one of US, is
entitled to his style. ‘!Le style, c’est I’homme”, said Buffon
over 200 years ago-1 think it was in 17.53-before the
Aca&mie frangaise. He was a member of the Acadknie
frangaise. Ambassador Yost may have been tired last night
and under constant tension. That is not unusual for US who
live and labour in this hectic city. But sometimes I envy my
good friend, Ambassador Yost: he only has to walk across
the street to go to his office, and it is only ten minutes to
his abode at the Waldorf Astoria. Many of us, whether we
are ambassadors or counsellors or secretaries, have to live
far from the centre of town because the rents are too high
there. It takes us half an hour sometimes to get here
because of the snarled traffic, and an hour, sometimes,
from Queens. Mr. Yost is privileged. We do not have that
privilege, We do not complain. We complained at one time
that this was the wrong place for the United Nations
Headkuarters, but we have to bear our cross. Each one of us
has his mission and his problems, like Mr. Yost.

32. I have been involved in this questioq of freedom of
information.
It was my privilege to be a member of the
Committee of Fifteens which voted by secret ballot, at the
Palais de Chaillot, to rewrite the draft convention on
freedom of information that had already been worked out
by none other than several friends of mine under the
chairmanship
of General R6mulo of the Philippines in
Geneva
three years previously. If, by appointing
8 Committee on’ the Draft Convention on Freedom of Information.
5

41, Now I want to tackle this gentleman on my right. It is
high time the Council realized that Israel has not budged
from the position it took when in the Knesset it enacted
legislation to merge Jerusalem with Israel. I think that, if
you should respect Mr. Tekoah for anything, it is for his
blunt statement-and I am paraphrasing what he said-that
Jerusalem is no longer negotiable. The Council is busying
itself with resolutions, but it does not act, Israel says,
“Jerusalem is not negotiabIe.”

37. Mr. Yost probably did not approve of my figuratively
exhibiting in the Council some of the shocking skeletons I
produced from the musty historical closets of the deceitful
days of take Success in 1947 and thereafter regarding the
Palestine question, including Jerusalem. If the historical
facts I have adduced, and with God’s help will continue to
adduce in the future, are not relished by some of my
friends around this table, I feel sorry for them. The truth
hurts. But I ask them: What about the indigenous people of
Palestine, who daily are being massacred and subjected to
all sorts of indignities because the Zionists, who still wield
tremendous influence, especially in certain Western countries, are drunk with power and do not heed the counsel
that is being given to them by some of their best friends?

42. The Arabs have always treated the Jews with exemplary chivalry throughout their long history, The Jews were
expelled from Europe, by the European countries represented at this table. The Jews were expelled from England
in 1290, from France in 1394, from Austriain 1490, from
Spain in 1492, from most of Germany in 1519 and from
Russia-that is, Czarist Russia-in 1727. Why? Those were
the Middle Ages. The Christians were intolerant to one
another; so why should they not be intolerant to the Jews?
Those were the D’ark Ages, the ages of European intoler.
ante. When in Spain Arab culture flourished the Jews were
respected all over the land.

38. In August 1968, the Council met on a European issue.
Our colleagues from the Soviet Union and Bulgaria spoke
for hours, and on more than two or three occasions we
stayed until after midnight listening to the debates. The
then representative of the United States and the representatives of other Western Powers who were sitting’ in the
Council did not take exception to the length of the
speeches or the lateness of the hour; nobody asked for the
early adjournment of the meetings. Is it because the issue
was European? Yes, it is because the issue was European
that the representatives of the Western Powers sat patiently,
“sweating it out”, to use an American idiom.

43. Hitler was indeed a godsend to Zionism, 1 do not
know why they complain. Russia seems to like its citizens
regardless of their religion, and I think the majority of
Russian Jews are loyal Soviet citizens. They have made
their mark in the Soviet hierarchy. Why are the Jews now
clamouring and using all kinds of pressure on the Soviet
Union? They want the Soviet Union to expel the Jewsand the Soviet Union does not want to expel the Jews who
are loyal citizens-so that they may replenish Israel with
more immigrants, expand all over the Middle East and
enslave it econornicaIly. If they can wield their influence
and exert their efforts in such a great country as the United
States, my good colleague from the Soviet Union should
not belittle what they could still do inside his country.

39. Jerusalem is not a European city, and Israel has
repeatedly stated that Jerusalem is not negotiable; and we
were advised by our Western friends that this question
should not have been submitted by Jordan for the
consideration of the Council. Jerusalem is not a European
city. Do you hear that? But a European issue is very
important. I have been here long enough to know what has
taken place. I can cite other occasions. You may recall, my
dear Ambassador Yost, and I am not saying this derisively,
because I have always held you in high esteem-he is not
listening-that
other representatives have spoken for many
hours, much longer than was ever taken by the Saudi
Arabian representative on the Palestine question, which
affects his country and the whole region-nay, the whole
Moslem world. You may not have been in the Council at
that time, my dear friend, but on several occasioss our
erstwhile colleague Mr, Krishna Menon of India spoke for
several hours, and tea was served to him in the Council
chamber. My good and illustrious friend Sir Zafrullah Khan,
in 1947 and for many years thereafter, addressed himself to
the Kashmir question and made lengthy speeches in the
Council. The repre’sentatives of the Western Powers sat
patiently, like Egypt’s proverbial sphynx, listening, listening, listening-l do not know how attentively, but listening.

44. I will read from a book by Sumner Welles, a former
Secretary of State of this host country. I quote from his
book entitled We Need Not Fail, published in Boston in
1948; Mr. Welles wrote:
“By direct order of the White House every form of
pressure, direct and indirect, was brought to bear by
American officials upon those countries outside the
Moslem world”-that
is significant, “outside the Moslem
world”-“that
were , , . either uncertain or opposed to
partition”-the
partition of Palestine. “Representatives or
intermediaries were employed by the White House to
make sure that the necessary majority would at length be
secured.“9
I am not going to encumber the Council with more
quotations about what took place: the pressure that was
brought to bear through cardinals and prelates in Latin
America, the pressure that was brought to bear on Asian
countries that were in dire need of economic aid in the
wake of the Second World War, They were threatened with
the cutting off of their aid. You wonder how Israel
succeeded in being created. It was by pressure, and in one
of the countries that emerged as the greatest miIitary Power
after the Second World War.

40. Have you forgotten, you representatives of Western
countries-and
I should like to address my good friend,
Lord Caradon, too-that your countries and Saudi Arabia
enjoy very good economic relations? And you, my dear
friend, Ambassador Yost, you had always given us the
genuine impression that you genuinely understood the
predicament in which the Arabs find themselves in the
Middle East. I sometimes wonder what is happening to
cause some of our best friends to treat us so abruptly.
Maybe it is because we are weak.

9 Boston, Houghton Mifflin CO., 1948, p. 63.

6

45. I was introduced to Bernard Baruch in this country.
He gave me and others to understand that he wasopposed
to Zionism, but they played on his sentiments. I may be
allowed to read a very short excerpt from a book entitled
Trial and Error by none other than the first President of
Israel, Mr. Chaim Weizmann, published by Harper and
Brothers in 1949, in which he states: “Bernard Baruch, who
at one time was opposed to Zionism, was pressurized by
Mr, Chaim Weizmann and others.” In his book Mr. Weizmann refers to Bernard Qruch as being very “helpful to us
in many respects, and used his influence freely in our
favour.” Mr. Baruch wasconsidered to be the best friend of
successivePresidents of the United States, seven of them
during his lifetime. That is what the Arabs are contending
with: pressure from within the Western States. Gentlemen,
how can we expect you to render justice unto the
indigenous people of Palestine or to preserve the integrity
of the Holy City of Jerusalem?

50. It is appropriate, so that we may understand the ethos
of the Zionists, to burden you with another quotation from
Barnet Litvinoff, since his book is not available. He says:
“The Arab-Isrieli war of 1967 brought even the most
fiercely internationalists into a sudden awareness of
themselves asJews,to the point of willingness by some to
intervene voluntarily in the Middle East where they
defied the law to keelj out of the Far East. The point has
been noted in America.”
I wonder to what extent it “has been noted in America.”
51. In conclusion, I want to reaffirm before the Council
that if the United Nations does not act with dispatch and
procrastinates, as it has done for the last 20 years, there is
no assurancethat there will not be a world conflict.
52. Asia is a dormant giant. We would like to see that
giant, when it awakes, develop in an orderly fashion. But
colonialism by proxy and under various guises, whether it
be in the Far East or in the Middle East, does not augur
well for humanity. The Western.countries, whether they are
in Europe or in the new hemisphere, must realize that you
can kill a person but you cannot tread wantonly on the
dignity of peoples. The Palestinian people-and forget that
they are Arabs-have awakened. They are now a ferment in
the whole Middle East, a ferment that may cause a lot of
suffering to the Arabs themselves and ultimately to the
Jews,which would be deplorable.

46. I should like to quote a few other excerpts from that
very well-written analytical book by Barnet Litvinoff,l 0 for
the benefit of our colleague from Israel, if he has not
already read it. I tried to buy a few copies to give to
friends. I went to several book shops andsthey told me
there was not a single copy. Sometimes I wonder whether
the Zionists in the United States have bought out the book.
This is what Barnet Litvinoff said:
“Israel fell within no natural grouping of peoples, no
regional grouping of States, no economic union, no
historical association. It would have been an embarrassment to the great Powers if she had died, but it was an
embarrassment to them also that she lived. . . . Israel was
the world’s problem child, to be visited regularly,
frequently flattered, but not accepted as normal.”

53. But there is no escaping the fact that all the might of
States cannot crusha people. Wehave witnessedthis on the
other side of Asia in regard to a people who have no
sophisticated weapons, who have only the will to fight in
order to preserve their integrity as a people. This should
serve as a lesson to us, no matter from what continent we
hail, that our only hope is through the United Nations; not
in an academic manner, but in such a waythat we may turn
a new page in implementing our decisions, rather than
adopting resolutions which seem to be only an exercise in
futility. If the big Powers mean what they say about
wanting to bring peace to the Middle East, it behoves them
to keep silent and to act before it is too late.

47. We are dealing with an abnormal State. How can it be
normal when it is surrounded by hostile peoples, when the
whole Moslem world is now conscious of the fact that it
may lose Jerusalem, at least for the time being? And if it is
one day recovered, who has the assurance that Jerusalem
will not have been razed and become a dream of the past?
48. Mr, Litvinoff also saysin his book* “The Israelis could
eat because the Jews of the world poured their funds into
Israel.” In our tradition we would never let a stranger in our
midst go hungry, whether he be Jew or Gentile. But who is
feeding the aggressor and where do the bulk of the funds
come from, except from Western countries, and mainly
from our friends, the people of the United States, whether
Jewsor Christians?

54. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Rench): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Tunisia. I now
invite him to take a place at the Council table, and I give
him the floor.
55. Mr, MESTIRI (Tunisia) (translatedfrom i+ench}: In
bringing the question of Jerusalem before the Security
Council, the Government of Jordan has in fact raised a
basic problem of international law, or a problem of law
purely and simply-namely, can force and the policy of fait
accompli properly constitute the basisof relations between
States and between human beings. At the same time, the
representative of Jordan has raised a question as to the
raison d’dtre of the United Nations which, under the terms
of its Charter, is the guarantor of the maintenance of peace
in accordance with the principles of justice and international law. For what, in fact, is the situation? The Arab
city of Jerusalem is under military occupation. Furthermore, despite resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) of

49. Mr. Eban came from South Africa. I have been told
that Mr. Tekoah hails from Shanghai. Others came from
Russia. Other Zionists hailed from Poland. Very few came
from France or the United States; the Jews are happy there.
But Barnet Litvinoff talks to us again:
“South African Jews mourned the death of Dr. Verwoerd, the apostle of apartheid, as though they had
forgotten their own previous history and had not themselvessuffered the penalties of segregation.”
10 Barnet Litvinoff, A Peculiar People (New York, Weybright and
Talley, 1969).

7

/
I

technical nature advanced here by the representative of
Israel. There are two basic reasons which prompt me not to
abuse your attention by consideration of a false problem
whose nature in any case is, I am sure, quite clear to you.
The first reason is that, in the history of occupation
throughout the ages, other occupiers of baneful memory
have produced the same arguments about unification, social
and economic integration, and the happiness of the victims,
in order to justify and perpetuate their annexations by
force and violence. A certain modesty bids us leave it to
those who have expounded at length to you the secrets of
their organizing and modernizing genius, as applied in
Jerusalem for the supreme objective of its advancement, to
reflect themselves on the moral disaster to which the
arrogance of force has led them. Nevertheless, we cannot
conceal our astonishment at the scant attention which the
representative of Israel seems to pay to history or, for that
matter, to the present. He seems to have forgotten that
Nazi Germany, too, reached hitherto unknown heights in
the field of technical and scientific progress. But at what
price? The representative of Israel knows very well. He
seems to have overlooked the current events which we
Africans, and the world with us, have been living through
for eight years, for he apparently forgets the incredible
economic power which racist South Africa has in fact built
up. But at what price? At the price, we are obliged to
recall, of the enslavement of 12 million human beings.

the General Assembly and resolution 252 (1968) of the
Security Council, the occupation system is being perfected
and, under the very eyes of the international community, it
is gradually being transformed into a system of annexation.
Thus; the-situation is perfectly simplk. It is exceptionally
clear and, were it not for a premeditated attempt to distract
the attention of the members of the Security Council and
the world public, it would not call for speeches but for
determined, clear-cut and effective action to restore the
law.
56. So far as speeches are concerned, no member of this
Council has ever spared any efforts in denouncing the
flagrant violation by Israel of international law and the
Security Council decisions. But as for action, there has been
none, or at least not yet. Indeed, we already have grounds
to fear that the well-known saying that the road to hell is
paved with good intentions now applies to the way this
important body of the United Nations is, more or less
consciously, allowing matters to go. The decisions which
the Council takes from time to time on dangerous
situations soon afterwards seem like expressions of a
momentary impulse and not of a determined will to rectify
the course of events and restore law. For, whenever the
Council has to take decisions, on Rhodesia, Namibia or the
Middle East, it gives the impression of,lacking sufficient
conviction to ensure compliance with them, as the letter of
the Charter empowers it to do and the spirit of the Charter
indeed requires it to do.

59. My second reason for not dwelling on this line of
argument is our love of reason and justice, and of an
international order based on these two standards. This
compelling reason alone makes it incumbent upon my
country not to remain silent in the face of the Israeli
authorities’ defiance of the Council, the United Nations and
world public opinion. To remain silent today would prevent
US from conferring the moral weight and due sense of
responsibility on our voice and judgement tomorrow, when
faced with events that are tragic for world peace.

57. It remains to be hoped that with regard to Jerusalem
the Council will go beyond academic condemnations and
see to it that all measures tending to change the legal status
of Jerusalem-and this is certainly the case with the
measures which are the subject of the Jordanian complaint-are not only declared null and void in law, but are
annulled and redressed in fact. Nearly a thousand million
Moslems expect the Council to assume its responsibilities,
and not give the unbridled fanfiticism of a few people time
to provoke the religious feelings of many hundreds of
millions of human beings, They expect the four great
Powers, by virtue of the special responsibilities conferred
on them by the Charter, to discharge their duties toward
international morality and all States Members of the United
Nations. We-all of us who are States Members of the
United Nations-have, in signing the Charter, agreed to
grant to them and recognize their pre-eminent role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. We feel
today that we are being deceived to a certain extent, since
the legal obligations of the parties concerned, although
honoured in words and by good intentions, are nevertheless
forgptten as soon as it comes to putting them in practice.
Those who proclaim themselves to be the defenders of
freedom and peace should no longer, under the pressure of
interest groups whose power is deplorable in its scope, call
the occupation of Jerusalem “unification beneficial to the
entire city”. Let them call the occupation “occupation’?; let
them denounce it unequivocally and, above all, take action
to restore the law in order to remain true to their own
moral image of themselves and-what matters more from
our standpoint-to the obligations which they have assumed
under the terms of the Charter.

60. These are the reasons which have led us to take part in
this debate and to bring it to the main point at issue which,
for us, is respect for the Charter of the United Nations, the
denunciation of annexation and right of conquest, and the
determination of the international community not only to
deplore injustice, but to fight it and prevent it.
61. We are aware that a carefully preserved myth has been
to some extent instrumental in presenting Israel as a
country in a constant state of self-defence, Israel has used
this myth to perpetrate successfully acts of aggression
against its neighbours and to put into practice the expansionist plans worked out and executed by the master minds
of Zionism. Today, this myth is disappearing, and what has
recently occurred in Jerusalem is the best illustration of the
true face of the State of Israel. In the case of Jerusalem, the
narrowest religious fanaticism goes hand in hand with the
most arrogant racial fanaticism. As a result of the impunity
guaranteed by the prejudice in its favour, Israel, as the
Jordanian representative has clearly explained, has not only
undertaken the final annexation of the Arab quarter of
Jerusalem, but has also deliberately prejudiced the peaceful
and harmonious coexistence of religions which made that
place a source of light and inspiration for hundreda of
millions of human beings living in every continent and
belonging to all races and political systems,

58. The members of the Council will therefore understand
why I shall not dwell too long on the arguments of a
8

permitted by the Security Council to continue its wanton
defiance of the decisionsof the Council andto pleadin the
name of the people of the Sudanwith all the membersof
the Council as men of conscienceto try to seethat the
judgement they have passed,the decisionthat they took on
21 May 1968 [resolution 252 (196811,is not madevoid by
the actions that Israelis taking day after day to perpetuate
its occupation. Israel has been allowed to defy this
Organization for too long; there must be a limit. At some
time a halt must be called.

62, The laws promulgated by Tel Aviv to regulate the life
a% administrative and social organization of the Arab city
r%ffirm
by a further upsurge of racism, the tendencies
aIready displayed by the Israelis in the rest of occupied
Palestine.
They can be summed up as follows: the superiOrity of the chosen people, the superiority of its faith over
that of others, and the right it assumes of doing whatever
S%m~ likely to promote that faith at the expense of
eVorything else, including the social, economic, cultural and
Political rights of peoples, in other words at the expense of
human rights and fundamental freedoms.

67. To the Arabs, to the Palestiniansespecially, this
pleading may well sound like a cry in the wilderness,for
was not Israel conceivedand did it not comeinto beingasa
result of the disregard for the rights of the people of
Palestineto their homeland? The chronicle of the tragedy
of Palestine has often been recounted, but it bears
repetition. Let us remind ourselvesof the rapeof Palestine
and the dispersalof the Palestinians,At the time of the
Balfour Declaration on 2 November 1917 there were
57,000 Jews in Palestine,many of whom regardedthemselvesas Arabs, though of the Jewishfaith. In 1922 there
were 84,000 Jews in Palestine.They owned only 2.5 per
cent of the land. Yet when Israelcameinto beingit took by
force land which wasin excessof the area assigned
to the
Jewish State by the United Nations by 36 per cent. More
than half of the Palestinerefugeescamefrom the areasthat
Israel had taken by force. This is the injustice that the
Palestinianswill never forget as long as there are Pales
tinians on the face of this earth; and there arePalestinians,
in spite of the fact that the PrimeMinister of Israelwould
prefer to ignore their existence.

63. The Council is aware that the situation in Jerusalem
has aroused not only the Arab countries, but all Moslem
Peoples and all who are attached to the great human values.
WC believe that the Council should face up to the situation
energetically and realistically. The facts are plain. Moreover,
the representatives of Israel are not concealing them. In
their eyes,ithe only right is the right of conquest and the
&%urity Council is nothing more than a body designed to
Prbduce such texts as will meet the requirements of easily
satisfied consciences. For example, this morning the spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Israel reiterated
the Israeli position in a formula which is both simple and
clearcut. He said: “Whatever the decision of the Security
Council, Israel will not give up Jerusalem, which will remain
a unified city.” This statement is an open defiance of the
Security Council and the United Nations. The Council must
take up the challengewhich in fact sums up the entire
Israeli philosophy on the problem of the Middle East asa
whole, and the solution of the problemmay dependon the
Council’s action today becauseif the Council showedits
determination, Israel would then understandthat the right
of conquest and the policy of the fait accompli are
unacceptable.
64. The PRESIDENT (tramlated from French): I invite
the representativeof the Sudan to take a place at the
Council table, and I give him the floor.
65. Mr. FAKHREDDINE (Sudan): Mr. President, I am
grateful to you andto the membersof the Security Council
for affording me this opportunity of addressing
the Council
on the question of Jerusalem.I do not come before this
Council asthe representativeof a memberstate of the Arab
League although the history and culture of my peoplehave
been part of the history and culture of the Arabs, and the
destiny of my country will remain indissolubly with the
destiny of the Arab world. Nor do I comebefore you asthe
representative of a State in which the majority of the
population is Moslem to protest in the name of Islam
against the Israeli occupation of MoslemJerusalemand the
wanton desecrationof Moslem shrines. I have not come
here as the representative of an Arab country or of a
Moslem State. I come before the Council as the representative of a nation, of a people whosevoice will not be still
in the face of the persistent expansionismof Israel, its
occupation of the Arab lands andits ruthlessoppressionof
the Arab people in Jerusalem and out of Jerusalem,
wherever the armiesof Israel hold sway in the occupied
Arab lands.
66. I cometo protest andto plead, to protest in the name
of the Government of the Sudan that Israel should be
9

68. The Prime Minister of Israel,h’lrs.Golda Mcir, with the
disregardfor the truth that hasbecomethe dr~tin~~~lishing
characteristic of Israeli leaders,wasreported ihe other day
to have denied that there wassuch an entity asPalestine.
“Where arethe Palestinians?“, sheasked.The answeris not
far to seek or hard to find. The Palestiniansfill the refugee
camps, living in misery and deprivation-but now with
hope, since they arenow fighting back. The Palestinians
are
scattered throughout the Arab world, living asbrothersand
compatriotsin the host countries.But in the depthsof their
souls there is yearning, yearning for their return to
Palestine.Many Palestiniansare now living outsidethe Arab
countries. But whether they arein campsin Arab countries
or outside them, there is one burning, persistentideathat
unites them all: the idea of their return.
69. Mrs. Meir and the Israeli leadersmust know andfear
the relentless and driving force of this idea which, in the
caseof the Palestinians,is not basedon myth or legendbut
is part of the living and bitter memory of two generations.
The legend of the return of the Jews to Israel, unlike the
return of the Palestinians,goesback, of course, aswe all
know, to time immemorial and lendsitself, aswe all know,
to many inspirational, if fictitious, additions. However,if
we leave the realm of myths, we shall find that present-day
Jews cannot make a reasonable claim to any racial
continuity with the ancient Hebrewsand the Judeans,no
reasonableclaim that would endowthem with a title to the
land of Palestine. It is, of course, true that many of the
ancient Judeansremained on the land; they remainedand
became Hellenized, they became Christians, some were
converted to Islam. Those who went into the Diaspora

public safety.” Again it is reported that compensations
were offered and accepted by the former Arab inhabitants,
except for an isolated troublesome case. Yet one wonders
why the first foreign newsmen to reach this area of
demolition were forcibly removed by military policemen, as
reported in The New York Times. One wonders indeed why
Mr, Kolleck, the Israeli Mayor of Jerusalem, as reported this
the in The Christian Science Monitor of 1 July 1969,
described the seizure of the Arab houses in Jerusalem as
“an unattractive feature”. How could they be an unattrac.
tive feature, if that seizure had followed a finding by the
Jerusalem engineers that the buildings were a danger to
public safety? If it was an act of slum clearance that the
authorities had undertaken with full compensation, there
should have been no need for the Mayor to apologize for
this example of Israeli care and beneficence, no need for
the Mayor to describe this act as “an unattractive feature”.

eventually became indistinguishable from the members of
the various communities amongst which they lived. This is
such a self-evident truth that one wonders why it has often
been denied. It is very rarely that a normal person can
distinguish a Jew by merely looking at him. Those who
claim the ability to do so resort to esoteric criteria that do
not really merit serious consideration. One may claim that
facts are immutable and obstinate, as we all have done; but
if the mind is fed on legend it ceases to be receptive and
becomes impervious to truth. Such a mind Tolstoy likens to
a grain-bin with a hole in its bottom: you keep pouring
grtin into it but the grain falls through. The grain-bin has a
hole and will not hold any grain. So is the mind that is
blinded by myth and legend. Thus many Jews persist in
perpetuating the legend of their return to Israel and of their
right to return, The facts do not substantiate their case. Yet
this belief forms the mainstay of the Zionist polemic,
advanced so often in resonant tones with the admonishing
finger pointing at those who dare to doubt, and in the tones
of awe-inspiring prophecy. This is what legend feeds upon:
the quivering voice, the wordy words, the rhetorical
questions, are the substance of the spurious claims of Israel
to Jerusalem.

72. There is no doubt that this unattractive action by the
Israeli authorities was in violation of Security Council
resolution 2.52 (1968) of 21 May 1968, which resolution,
after having deplored the failure of Israel to comply with
General Assembly resolutions on Jerusalem, explicitly
stated that the Council considered all legislature and
administrative measures and actions taken by Israel-in.
eluding expropriation of land and properties therein-which
tended to change the legal status of Jerusalem as invalid.

70; Let us discard the mythology for a while and face the
facts of the situation now before us. The Council, Mr. President, is primarily and properly concerned with the rightsthe political rights, the human rights-of the people of
Jerusalem. The Government of Israel and its spokesmen
have sought to treat this issue as if it were one of purely
religious significance, as if it had nothing to do with the
title of the Arabs to Jerusalem. Thus, a few months after
the Israeli conquest, namely in the month of October 1967,
the Israeli Government started to put into effect plans for
what they called the reconstruction of the city. In January
1968, The New York Times correspondent in Jerusalem
reported that the Israeli Government “expropriated 838
acres of the former Jordanian sector of Jerusalem, essentially to ensure Jewish settlement in the Old City”, After
mentioning that the dispossessed Arab inhabitants would be
compensated, he went on to say, “Israeli leaders have
always considered the settlement of their people on a
controversial land the surest means of ensuring retentin of
the area”. Yet, while appropriating the land, the Israeli
Government spokesman was at pains to emphasize that
“neither Church nor Moslem religious property was involved in the action”. This is from The New York Times of
12 January 1968. It was then that the pattern was set for
disregarding the essential injustice of dispossessing people
of; their property under the guise of “town-planning” and
‘cslurn-clearance” and emphasizing that religious sites were
not involved-as if the interest of the Arab inhabitants and
of the world in Jerusalem need only be concerned with the
preservation of religious sites and access to religious shrines.
Article 2 of Israel’s Legal and Administrative Matters
(Regulation) Law, annexed to the Secretary-General’s
report of 11 April 1969 [S/9149/, reaffirms this point of
view.

73. The Secretary-General, who was asked by the Security
Council to report on the implementation of that resolution
calling upon Israel to rescind measures already taken and to
desist from taking any further action which tended to
change the status of Jerusalem, reported that he had been
denied any means of obtaining first-hand information. The
reply to his request for information on the steps taken on
the implementation of Security Council resolution 252
(1968) was couched, as we see from the report, in such
off-hand and negative terms as to indicate the utter futility
of any further pursuit of his quest for information.
74. The culmination of these acts of defiance was the
transfer of the Israeli police headquarters from Tel Aviv to
East Jerusalem. This act is described in The New York
Times of 2 July as “the boldest move so far in the two-year
effort by Israeli officials to solidify their administrative
annexation of the Arab sector”, The transfer of the police
headquarters to East Jerusalem, according to press reporfs,
is expected to be followed by arrangements to transfer the
Ministry of Justice and the Supreme Court, thus progressively and systematically achieving the execution of the
Israeli plan of total annexation.
75. Meanwhile, the Government of Israel had proclaimed
laws and administrative ordinances designed to legalize and
regularize its annexation of Jerusalem. Those Israeli laws
were so adequately dealt with by Mr. El-Farra of Jordan in
his statement before the Council on 30 June 1969 /1482/rd
meeting] that there is no need for me to make reference lo
them in detail, I should only wish to emphasize the
conviction of my delegation that such laws and regulations
cannot be recognized by the United Nations as valid, and
that any claims arising from their application cannot be
entertained. One is gratified indeed to note that this is an
opinion with which almost all those who have spoken in
this debate concurred.

71. The razing of Arab homes, as again reported in me
New York Times, this time of 16 June 1969, is explained
by the Israeli Ministry of Religious Affairs as follows: “The
eviction and demolition orders followed a finding by
Jerusalem engineers that the buildings were a danger to
10

76. On the other hand, one has also heard in this debate
various expressions of deprecation of the resort to violence
by the Palestinians. One has repeatedly heard that violence
would lead to reprisal from the Israeli Government, and
that reprisal would breed more violence, so that the
atmosphere would be cofnpletely unsuitable for the efforts
directed towards the achievement of a peaceful solution.
That argument would have been more convincing if it were
to demonstrate that the parties to the dispute were all
willing to seek a peaceful solution and abide by their
obligations in this regard.

I
i

I

I

c
!

;

response to his request for compliance with Security
Council resolution 2.52 (1968) of 21 May 1968: “the
matter remains as set forth in the letter addressed to the
Secretary-General by the Minister for Foreign Affairs on 10
July 1967”. [See S/9149, para. 3.1 That wasthe reply by
the representative of Israel to the Secretary-General. Yet
some voices are raised in this Council, not in support of its
resolutions; some voices are raised, not to deprecate the
erosion of the authority of the United Nations, not to call
for measures that would make Israel comply with the
resolutions of the United Nations, but in lamentation that
there is SO much violence in the Holy Land.

77. The Israeli protestations of peace are so profuse and so
frequent, so hedged in with reservations, as to be devoid of
any content. Indeed, it is quite futile to consider Israeli
peace pronouncements as bearing any reference to their real
intentions, It was not an Israeli publicist who first
discovered the value of double-talk, the hoax of proclaiming peaceful intentions while pursuing aggressive policies;
but Israel has certainly learned the lesson well.

79. Israeli leaders have repeatedly said that they plan for a
long stay in the occupied Arab territories and in Jerusalem
indefinitely, The fedayeen cannot be blamed for making it
plain to them that the land belongs to the people of
Palestine.
80. The Foreign Minister of Israel, in an article published
in The Jerusalem Post of 9 June 1969, thought it prudent
to dismiss an essayentitled “Colonization at its Height”
that appeared in Ha’aretz of 3 June 1969 as evidencing
shallow pseudo-intellectualism, but it is interesting to recall
in this connexion the reference made by the representative
of Iraq [1484th meeting] to Israel’s dreams of glory and
colonial ambition, what the representative of Iraq referred
to as the “Zionist’s burden”, It is interesting because
Mr. Eban states that that article hinted that Israel’s manifest destiny may be at hand while its belated part of the
white man’s burden remains to be fulfilled under the guise
of restoring Zion. The violence of the fedayeen must warn
at least such extremist Israelis dreaming of their white
man’s burden that their particular brand of the white man’s
burden would not be easy to bear.

“It is only recently”-says Foreign Minister Abba
Eban-“that we have noticed a tendency to regard our
country’s territorial configuration as a lonely and supreme criterion, ignoring the parallel problems of its
human composition, its spiritual ethos, its Jewish singularity and its poignant but undying passion for
peace . , .“,
That is “Ebanese” for saying “we want peace just as
everybody else, but we have to expand a little to be able to
make it stick”. It is the same sentiment as expressed by
Mr. Moshe Dayan in terms more in keeping with the
forthright image of the Minister of Defence, when he said
on 27 June 1969, addressing a meeting of industrialists in
Jerusalem:

81. The term “city of peace”, a favourite expression in the
Council, is already beginning to sound like a mockery asthe
persistent provocation of the occupation authorities continues to intensify the mistrust and fear and the violence.
The Israelis must surely know that the Arab people, the
Palestinians, cannot be subjected to the wilful repression of
Israel indefinitely and without any hope of reprieve simply
because it is in the interest of Israel’s security to hold on to
the land it has occupied. The Israeli Government must
surely be aware that immense pressures are building
throughout the Arab world for the complete relinquishment of the peace effort. The Security Council, in order to
forestall the deterioration of the situation, must find a way
to ensure the implementation of its resolutions. Otherwise
the peace effort will lead nowhere.

“‘We are not talking of minor rectifications of the
border, but of major ones. , . , This is our homeland, and
if I say homeland I mean also Nablus and Jericho.”
Mr. Dayan was also reported to have spoken of retaining
half the Sinai Peninsula. As for the Golan Heights, he said
that it was no longer negotiable. “We consider it as part of
Israel, like the Jezreel Valley or the Galilee”-no longer
negotiable.
7X. If Jerusalem is not negotiable, if the Golan Heights are
not negotiable, and if Nablus and Jericho and half the Sinai
Peninsula are to be considered part of the Israeli homeland,
what are the Arabs to do? What are the Palestinians to do?
They are asked to pursue a policy of peace. They are asked,
and indeed they have done so, to come with their
complaint to the Security Council as guardian of peace.
This they have done. They have done it in relation to the
whole area of the conflict and specifically in relation to
Jerusalem. These overtures of peace, this readiness to make
peace, Israel has repudiated and ,rejected. Let us not forget
that it was after the Arab Governments had declared their
acceptance of the Security Council resolution calling for
withdrawal of the Israeli forces from Arab territories that
the Defence Minister of Israel declared most of those
territories to be part of the Israeli homeland. The Secretary-General of the United Nations wasbrusquely told, in

82. There must be a more effective waybesides addressing
appeals and exhortations to the Security Council to
shoulder its primary responsibility, the preservation of
world peace. I remember the last time I spoke before the
Council, on 18 June 1969, addressing to it yet another
appeal to act in Southern Rhodesia for the achievement of
peace and justice [147&h meeting]. I remember that as I
spoke on that occasion I watched the hardened and set
expressions of those who knew what they were doing and
could not be persuaded to do otherwise. Is one doomed
always to meet with such adamant resistance? Is there no
hope for justice in this world?
11

*

89. He began by saying that t.hc previous day he had
listened to a number of Arab delegations and that yesterday
the chorus had been joined also by Morocco. I am gratified
to have had the opportunity of appearing on a list of
speakers which, compared with all the other Council
debates, was unusually long, and also before and after a
number of distinguished persons representing very im.
portant States. Today, I ;:m particularly pleased to take the
floor at a meeting where the representative of Afghanistan
not only brought to bear the traditional authority of his
country’s views, but also his own personal. authority as
former President of the General Assembly.

83. Mr, Abba Eban wrote in the article I just quoted:
“History works not in logic or precision but in irony. It was
Israel’s very stability that brought about the destruction of
the Middle Eastern security system.” If history works in
irony, the over-extended borders of Israel may yet represent for it the greatest danger it has ever encountered.
84. One might ask here why this quest for peace in the
Middle East has been so unrewarding. May it be that even
those of us who are genuinely searching for a peaceful
solution are looking for it in the wrong place? It is our
conviction that, whatever the outcome of this debate,
whatever action the Security Council may decide to take on
this issue, it would not by such action alone achieve peace
in the Middle East. Peace will not reign in the Middle East
even if the Arab nations decide to negotiate its terms with
Israel. There will not be peace in the Middle East even if
Israel were to decide to relinquish its hold on Jerusalem,
withdraw from Sinai and abandon the Golan heights. There
will not be peace in the Middle East even if the Arabs
decide to take Israel unto their bosom, to epd their trade
boycott and to allow Israeli shipping freely to ply the
waterways. There will not be peace with the Arabs as long
as there is no peace in Palestine, as long as peace is not
made with the Palestinians. If peace is not made with the
Palestinians, we should all know that they will not lay
down their arms,

90. However, although I did join the chorils of Arab
delegations, the representative uf Israel could have spared
himself this reply today. So many delegations have taken
the floor on the problem, and other delegations from other
continents have joined in defending the legitimacy of our
argumentregardingthe Holy Placesin Jerusalem,that his
Governmentshould have learned a11important and logical
lesson from the fact that a great many delegations
representing 700 million Moslems in every continent
throughout the world have today denouncedits violations
of international law and warned it of the consequences
of
this courseof action. While many Arabs have taken the
floor today, the representative of Israel unfortunately
standsalone; there is no chorus on his side;he only hasfor
him the cohorts of General Dayan’s troops who invade
Arab territory and undermine the spiritual values of
Jerusalem.I am therefore happy to have,joined the chorus,
and I note that he is alone, this time more than ever, in the
Council.

85. The PRESIDENT (trunsluted from French): I now
invite the representaiive of Morocco to take a place at the
Council table and I call on him to speak.
86. Mr. EUZNHIMA (Morocco) (translated from French):
At its meetin.; yesterday (1484th meeting] the Council was
kind enough to give my delegation sufficient time to set
forth its views on the question before it. Yesterday, I felt
satisfied that I had said everything that my Government
had to say on the subject. I am taking the floor once again
today merely to exercise my right of reply to the statement
made by the representative of Israel at the end of
yesterday’s meeting when he attacked my country and
myself in abusive terms.

91. Mr. Tekoah alsosaid:
‘I * . . the representative of Morocco has also COLIN
before the Security Council to distort history, to deliver
himself of anti-Jewishepithets and personalaspersions,
and to tell us that we Jewshave no right to live in liberty
in our own homeland”11484th meetitlg,pu?~a.
2311.
I shall not retrace the course of history and remind him
that first of all there is no anti-Jewishtradition in Morocco.
For a very lo’ngtime, the Moroccan land hasbeen a placeof
asylumwherenot only Jewsassuch, but the Jewishreligion
asa spiritual force, have found paternal protection and a
legitimate place by the side of the Moslemreligion, SinCe
they derive from the samesource, the Kaaba, from which
the word went forth to the shores of the Atlantic in the
Judaic aswell asthe Moslem revelation. Tllnt tradition has
been respectedto this day. There are more synagogues
in
my country than mosquesin the rest of the non-Moslem
world. But, assoon asthe hand of Israelwas placedupon
Jerusalem,the destruction of mosquesbegan,andI am not
optimistic about Israel’sintentions with regard to those
which remain.

87. I believe that there is no greater moral satisfaction
than to express the views of one’s country on a problem
when they coincide with one’s personal convictions and
moral views. I did this yesterday with fervour, enthusiasm
and a sense of responsibility. I am aware that the right of
reply gives those who have recourse to the rules of
procedure an opportunity of reverting to the substance of a
problem., I can assure you, Mr. President, that I have no
intention of using it for this purpose, nor do I wish to take
the floor in order to reply to personal abuse, Wisdom is
always of permanent value, irrespective of its source, but
aspersions have force only when they come from those who
have the moral authority to cast aspersions, I believe that
the person responsible for the abuse addressed to me does
not deserve a reply from me.

92. When I took the floor yesterday, I did not point out
that the Israelishad also destroyed the Moroccan Quarter
built with the religiousdonations madefor centuriesby old
Moroccan families to pilgrims from Mecca. I deliberately
refrained from mentioning the material interests of mY
country in order to stressthe contribution which a Moslem
country like my own made to safeguardand protect the

88. In replying, I would have preferred to take up the
points raised yesterday by Mr. Tekoah in a different order:
however, yesterday, for once, he used a subtle rhetorical
device, developing his remarks about the Moroccan delegation in a kind of crescendo as he went on, and I should like
to reply along the same lines, but using a different tone.
12

Holy Places. Neither d0 I think that there were any
personal attacks against Jews. At yesterday’s meeting, 1
mentioned the names of three Jews: Mr. Tekoah,
Mrs. Golda Meir and Mr. Abb3 Eban, and I only mentioned
those names in order to stress their very recent origin in
Palestine and to ask them whether they have any greater
right than some Ralestinians who have been in Jerusalem for
1,500 years. I do not think that references to these rights
can be construed as anti-Jewish abuse. I also mentioned
Mr. Rafael and Mr. Zban and said that in other circumstances, at a time when Israel still had some compunction
about camouflaging its policies, talented representatives
came before the Council to convey, more or less ably-and
sheltering behind a screen of rhetoric-the intentions which
Irave been very clumsily conveyed by Mr. Tekoah. I do not
believe that by failing to extend this same compliment to
Mr. Tekoah, I was involving myself in a personal attack.

crossed the Straits of Gibraltar of their own free will and
settled in Morocco where they have remained to this day.
There, they were given not only protection, but also
Moroccan nationality of which they could take full
advantage, in complete equality with other Moroccan
citizens up to the present time. Some of them became
ministers, scholars and high public officials. On the other
hand, I do ‘not believe that Israel offers much hope to any
Palestinian Arab of participating in the administration of
Jerusalem or Palestine at any level whatsoever. I could
remind Mr. Tekoah that at the time when the whole of
Europe w3S under the yoke of nazism and when hundreds
of thousands of Jews were leaving Europe to the satisfaction of many European leaders, the doors of my country
were open to them. I remember that when I* was a child in
1941, four schools were closed in my native town so that
the families of Polish Jews could live in them. Many of
them are still in Morocco today. I should also like to say
that the ruler of Morocco, who did not enjoy all sovereign
privileges at that time, had refused to receive the Armistice
Commission and had also declined to sign legislation
submitted to him by the Vichy Authorities containing
discriminatory provisions against Moroccan Jews. The
sovereign of Morocco said: “These Jews are of Moroccan
nationality, and no authority other than Morocco has the
right to legislate in any manner regarding their fate”.

93. The representative of Israel finally said, with regard to
the statements by Arab delegations: “The one who surpassed all in this arrogance was the representative of
Morocco”. I welcome the superlative used in my regard and
find that Mr. Tekoah has either lost his level-headedness or
that my arguments were pnrticularly cogent, and I can
assure him that in future I shall try to surpass myself. But if
he wishes to talk about arrogance, I can refer him to all the
statements made by Morocco during the 13 years that we
have been Members of the United Nations, as well as to the
statements made by Moroccan delegations at international
conferences. Unfortunately, here as elsewhere, we 11avehad
regrettable confrontations with very many countries, and
on occasion, painful controversies with some representatives, wl1en we defended the direct interests of our
country or joined with other delegations in defending
general principles of law and respect for the principles of
the Charter. And I challenge Mr. Tekoah to find in any
right of reply exercised after an intervention by the
detegation of Morocco any statement by any representative
with whom we were not in agreement to the effect that we
were arrogant in our statements or replies. This is the first
time that the term arrogance has been used with regard to a
delegation which, despite its standpoint, has traditionally
conducted itself with courtesy, frankness and authority and
has brought those qualities to bear in eve1y debate. I
therefore challenge the representative of Israel ‘to find a
single reply accu’sing us of arrogance since we have been
members of international organiza tions.

95. At the time, Jewish authorities much more important
than Mr. Tekoah paid tribute publicly to the sovereign of
my country and today I can assure him that young
Israelites who have not left Morocco, but are staying there
and building their future with confidence and developing
their interests peacefully, have much more confidence in
the future of Morocco than in the future of Israel.
96. Finally, the representative of Israel accused the representative of Morocco of arrogating to itself the right to
speak on behalf of Christianity, and he mentioned a
number of eminent Church leaders to whom I certainly
made no reference in my statement yesterday. He stated
that I had mentioned the names of the Greek Orthodox
Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Armenian Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Patriarch of the Church of Ethiopia, and
Catholic and Protestant t?1eologi:us. Al no time-and the
record of yesterday’s meeting; wili bear me out-.did I
mention names, It is true that I referred to certain
statements by the Cardinal of Liu Paolo, and notwithstanding the respect I feel for the Cardinal and his
authority, since Mr, Tekoah had himself rcferrcd to statements by certain Christian leaders in support of certain of
his arguments, I 11adthe right to refer to those statements
in order to place them in their proper context and prevent
hasty conclusions being drawn from the statements which
certainly do not have the meaning Mr. Tekoah has tried to
attribute to them. In any case, as far 3s the Patriarch of the
Greek Orthodox Church is concerned, I believe that the
autdorities who are qualified to speak on behalf of the
Orthodox Church have brought certain statements to the
notice of the members of the Council in which their point
of view on Jerusalem is clearly set forth. I am sure that
when Mr. Telcoah has studied these statements, he wiII
refrain from rushing to draw conclusions from statements
by the Patriarch of the Orthodox Church, in the way he did
yesterday.

94. I used the term arrogance at the beginning of my
statement; I see that when I used it at the beginning of
yesterday’s nleeting 3s one gives a blank cheque, he
countersigned it later. The delegation of Israel often resorts
to a certain kind of tactic: when it has exhausted its
arguments on 3 specific topic and sees that the Council is
not following its digressions, it immediately launches into
accusations of anti-Semitism, historical in nature, on the
part of the Arab countries. Unfortunately, Mr. Tekoah
.chose a poor example yesterday when he said that “in
Morocco. . . Jews have lived for centuries in misery and
persecution” (ibid., para. 2X?/. Without going very far
back into history, I should like t’o remind him that when
the Arabs left Sptin--and it was not as conquerors
-350,000 Spanish Jews-and it was not the tradition of
certain Jewish communities to follow the vanquished3

97. In conclusion, I would not wish to leave the accusation of anti-Semitism levelled against me personally without
a reply. In fact, I assume full responsibility for what I said
about Zionism. The language I speak is rich enough for me
to use still more violent terms with regard to Zionism.
However, in my delegation there is a tradition of choosing
the most moderate terms, despite the richness of the
vocabulary at its disposal, even when condemning vigorously. I condemned Zionism in those terms, and I challenge
Mr. Tekoah to point to anything I may have said, here or
elsewhere, which could be construed as anti-Jewish. Once
more, we are confronted by a strategy worked out by the
Israeli delegation which is aware that anti-Semitism
throughout the world is its sole asset. Thus, when tolerance
prevails in the United Nations, they revive, provoke and
create in some countries with Jewish colonies conditions
which, if the authorities are unable to control the population, can legitimately give rise on occasion to difficulties
which can be exploited afterwards.
98. I believe that the wisdom of Morocco has always
prevented Israel from using this strategem and it never had
an opportunity of doing so. Certainly, some Israelites have
left Morocco; some did so before my country became
independent and we bear no responsibility for that. Two
reasons may be adduced in the case of those who left
afterwards: as Moroccan nationals, the Jews of Morocco
have the right, like any other Moroccan, with their
passport, to take a plane and to go where they wish. This is
what many have done. Others perhaps went to Israel out of
enthusiasm. We did not try to suppress this enthusiasm.
Some young people of about 20 years of agewere fired by
a new idea and a new adventure; we allowed them to go to
Israel. However, I can assure Mr, Tekoah that today in a
number of Moroccan consulates in Europe there are many
files on Moroccan Jews who have left Morocco in various
circumstances and who are now in Europe applying to
return to Morocco. Some of their applications state that
they were treated like labourers by the Zionists in Israel
and like a sub-proletariate by the Zionists cosmopolitans
who have settled in Israel. My country is considering these
files with due care, but I must say here and now that those
who were permitted in a moment of youthful enthusiasm
to place the energy of their youth at another country’s
service may not return in the weakness of old age to the
country they left when it needed the strength of all its
children.

great pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the high office of President of the Security Council for
this month. I am sure that under your wise and able
leadership our deliberations will come to a successful
conclusion.
103. I did not finish my statement last night because
Mr. Tekoah had referred to certain questions and I thought
that the best way to rebutt his allegations would be to
submit pictures and those pictures were not available last
night. Now they are before you and I do not need to dwell
on proving the falsehood of many of the allegations made
by Mr. Tekoah. He said last night that no mosques had been
destroyed by Israeli bulldozers. The pictures you have here
belie Mr. Tekoah’s falsehoods. Four pictures are attached to
document S/9289 of 30 June 1969. The first, which was
taken in October 1968, shows the mosque. The second
picture showsthe bulldozers coming near the mosque. The
third picture shows that neither the mosque nor the other
houses of the Moroccan Quarter, just referred to by
Ambassador Benhima, are there. These pictures are evi.
dence of how much weight should be given to the
allegations of Mr. Tekoah, who is an architect when it
comes to distortion, fabrication, deceit and misrepresentation,
104. There are other pictures, attached to document
S/9303 of 2 July 1969. Here again you find on Arab
land-every inch of it is Arab-very many high buildings (1
said scores of them) rising up within the Holy City of
Jerusalem.
105. I know that the hour is late, Mr. President, and I
know that it is your intention to conclude our deliberations
tonight. I know that we should be very brief because it has
been a long day with many hours of work, and I know that
many members would like to see this unpleasant debate
come to an end. But certain points have to be answered for
the record, certain issues cannot be left unanswered.
Mr. Tekoah said, in reply to the Soviet Union representative:
“What is it, then, that the Soviet Union objects to: that
Israel succeeded in chasing away, in 1967, the foreign
troops which the USSR declared in 1948 to be aggres.
sors? ” [1483rd meeting,para. 106.1
It has been the practice of Israel to present the conflict as
one between the Israelis and the Arab States, ignoring the
fact that there is something called the Palestinian people. It
is the people of Palestine that the Israelis chased away, and
not foreign troops in Palestine. It is the Israelis who came
with their arms, terror and Nazi-like tactics to erect a racist
and colonialist State at the expense of the people of
Palestine.

99. Mr. Chairman, I should like to thank you once more
for allowing me to make this rectification.
100. Mr. Tekoah said yesterday what he thought about
me. If he would like to know today what I think of him, I
would simply say: nothing.
101. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Jordan.

106. Mr. Tekoah said last night that we keep calling Israel
colonialist, that we keep saying that Israel’s practices are
colonial practices. Yes, we do, we do say that. B,ut we do
not stand alone in stating this fact, This has become
common knowledge. Pick up any objective material, and
YOU will find that this is the conclusion reached by every
objective writer, Here I have a book by a well-known
historian published just a few weeks ago. This is the most

102. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Mr. President, allow me at
the very outset to fulfil a pleasant duty, that of associating
my delegation with the many tributes paid to your
predecessor, my colleague and good friend, Ambassador
S01ano Lbpez of Paraguay, for his ideal performance during
the deliberations of the Council last month, It also givesme
14

recent book of Arnold Toynbee, the British historian, and
it is entitled Experiences. l1 He has something to say about
what the Israelis are doing in the Land of Peace; what they
did to the people of Palestine, what they are planning for
them in the future, what they are doing right now; on page
264 we read:

The figures giiren by Mr. Tekoah have no foundation, Did
this surprise me? No: I was expecting this. It is the
God-given gift of Mr, Tekoah to waste the time of the
Council and to keep citing figures that are either nonexistent or unauthentic. But even if we assume for the sake
of argument that in 1844 there were 7,190 Jews-and
according to him there were even more Arabs than Jews-in
Jerusalem, how does it come about that today there is a
majority of Jews in Jerusalem and a minority Of Arabs?
And how does it come about that, according to him, there
are today one-fifth of a million Jews in Jerusalem, when
only 60,000 had remained there? Was it a result of natural
growth? Was it lack of birth control? It does not seem so,
because, even according to the statistics, this figure could
not be valid. No, the answer is very simple: it is the illegal
immigration; it is those immigrants who came to the Holy
City, who displaced the inhabitants of the Holy City, who
took over and are now on the go, continuing to displace, to
bulldoze, to destroy and to expand.

“The moral wrong and economic calamity that has been
inflicted on African populations in South Africa, Rhodesia and temporarily in Kenya by West European settlers
has been inflicted by East European settlers, the Zionist
Jews, on the Palestinian Arabs. A majority of these Arabs
whose homes lie on the Israeli side of the 1949 armistice
lines have been evicted and robbed. In 1968, the Arab
inhabitants of the territory between the 1949 and the
1967 armistice lines were in danger of suffering the same
outrageous ill-treatment.”
He went on:
“Israeli colonialism since the establishment of the State
of Israel is one of the two blackest cases in the whole
history of colonialism in the modern age; and its
blackness is thrown into relief by its date. The East
European Zionists have been practising colonialism in
Palestine in the extreme form of evicting and robbing the
native Arab inhabitants at the very time when the West
European peoples have been renouncing their temporary
rule over non-European peoples.”

111. This is an important point in Mr, Tekoah’s speech
last night: the question of the capital. Mr. Tekoah said:
“After the Arab conquest of Jerusalem in 635 and
during the relatively brief period of Arab rule, Jerusalem
remained neglected . . . It became a capital again only
with Israel’s rebirth; and this is the mystery and miracle
of Jerusalem’s eternal link not only with the Jewish
religion, but with the Jewish people.” (1483rd meeting,
para. 118.1

107. That is not the Arabs calling Israeli practices colonial
practices: that is a well-known British historian doing so. It
is not we who compare the practices of Israel with those of
Ian Smith and South Africa. This has become a matter of
general knowledge in the world of today.

This statement showed a complete ignorance of Islam. Yes,
Jerusalem was never made a capital, either a Moslem or an
Arab capital. Neither was Mecca. One may wonder why.
This was very ably explained last year by our colleague,
Mr. Shahi of Pakistan. He answered the question. He asked
what it indicated, and then he said it indicated that in
Islam, Mecca is so holy that it is improper to convert it into
a seat of temporal power. The Arab and other Islamic
peoples show the same veneration for Jerusalem. Then
Mr. Shahi reminded us that it was a veneration which had
been expressed by a respected religious leader of the United
States, Cardinal Gushing, the Archbishop of Boston. Writing
in The PiZot of July 1967 he stated, regarding the holy
places in Jerusalem: “There should be no place here for
either politics or power, for violence or for strife, for
destruction or for death; it should be a place of peace”.

108. Mr. Tekoah spoke about recognized borders, I need
not dwell on that, because my colleague and friend
Mr. Fakhreddine Mohamed of the Sudan just mentioned
that the Israelis say Jerusalem is not negotiable. Mr. Eban
said this morning that, whatever you do here in the
Council, they will never give up Jerusalem. He challenged
the Council this morning. Even before it takes a decision,
he issues that warning to the Security Council. As for the
Golan heights, and other areas too, they are not negotiable.
I need not dwell on this. It has been discussed very ably by
my colleague from the Sudan.
109. Mr. Tekoah spoke about my complaint, terming it
frivolous, and he kept repeating this. But I ask: does any of
US here know of any other complaint in the history of the
Security Council that received the full and unanimous
support of all members of the Security Council around this
table during their interventions, as well as the support of
the world at large? It is the privilege of Mr. Tekoah to keep
distorting and fabricating, but the stand which I hope will
be taken by the Security Council will be the answer to
those distortions.

112. Last night, Mr, Tekoah reiterated that the people are
happy, that they are getting more pay, and that there is
nothing to worry about. As my final point I want to cite a
single example. The Israelis tried an experiment: they went
to a sheik-the head of a Bedouin tribe-in the desert. They
gave him a few camels; I do not know how many. They
found some work for the children of that Bedouin. After a
while they wanted to find out whether that experiment had
worked, and he was asked whether or not he was happy,
having the extra income and the extra camels. And that
Bedouin, an illiterate, a man living in a tent, had the
following to say, and this is to be found in The Jerusalem
post, a semi-official newspaper, not in some other source.
This comes from the edition of Monday, 16 June 1969, and
appears on page 10. 1; response to the question as to
whether he was happy, the Bedouin said: “Do you Want me

110. Mr. Tekoah referred to certain figures in the EflcYclopaedia Britannica, saying that in 1844, 7,190 Jews were in
Jerusalem. I looked this up this morning. I went to the
library to find those figures. I looked in the encyclopaedia.
11 New York, Oxford University Press, 1969.
15

wiped out elsewhere. Its success in the Middle East so far
can only be explained by its association with the imperialist
countries. I will quote as -evidence only the statements
made by Weizmann and Ben-Gurion, which provide further
proof, if this is necessary.

to tell you the truth? 1 hate you. Yes, I know, before you
came I was much worse off. Now I have a herd of camels; I
live in a real hut instead of a hu&, and all my sons are
working and earning good money. I admit this, we have
never been so well off before, but we hate you all the same.
We would rather be oppressed by our own people than live
under you, the conquerors,” No one likes a conqueror nor a
colonizer, nor any form of foreign domination. People like
freedom, freedom even with poverty.

119. The State of Israel is the culmination of Palestine’s
colonization by the Zionist organization, to the detriment
of the Arab people; and it is the beachhead of world
imperialism. We are aware of the vicissitudes that led to this
colonization and we know how Palestinian nationalist
movements of 1936 had to be crushed in order to enable
that colonization to develop.

113. The PRESIDENT (translated ffom French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Yemen. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and I give him the
floor.

120. Moreover, ever since its creation, the Zionist State
has been the watchdog of imperialist interests in the region,
and that is why the leaders of the State have not denied
their expansionist designs for settling several million Jewish
emigrants. The historical development of the national.
liberation movements of dominated peoples has forced
colonialism to evacuate the Middle Eastern countries.
Nevertheless, in view of their enormous strategic and
economic interests, the imperialist countries have left a
kind of sword of Damocles hanging over the area. The truth
is that nothing can legitimize or justify the creation of
Israel on Palestinian territory, any more than the evolution
of the Jewish home into a Jewish State can be justified,
except by applying colonialist logic.

114. Mr, ALATTAR (Yemen) (translated from fierzch):
First of all, Mr. President, may I thank You and the
members of the Council for allOW&
me t0 speak in the
debate
on Jerusalem,
which appears on the agenda at the
request of Jordan.
115. Jerusalem is a holy place for three religions. Consequently my country attaches great importance to it, and
my Government hopes that the Council will take all
necessary and appropriate action to ensure that the
character of this holy place is respected. Arab Jerusalem
must not lose its status. It would be an injustice in the
annals of history for a country to defy all the nations of the
world and to apply its laws as a conqueror, without regard
for the resolutions adopted by an absolute majority in the
Security Council and at the special session of the General
Assembly. My delegation is firmly convinced that Arab
Jerusalem, where the Holy Places of the Christian, Jewish
and Moslem religions are situated, will be delivered from
this military domination. But the Security Council must act
as quickly as possible.

121. Is it not incredible that this people, formerly the
victims of Nazi persecutions, should have reached the point
where they use almost identical repressive measures against
the Palestinian people? Is it not equally shocking and
repugnant to see how a colonialist and racist legislation is
implemented? We would quote, as examples, the Law of
Return, the Absentees’ Property Law, the administrative
and police measures adopted by the military or civil
authorities against the Arabs. Are the last expulsions of
Arabs from their homes in Jerusalem not a further
example? Here we have the living picture of a colonial
community.

116. Although Jerusalem is the main subject of your
deliberations, my delegation feels that sight should not be
lost of the real problem, namely, the military occupation of
Palestinian land by the Zionist State a@ the armed
conquest of the other Arab territories. It is in this context
and in this context only ‘that we must consider the action
which the Zionist State continues to take in Jerusalem
despite the resolutions of the Council and those of the
General Assembly. The Zionist State persists in defying the
intema‘tional community, copying what other colonialist,
imperialist and racist States have done elsewhere.

122. Moreover, through emergency legislation and unspeakable methods and provocations, the Zionist State has
got rid of one and a half million Palestinians who subsist
only through United Nations charity.
123. Obviously there can be no colonial State without
economic penetration and long-term economic objectives.
We would like to give some thought to the second aspect.

117. The political, economic and social aspects which
enable us to analyse the phenomenon of Zionism should at
least be emphasized, if we cannot discuss them in depth. I
do not intend to dwell on the history of the Zionist
question here, nor analyse the racist ideology of Zionism, as
our delegation already dealt with these problems at the
205th meeting of the First Committee, on 20 November
1948, at the first part of the third session, Suffice it to say
that the Palestinian people have been’ deprived of the simple
right of enjoying their own land, the land of their ancestors,
as a result of Machiavellian manoeuvres, conceived and
implemented by Zionism, materially, politically and
morally supported by world imperialism.

124. However, before we do so; we should like to ask
what the economic significance of the State of Israel is. The
Zionist leaders speak proudly of “Israeli miracles”. What is
SO surprising about such miracles when one has millions of
dollars available every year with no ties attached? The sum
of the contributions, subsidies and taxes paid by the entire
world Jewish community is beyond comparison with the
total given to any other country, if the per capita factor is
taken into account. The United States alone sends millions
of dollars annually, not only through foundations but also
through other “charitable” organizations. Has it not been
recognized as legal, or almost so, in the United States, for
Jews to have the right to tax exemption on the money sent

118. There is no doubt that the Zionist State is a colonial
phenomenon, although traditional colonialism has been
16

-

Y

1

J

to Israel? And what we see in the United States is just a
typical example; we find the same principl,es in force, with
many different variations, in other countries. This direct
financing factor, together with the exploitation of “confiscated” land or land “uncultivated because of absenteeism”, constitutes an economic potential which the State
of Israel has used effectively to achieve a high growth rate.
Added to these factors are those of technical advancement
and the high level of skills, which initially cost the Zionist
State nothing. Indeed, the technicians who came to
Palestine were trained free of charge by European or other
States. When you know how much it costs to train
specialists, you really cannot be surprised at the progress
achieved by Israel. Furthermore, the time factor is by no
means negligible. A developing country would have to wait
two or three school generations to obtain productive
results.

ences between this social kind of production and that of
the exploiting systems of imperialism? The Zionist State is
as dangerous economically as the rt4gimes of Southern
Rhodesia, South Africa and Portugal, just to mention the
dregs of a colonial system rejected in abhorrence by the
people of the Third World. The countries which have had to
fight against this system of exploitation cannot allow
themselves to condemn those who fight for its eradication
in their own countries. Today Palestine is the outpost for
trying out a system that is as treacherous and dangerous as
that of the colonial era. By this we mean the Zionist
system. It is by no means foolish to believe that, if the
Zionist leaders succeed in the Middle East, other countries
will follow, and become victims in their turn. This may be
an apocalyptic view of the problem, but it would be the
logical conclusion.
128. Nor is it an exaggeration to say that the Zionist State
is racist. TO begin with, Zionism presents itself as a means
of fighting against assimilation. It creates an extremely
serious moral and political problem for Jews throughout
the world, to the extent that many of them are tom in their
convictions between the communities in which they live
and the Zionist State. In a way, a Jew has two nationalities,
but he is above all constrained socially, morally or
economically to be a tool of Zionism. Believe me, enormous courage is needed to resist such pressures. Fortunately there are many such brave men and there will be
more and more of them. As an example I would like to
quote the letter published in Le Murzde of 9 October 1967
from Mrs. JacquelineHadamard,a teacher, in reply to
Baron Rothschild,who wascallingfor a “solidarity tax for
Israel”. She said: “No, I owe no tax for solidarity. My
solidarity is with the oppressed,
the persecuted,the Israeli
victims, the countlessArab victims, as with the VietNamesevictims, the Negroeswho arethe victimsof racism
in South Africa, andin general,all victimsof racism.”

125. The Zionist State has consequently benefited from
extremely important specific factors, which enable it to
make the most of the situation from the economic point of
view. Most countries, given the same advantages as Israel,
would also have been capable of achieving “a miracle”. I
can give you figures to support my argument. I wish simply
to place Israeli achievements in their proper context and to
stress this fact which may do something to offset the
effects of Israel’s vast and clamorous propaganda campaign.
Many leaders of the Zionist State do nothing to hide their
long-term economic objectives, namely, to make Israel an
instrument for penetrating into the developing countries of
Africa and Asia. This is the main imperialist danger of the
Zionist State. What Mr. Eban calls the “open frontier” is,
first and foremost, the conquest of Middle East markets in
order to secure the raw materials needed by Israeli industry,
and particularly as an outlet for its own manufactures.
126. The Zionist State cannot, after all, live indefinitely
on subsidies paid by the world Jewish community. If Israel
is to draw upon its own resources to survive, the ideal
market would be the Middle East market, and subsequently
this could be extended to Asia and Africa, thereby
preventing the Middle Eastern countries from becoming
industrialized. What we are saying here can be proved by
the 19 years of Israel’s history and particularly by the
economic crisis which Israel underwent before the events of
June 1967; whence the vital need for the Zionist State to
mobilize the sympathy of the world Jewish community
through the well-organized conjuring up of the danger of
Israel’s destruction. In fact, they are maintaining a political
and military state of mind which is always profitable, if I
may say so. The conferences organized by Jewish millionaires serve only one purpose, that is to fulfil the Zionist
dream of making the Zionist State the middleman of world
capitalism, the more so because the output potential of the
“dominated”
Palestinians costs 1~~s than in the industrialized countries. The project for. making Hai’fa a free
industrial zone is only the first step towards achieving this
objective. Already in Africa, the number of Israeli firms
serving as figureheads for United States companies is
increasing each year.

129. But Mr. Rothschild’s letter calls for a further
comment: hasit neveroccurredto him that the pro-Semite,
who considersthat he belongsto a chosenpeople,is just as
racist asthe anti-Semite?I would addthat hisattitude, far
from serving the Israeli people and Jewsthroughout the
world, only provide ammunition for anti-Semitism. He
therefore bears a grave responsibility. A Father of the
Church, Father Paul Gauthier, who lived through the
Palestiniantragedy, wrote: “Is not Jewishracisma source
of other anti-Semiticracism?To want to saveall Jews,and
no one but Jews, is the reslllt of the same kind of
calculation asthe desireto kill all Jews.The ideais turned
around but the reasoningis the same.There is no race
superioror inferior to other races.”
130. To make sucha claimis alreadyto be racist,whether
consciouslyor unconsciously,and nazismused such languagelike this first againstthe Jews,the Poles,the citizens
of the Soviet Union, the Czechsand countlessothers! The
Whites of South Africa and Rhodesiaareproudto makeit.
To claim next to be seeking?acial purity” or to speakof
the “chosen people”, “superiority” or “technological
capacity”, proves that the speakeralready has a racist
opinion, And yet the pressof the Zionist State publishes
such declarations and opinions. I can quote several
examplesto the representativeof the Zionist State and I am

127. Do you now find that, in the light of this an,alysis,
the Zionist State appears more or less as a new form of
colonial State’? What are, in fact, the fundamental differ17

/’

their standard of living was improving. It is true,
Mr. Tekoah, that other countrieshave tried to form a third
force, in the hope that they might be able to play an
important political role for future collaboration, and they
have done so by holding out the lure of higher wagesand
better living conditions. This, however, as you know, has
resultedin a piteous failure, and YOU may be surethat in
Palestinethere can be no collaboration with the Zionists,

at your disposal to give you a list of them. This brings to
mind some evil memories: did not the former colonialists
use similar language about the military capacity of the
Algerian, the Moroccan, the Viet-Namese and others, who
proved these embittered colonialists wrong?
13 1. Those who are known as “territorialists”
in Israel,
who wish to rid the country of its Arab inhabitants, and the
political territorialists who are said to be content to
dominate the Arabs from a position of strength because
they have to deal with the new industrial expansion of
cheap labour-provide further examples of Zionist racism.
Other dreams of mystical and religious grandeur show
through in articles published periodically, and these are
sometimes even directed against the Levantine Jews who
come from North Africa and the Middle East. And they say
that the Arabs are racist! From this rostrum, we should
like to say frankly and honestly that the Arabs do not have
to pay for the faults of the European world. We are aware
of the atrocities of the Nazi concentration camps and we
condemn them and the reason for their exfstence. But we
cannot accept that it is for us to make amends for the
horrors of mankind by making Palestinian Arabs the victims
of countless injustices, among others the confiscation of
their national territory, in the name of legitimate and
necessary redress for which they are in no way responsible.

136. As to the secondcomment, Mr. Tekoah, referringto
the United Arab Republic, spoke of Yemen and the
bombing of Yemeni villages. First of all, these are events
which concern two sisternations and our brothers in the
United Arab Republic came to the help of the young
republic, for which we are grateful to them. We do not
deny the existence of opposition, conflicting interestsat
timesand evenmistakeson both sides.You seemto believe,
Mr. Tekoah,in the old policy of “divide andrule”; but the
time when,that policy was in vogue is long past. Now,
people draw the obvious conclusionsfrom the lessonsof
history and of our people. With your permission,
Mr. Tekoah, I would point out that our relations are as
good as they possibly can be with our brothers of the
United Arab Republic and indeed with all the other Arab
countries, and we are united in supporting the Palestinian
people.

132. Certain aspects of the June events were positive, if
only because they confirmed the existence of Palestinian
resistance. Not so long ago the Zionist State denied, in all
seriousness, the existence of Palestinian resistance and was
content to call the members of the resistance “terrorists”!
Every dny that passes shows that the resistance movements
are a reality; and we would like to salute them here and
assure them of our full support, because a people fighting
untiringly to recover its national land deserves the admiration of everyone. This is true not only of our Palestinian
brothers, but also of our black brothers in Southern
Rhodesia, in the territories under Portuguese domination in
South Africa and in Asia.

137. In conclusion,my delegationfervently hopesthat the
Security Council will live up to its responsibilitiesSOthat a
so-callednation doesnot defy the whole world.
138. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): The next
speakeron my list is the representative of Syria. I invite
him to take a placeat the Council table andI give him the
floor.
139. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I want to assureyou, Mr. Presi.
dent, and through you the membersof the Council, that it
wasnot without greathesitationthat I askedfor the floor. I
know that the hour is late. I know that we have taxed the
patienceof all of you. I know that we have beentelling our
tale in detail.

133. The awakening of the Palestinian people is a historic
fact. The Palestinian people is in a position to wage a
popular struggle based on the specific conditions it considers appropriate for asserting its national rights, The
awakening of the peoples of the Orient is a further resultof
the June war.

140. What comesto my mind, to diverge a little bit from
the world of politics, is one of the greatest poemsever
written, entitled “The Legend of the Great Inquisitor”
which is to be found in the novel The Brothers Karamazov
134. We have alwaysusedthe term “Zionist” deliberately by the great Russiannovelist Dostoevsky. In it, Ivan, the
to distinguishit from the word “Jew” or “Jewish”, We author of the poem, speaksto his brother Alyosha; andit
believe that the leaders of the Palestinian resistance waslate at night, and night lendsitself to profound talk but
movementsare awareof their duties and responsibilities. to few people. He speaksto his brother before telling him
his poem. He was revolting against the injustices of
Recent statementsmakeprovision for a PalestinianStatein
mankind, and Dostoevsky in a way representedto a very
which Jewsand Arabs, Christiansand Moslemswould form
largeextent the guilty conscienceof mankind. So Ivan says
a singleState, without racial or religiousdiscrimination.In
this context peacecould becomea reality in this holy land to his brother Alyosha: “People understand others who
and Jerusalem could recover its cultural and religious suffer from hunger,but they do not understandthat people
can suffer for an idea”, Then he goes on to relate The
effulgence.
Legendof the Great Inquisitor, how Christ appearedto the
Great Inquisitor and was put in gaol. And ever since
135. Finally, with your permission,I shall reply to two
commentsmadeby the representativeof the Zionist State. mankindhassufferedfrom truth being put in gaol.
In the first instance, speaking as some directors of
colonialist enterprisesusedto do, he pointed out that the
141. If, therefore, tonight, we come to plead asdefeated,
Arab worlcersand employeesnow earnedbetter salaries
and we alsocometo pleadaspeoplewho suffer for an idea.
18

142. After having listened to Mr. Tekoah yesterday, I read
and reread very carefully his statement and mine. In the
beginning of his statement he referred to the Arab speakers
and to their speeches as an “orgy of enmity and abuse”
[1484th meeting, para. 2291. These are strong words,
“orgy of enmity and abuse”. I assure the Council, most
sincerely, that I carefully went over what I had said, as it
was reproduced in the verbatim record of the Council’s
meeting, and I listed the persons, the authorities and the
sacred names $hom I had quoted. And “persons” are to be
distinguished from “the sacred names”. They were: Yigal
Allon; Mrs. Meir; the records of the Security Council
concerning the cease-fire resolutions; the interpretations as
found in the Security Council records; Pascal, the great
French thinker and mathematician; Menachim Begin; Abba
Eban; The Gospel; St. Paul; the Prophet Isaiah, and
Professor Ya’cov Talmon. Now, let us leave aside the sacred
names, the Gospel, the Prophet Isaiah, St. Paul and Pascal; I
am sure they are much beyond the understanding of
Mr. Tekoah. But if he has found hatred in the others, as
quoted by me, specifically Allon, Mrs. Meir and company,
it certainly is not my fault. That is what is to be found in
their own words. But I certainly advise Mr. Tekoah to read
in full the letter of Professor Ya’cov Talmon which I
quoted. I quoted only two paragraphs from it as it contains
fourteen pages published in Hebrew, in a journal called
Ma ‘arix dated 6 May 1969.
143. My second point is that the United Nations-and here
we have to give some recognition to the fact that the Arab
problem has brought many contributions to United Nations
jurisdiction-is faced now with a totally new dictionary,
coming out of Israel, a vocabulary concerning the occupied
territories. First they were referred to as “occupied”, then
“‘administered”, then “liberated”, then “annexed”. Then,
with regard to Jerusalem there is another vocabulary.
Mr. Tekoah yesterday spoke of “unified, happy Jerusalem”.
Teddy Kollek spoke of Jerusalem being “remarried”.
Mr.Abba Eban at one time spoke of Israel having been
without a head and having found its head in Jerusalem. It is
rather strange that Israel should have looked for an Arab
head. Then Mr. Eban used another simile. Speaking about
Judaism, Christianity and Islam, he brought in the analogy
of the mother and the child. In this connexion, such
slogans,, if they go beyond the level of slogans, are really
void of any meaning:To speak of a mother and a child is
certainly a nice image, or of a unified city or a remarried
city. But pushed beyond the level of slogans such images
are bound to lead us, I am afraid, to the threshold of radical
confrontations, if not radical opposition, which might
prove particularly unfavourable and perhaps even disastrous
to the basic tenets of Zionism,

Palestine. In fact, if you read the Declaration of the
Establishment of the State of Israel you will find something
amazing, to say the least. Listen to this sentence: “Pioneers,
ma ‘pilim and defenders”, and then there is a foot-note to
explain that ma’pilim is a Hebrew word meaning immigrants coming to Eretz-Israel in defiance of restrictive
legislation. This is in the Declaration of Independence of
the State of Israel.
145. My third and most important point is this: in his
interpretation yesterday, commenting upon my remarks
concerning the cease-fire, Mr. Tekoah said-I will leave aside
the vindictive language; I concede to him that I cannot use
that language-that Syria, “contrary to its international
obligations . . . has today repudiated even the concept of
the cease-fire fine under which it affixed its signature in
1967” [ibid., para. 2301.
146. This is a very important legal and juridical problem,
for in his interpretation yesterday, with an arrogance which
made it self-defeating, Mr. Tekoah attempted to make the
Council accept as an international concept what the
Council itself denounced as a fraud. Indeed he tried to
make the Council believe that Syria and other Arab
countries victims of Israel’s aggression had accepted the
concept of a cease-fire line by accepting the Security
Council resolutions on the cease-fire adopted on 9 and 12
June 1967 f235 (1967) and 236 (1967)/. The records of
the Security Council show that we accepted both rasolutions on the cease-fire in their real meaning, indeed, as
interpreted by a very distinguished member of the Security
Council, Lord Caradon. I will again use his own words:
“It is well, I think, to refer back to the actual words of
the agreement reached by General Bull. I refer to the
record of yesterday’s meeting; the actual words of
General Bull were: ‘(1). I proposed a cease-fire together
with no further movement of troops to be effective at
1630 hours GMT, 10 June.’ That is the proposal which he
made to both parties, and it was accepted by both parties.
“I am very glad that I can confirm that . . .“. (1357th
meeting, paras. 204 and 205.]

In other words, he was confirming what had previously
been stated:
“There is the ceasefire order which means that troops
should stay where they are and that any movement,
north, south, east or west, except such movement as to
return from the scene of battle to one’s own home
ground, is a violation of the cease-fire”. [Ibid., para.

177.1

144. Concerning what Mr. Tekoah referred to as the
eternal connexion between Judaism and the City of
Jerusalem, I only have to say that for any student of even
elementary history it is a very well-known fact that such a
connexion has undergone a most radical disconnexion and
that unless and until God Almighty, through a supernatural
initiative, demands and re-establishes such a connexion, the
temporal return of the Jews by force is, to say the least, an
injustice of the greatest magnitude and a shallow dream. A
little while ago my colleague from Jordan referred to the
illegality of people of the Jewish faith coming into

147. This concept of the cease-fire, affirmed by one
member of the Council, was not opposed, as the records of
the Security Council show, by any other member of the
Council, which means that the Council approved this
interpretation. Mr. Tekoah wants to lead the Council to
believe what his Tel Aviv authorities proclaim, that by
accepting the cease-fire we accepted what wasnever meant
by the Security Council. In short and most categorically,
the meaning he puts into the cease-fire resolution constitutes an utter fraud diametrically opposed and contrary to
19

what the
resolution.

Security

Council

adopted

as the cease-fire

148, What looms behind this fraudulent interpretation of
Mr. Tekoah’s? Two things: First, the cense.fire lines are
simply the new frontiers of Israel, something which we
most categorically and firmly deny to him and to his
authorities in Tel Aviv. Israel unilaterally denounced the
General Armistice Agreements, whereasinternational jurisdiction us representedby the United Nations still rccognizes
the AmmisticcAgreements asvalid. Secondly, there are the
deeds,and I need not again repeat all the statementsabout
the Golan Heights, Jerusalem unified, Shorm Esh-Sheikh
and soon.

149. l3ut one important point is that the Jewish Agency
Treasurer-the Jewish Agency, according to the status law
of Israel, beingan integral part of the Government of Israel,
chargedwith colonization and settlement---this year published a new budget for 1969-1970, in which appear the
following:
“(I) The Emergency Fund, now entering its third
year, which is expected to bring in $330,000,000;
“(2) The anticipated growth in immigration, and more
extensive absorption activities which are to include
servicesto immigrants of limited meanswho have come
hereover the past few years”.
Then appropriations are given in detail, including the
following:
“Immigration and absorption
“Settlement Department
“Youth Immigration

681,190,OOO
145,860,OOO
21,476,500”

Thesefigures all indicate sumsin Israeli pounds, and they
arc to be found in TRc hrael Digest of 7 April 1969. This
money is collected in the United States and is tax-deductiblc, classifiedas going for charity but going, instead, to
settle the occupied territories of the Arab countries-Jordan, the United Arab Republic and Syria. This is what
lies behind Mr. Tckonh’s interpretation of the cease-fire
lines.
150. Now, in concluding, I beg to apologizc once more. I
said that our march has been a lonely, dreary and painful
march through the night of the years. My generation and
generationsto come hnvc suffered from problemswhich we
did not create, and to expressthose sufferings I could not
find better words than a few verses of the illustrious
Presidentof Senegal,in a poem of his called ,IouZ:

“Joal!
“Je me rappelle.
C‘. . .
“Jc me rappelle les festins fun8bres fumant du sangdcs
troupenux dgnrgbs
20

“Ma We rythrnant

151 The PRESIDENT (frn,r,skrri,cl3h,,,l13~:lr): The nest
speakeris the represerltativetlf 1r;iq. I invite him to take a
scat at the Council table ml I c;lll oil him to make his
statement.
152. Mr. RAOUF (Iriltl): Allow 111~’
first to apologizefor
asl&tg for the floor at this late hjllr. LIlSt night the
representativeof ISlXl ilCCtlSl!dIraq of’ joinirlg a ChOlllS, a
chorus in an orgy of abuse.Ijut if WCrefer to his statement,
we find that he was nctllully singingsolo. and with all his
notesoff key.
153. 1 shall try to be very brief. I :I111
Ilot going to ilbUSC
your indulgenceur tax the paticncc’ of the mc~nbers
of the
Council. I will try to rebut the insinuations of the
representative of Isrml in what hiIS hCColllehis standard
practice. I ilIl1going to qllotc one ScrltcllCe
of hisreference
to Iraq. He said: “This is the State that I~:Isthe i1lldtlCityto
speak of justice, of hllm:ln rights, of spiritual VDIEICS.”
/ 1484th mctiug, pm. 234.J Now, in pnssi~~g,
if ttlc chrrice
of words is i!ldiCiltiVe(~1’the charactt’r Of tllCSpXllXY,tllC11
the frequent useof the word “audacity” andsimilarwords
by the representative of Israel shc~uldgive us food for
tllought.

154. Mr. Tekoah questionedour clualificatic)t~s
to speakof
human rights. I shotilcllike to remind him that Iraq served
twice on the United Nations Commission(~1IIuman Rights.
Its contribution is there for the rccorti, it is thcrc for
everyone to sec. For his illfOrl1lilti~~1l,
lest hehasforgottai,
only a month ago Iraq obtained the cndorsenientof the
world Organization wh,
for the third time, Trq Was
elected to serve il term on the (‘clrnrnissiuli011 IIlllll~lll
Rights by a mlljority of 24 votes out of 27. “I’trescare the
qualifications of Iraq to speakof lllln!illl rights.
155. He also referred to the hangingsof spieswho wcrc
found, after due processof law, gtlilty of qionagc for
Israel. NC choseto refer to thoac spits of the Jowishfaith
only. The Israelisnever tire of distrwiling their spies:llld
agents.I could quote SCVClXl instanceswhore they disowned
them first and then, later in, itck~~<,wledgcd
them, ;l~ldwith
pride. Hare I have a book called Ora’ hfm in I~ntmwm: the
Story of Eli C&n, Is~cl :c (hwtcst
,S[J~, written by
E. Bell-Ilil1l~lll.I2 For the information of the membersof
the Council, Eli COI111
WE4il Spy Wllo WilSCilll~lltin Syria,
tried and found guilty, and hanged in 1%Li. IsraeelW:IS
vehement in disclaimingany conIIcxi()ll with Iili Cohn, o11ly
to come out two years later illld ;1ckIloWlcdgchis services
12NW York, Crown, 1969.

with pride. It is very telling that the last pages of the book,
particularly the last two pages, sflow pictures of the Israeli
onslaught on Syria with the caption “Vengeance came two
years later”.

watch. When I- explained that I wanted to talk to him
about his life as a Jew, he gave a perfectly natural smile,
said the Arabic word of welcome, drew me up a chair and
called out to a Muslim street waiter to bring bottles of
lemonade,”

156. The Israeli representative never tires of accusing
nearly every country of the whole world of persecuting and
maltreating the Jews, all through the years, all through the
centuries, and all through history. Iraq, in his view, is no
exception. But I am going to put a question to Mr. Tekoah:
What does he think of Jews persecuting and terrorizing
other Jews? I should like to quote a few paragraphs of an
article that appeared in an Israeli paper called Haahn
H~zelz in Tel Aviv on 27 April 1966. The title of the article
is: “This could happen only in Israel”, and it reads as
follows:

Towards the end of the article, the reporter states:
“The Chief Rabbi of Baghdad met foreign correspondents in his office last week to repeat the statement he
made over Baghdad Radio at the time of the executions,
saying that the Jews were treated well.
“The white-bearded rabbi wearing a white robe, a red
tarboosh with a beige scarf wound round it, and tinted
glasses against the television lights, was ill and had his
secretary read his statement for him in Arabic.

“This could happen only in Israel. Last week Hadam
JIazeh published the SCOOP of the year. . . , It was the
story of the explosives that were thrown some 15 years
ago into the synagogues and other Jewish centers of
Baghdad with a view to spurring the Jews of Iraq onto a
hasty nliyra to Israel. These things were known before but
to a few people who guarded them a3 a terrible secret;
they have been made public now for the first time,
officially and responsibly.

“ ‘I have been in the service of the Jewish community
for not less than 65 years,’ it said. ‘As you can see, I am
93 years old and have lived through years of development, witnessing all the successive Governments of Iraq.
At all these times, I have been treated properly, especially
under the revolutionary regime.’
“The Chief Rabbi said that the Jewish community had
complete religious freedom. The civil law, covering Jewish
marriages, deaths and similar matters had been drafted in
accordance with the Jewish community’s wishes.

“If these things had happened in another country it
would have aroused a powerful public reaction, the
papers vying with each other in their loud demands for a
special investigation. The politicians during whose tenure
of office those things have happened-headed by David
Ben-Gurion-would
have informed the public about it,
with a view to determining the responsibility for the
order (to throw the explosives), . . . In short, a clear light
would have been thrown upon one of the most important
chapters in the history of the country. . , . With us,
however, ‘there was neither voice nor hearing’, as though
a rock was thrown into a swamp and sank into it. NO
official or non-official reaction, and no press discussion,
as though the incident were of lesser importance than the
rise in the price of eggs or the resignation of an assistant
secretary of the Jewish Agency.”

“All available evidence suggests that the rabbi has not
been making his statements under threat. Anyone who
tries to obtain an appointment with him soon becomes
aware that even for a man of 93, he displays an
exceptionally cantankerous independence.”
158. Before I conclude by thanking you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Council for bearing with me, I
should like to put one question to the Israeli representative.
He always maintains that Israel is the protector of Jews all
over the world; he maintains that Israel protects them
against the persecution and maltreatment by the Gentiles. I
therefore wish to ask him the following question: who is
going to protect the Jews from the terror of other Jews?

157. I am sorry to have taken your time; the hour is late. I
see that a draft resolution is being circulated, and I am
quite certain that the Council is anxious to conclude its
discussion tonight. But allow me, if not to read a whole
article, at Ieast to read two paragraphs of a recent report,
recent, at least, in so far as the events in Iraq are concerned.
It was published in the Sunday Times of London on
9 February, and speaks about the Jews in Iraq. The reporter
is Geoffrey Sumner. It reads as follows:

159. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, may I begin by
congratulating you on your assumption of the Presidency
of the Council for this month. Senegal and Pakistan are
bound together by the bonds of African-Asian solidarity.
We have both emerged from a similar colonial background,
and we have embarked on the same enterprise of recovering
our heritage in its fullness and of strengthening world peace
on the basis of justice. I have known you, Sir, personally
and shared with you many experiences since last year. May
I assure you of the profound esteem of my delegation for
your experience, your integrity and your judgement. If the
Security Council is able to act unanimously tonight on the
grave question before it, it will be due mainly to your
decisive leadership. It is also my pleasant duty to convey
my respect and appreciation to the retiring President,
Ambassador Solano Lopez of Paraguay. The courtesy,
exemplary rectitude and skill which he showed in.presiding
over our deliberations last month have been justly lauded
by all our colleagues.

“Mr, Elias Abdou, a watchmaker of Rashid Street,
Baghdad, and one of Iraq’s remaining 2,700 Jews, told me
yesterday: ‘You know, we Iraqis have a saying that, once
a man has drunk from the river Tigris, he will never want
to leave Baghdad. That is why I do not want to go to
Israel.’ ”
The reporter goes on to say:
“Mr. Abdou had clearly not been rehearsed in any of
his lines; he assumed at first that I had come to buy a
21

Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
had therefore been violated.

160. We are nearing the end of a memorable debate in the
Security Council. The debate has been suffused with an
emotion which commands the deepest respect of mankind.
It is not an emotion of hate; it is an emotion born of man’s
holy allegiances and his concern for his dignity. Many a
statement heard here this week would find a ready echo in
the heart and mind of the Pakistan delegation. Since the
problem before us h:a been fully discussed in its depth and
dimensions, I think a .ecapitulation might now be useful. In
my intervention in this debate I shall try as best I can to
indicate the recent !+ckground of the problem and the
position which has em:!rged before the Security Council.

“In conclusion, it was pointed out that the Arab
population places its trust in the United Nations and
relies on the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.” [S/8146, paras. 35, I3I-135.1
163. The total disregardby Israel of the resolutionsof the
GeneralAssemblyeventually led to the considerationof the
situation by the Security Council. The Councilheld a full
debatein April and May 1968 on the situationwith respect
to Jerusalemand adoptedresolution 252 (1968) on 21 May
1968,in which it statedthat it:

161. This is the thirti time in two years that the United
Nations has become actively concerned with the situation
in Jerusalem. Israel’s occupation of the Holy City in the
war of June 1967 and its declared intention of annexing it
gravely perturbed the hundreds of millions of Moslems and
Christians throughout the world. Even the more enlightened followers of the great religion of Judaism were not
unmoved by the traUm
and anguish of their Moslem and
Christian fellow men. As a result an overwhelming majority
of the Member States voted for resolution 2253 (ES-V),
adopted at the fifth emergency special session of the
General Assembly on the initiative of Pakistan. Israel
ignored that unanimous resolution. Consequently the General Assembly by its resolution 2254 (ES-V), deplored
Israel’s failure to implement the earlier resolution and
reiterated its call to Israel to rescind all measures already
taken and to desist forthwith from any measures designed
to change the status of Jerusalem. It is noteworthy that the
sponsors of this resolution-Afghanistan,
Guinea, Iran, Mali,
Pakistan, Somalia and Turkey-were all non-Arab States.

“Considers that all legislative and administrativemeasures and actionstaken by Israel, including expropriation
of land and propertiesthereon, which tend to changethe
legal status of Jerusalemare invalid and cannot change
that status”.

The Councilurgently calledupon Israel:
“to rescindall such measuresalready taken and to desist
forthwith from taking any further action which tends to
changethe statusof Jerusalem”.
Also in that resolution the Council deplored“the failure of
Israelto comply with the GeneralAssemblyresolutions”on
the subject adopted on 4 and 14 July 1967, namely,
resolutions2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V). The Secretary
General was asked to report to the Council on the
implementationof that Security Council resolution.

162. Even the second resolution, backed as it was by the
moral authority of 100 Member States, did not act as a
restraint on Israel’s conduct with regard to Jerusalem. The
Secretary-General
sent his Personal Representative,
Mr. Ernest0 A. Thalmann, to obtain information on the
situation. The report submitted by the Secretary-General
on 12 September 1967 indicated that:

164. The Secretary-Generalmade a report to the Council
on 11 April 1969 [S/9149/. This report, which contains
Israel’sletter of 25 March addressedto the SecretaryGeneral,is the clearestindication of Israel’stotal defiance
of the Security Council resolution, Indeed, evenif we were
to leave asideall the facts pointed out by the representative
of Jordan, the more important of which have not been
contestedby Israel, the Secretary-General’sreport and the
unchallengedevidencepublishedin the world pressleadus
to the following conclusions.

“The Israeli authorities stated unequivocally that the
process of integration was irreversible and not negotiable.
‘C. . .

165. First, Israel has completely disregardedresolution
252 (1968) and has refusedto rescind the legislativeand
administrativemeasuresand actions taken by it to change
the legalstatusof Jerusalem.

“The Personal Representative was told that the Arabs
recognized a military occupation r&ime as such and were
ready to co-operate with such a regime in dealing with
current questions of administration and public welfare.
However, they were opposed to civil incorporation into
the Israeli State system. They regarded that as a violation
of the acknowledged rule of international law which
prohibited an occupying Power from changing the legal
and administrative structure in the occupied territory and
at the same time demanded respect for private property
and personal rights and freedoms.

166. Second, far from desistingfrom suchmeasures
and
actions,it has enactedadditional legislationin the form of
the so-called“Legal and Administrative Matters (Regulation) Law”, which seeksfurther to consolidateIsrael’s
annexationof the Old City, Israel hasalsoenlargedthe area
of annexation and incorporated in it sizableportions of the
environsof the city.
167. Third, Israel has persistedin evicting Arab families
and demolishingtheir housesand has even seizedproperty
belongingto Moslemreligioustrusts.

“It was repeatedly emphasized that the population of
East Jerusalem was given no opportunity to state for
itself whether it was willing to live in the Israeli State
community. It was claimed that the right of selfdetermination, in accordance with the United Nations

168. Fourth, the population of the Old City remains
resentfulof, and unreconciledto, Israel’soccupation.

22

169. In this connexion I must refer to the statements
made by the representative of Israel during the current
debate, The more significant aspect of those statements is
not what the representative of Israel said but what he
carefully omitted to say. He has not cared to give any
explanation whether Israel has shown any regard for the
Security Council resolution. He has not chosen to give even
a hint that in future Israel will at least try to abide by its
terms. Even while the Security Council is deliberating on
tile situation in Jerusalem, evidence is accumulating that
Israel is taking every conceivable measure to consolidate its
Occupation of the city, to change its historic character, to
efface its personality and to present to the world a fait
accompli.
170.

It is natural that a consensus should have developed

in the Council in the consideration of this situation. The
elements of the consensus are apparent from the statements
made by members of the Council. It is not possible for me
to quote from all those statements. Therefore I will refer
Only to those made by the representatives of France, the
United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and the United States.

that the occupier has no right to make changes in laws or
in administration other than those which are temporarily
necessitated by his security interests, and that an occupier
may not confiscate or destroy private property. The
pattern of behaviour authorized under the Geneva Cow
vention of 12 August 1949 and international law is clear:
the occupier must maintain the occupied area as intact
and unaltered as possible, without interfering with the
customary life of the area, and any changes must be
necessitated by the immediate needs of the occupation. I
regret to say that the actions of Israel in the occupied
portion of Jerusalem present a different picture, one
which gives rise to understandable concern that the
eventual disposition of East Jerusalem may be prejudiced,
and that the private rights and activities of the population
are already being affected and altered.” [Ibid., para. 97.1
174. Mr. Zakharov of the Soviet Union summed up the
whole position in the following words:
“The question of Jerusalem reflects the essence of that
dangerous situation created in the Middle East by Israel’s
aggression against the Arab States in June 1967, and by
Israel’s subsequent policy aimed at the seizure of Arab
territories and the undermining of efforts to achieve a
peaceful political settlement.” [Ibid., para. 58./

f 7 1. Mr, BBrard quoted from the statement he had made
when the Security Council adopted resolution 252 (1968);
referring to the measures taken by Israel to change the
status of the city, he had said then:
“In our view there is no legal basis for such measures
and they are likely to have the most serious consequences. They can only stir upeill-will, increase tension
and complicate a problem which should be solved by
peaceful means.” [l#I 7th meeting, para. 50.1

175. I have taken the liberty of quoting at some length
from the statements made by four permanent members, not
only because of their intrinsic weight and striking clarity,
but also because the statements are made at a time when
the four Powers have been making efforts to formulate just
proposals in order to bring peace to the Middle East. It is
clear from their pronouncements that, first, Israel has
exceeded its rights as a temporary occupying Power in the
City of Jerusalem and has transgressed the rules which
govern military occupation under international law; and
second, by its attempt to annex the Holy City, Israel is
clearly foreclosing a peaceful settlement of the Middle East
conflict.

Mr. BBrard added:
“Some of these measures are also contrary to the rules
of international law governing armed occupation, and to
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
“The Israeli authorities have indeed repeatedly given
assurances that they would take all necessary measures to
protect the Holy Places and ensure free access for all to
places of worship. But the problem is a political, religious
and legal one and not only an administrative and social
one.“’ [1483rd meeting, paras. 51 and 52.J

176. There is no dissent from these conclusions in the
statements made by our other colleagues. We have to join
these with the conclusions wh.ich inescapably flow from the
statements made before the Security Council by member
States which are not parties immediately concerned but
which strongly feel that the present situation in Jerusalem
vitally affects their deepest interests. That this situation
touches, indeed, assaults, the most cherished sensibilities of
millions of peoples around the globe is a political fact of
paramount importance. Its importance cannot but submerge calculations of transient expediencies. The Council
cannot fail to pay full attention to the statements made by
the representatives
of Afghanistan, Indonesia, Iraq,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria,
Tunisia, the United Arab Republic and Yemen.

272. The representative of the United Kingdom, Lord
Caradon, stated:
“To prejudice the future of Jerusalem would be to deny
the hope, the possibility, of any peaceful settlement at
all. It would be to declare against any settlement. It
would bar the door to peace. It would be to make
another conflict inevitable.
“Jerusalem is the heart of the whole problem. All we
ask is that the just and complete settlement we seek
should not be ruled out in advance, should not be
rendered impossible, by any act designed to prejudice the
future status of the city.” [Ibid., paras. 33 and 39.J

177. Let me also refer here to the statement made by the
Foreign Minister of Turkey two days ago. He said:

173. Mr. Yost, referring to Jerusalem’s unique international standing, said:

“The Middle East issue is a conflict which has several
aspects, one of the most important of which is certainly
the status of the City of Jerusalem, with which all the
three major religions are directly and closely connected.”

“Among the provisions of international law which bind
Israel, as they would bind any occupier, are the provisions
23

f,yf

,

Referring to the measures taken hy Israel to annex the City,
he added:
“?‘urkey does not and will never approve of these and
other similar measures which are certain to render more
difficult the peaceful solution of the Middle East conflict.
We hope and believe that the Security Council will
re-examine at this time the situation in detail and take all
the measures it will deem necessary for the amelioration
of the situation, Indeed, we call upon the Council to
do so.”
May I also refer here to the resolution of the International
Islamic Conference held in Kuala Lumpur, which has been
quoted by the representative of Malaysia at the 1484th
meeting and which was adopted by the religious and
intellectual leaders of a score of countries of Asia and
Africa.
178. I have not so far referred to the firm convictions of
the Government of Pakistan with regard to the kituation in
Jerusalem. These convictions were fully expressed at the
fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly in
1967, and I had the honour to set them forth again during
the debate in the Security Council in 1968. The Foreign
Minister of Pakistan, in his statement before the General
Assembly on 4 October 1968,ls warned that no one should
make a mistake about the depth of our feelings on the
question of Jerusalem.
179. President Yahya Khan said on 30 May: “The
restoration of Jerusalem is a matter of profound concern to
us-indeed, to the whole Moslem world.” The President of
Pakistan has naturally referred to the feelings of his country
and the Islamic world. As regards the feelings of the
Christian countries, they are no less unmistakable.

“In order to ensureprompt and effective action by the
United Nations, its Members confer on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenanceof
international peace and security, and agree that in
carrying out its duties under this responsibility the
Security Council actson their behalf.”
I would emphasizethe words “the Security Council actson
their behalf’. Therefore, the four permanent membersof
the Security Council have to safeguardthe interest of all
Membersof the United Nationsin the city of Jerusalem.We
confidently expect that the deep concern that hasbeen
voiced by the delegationswhich have participated in this
debate and in those of the General Assembly over the
annexationistdesignsof Israelwill be fully respectedby the
four Powersin any recommendationsthat they may make
to the parties for establishinga just and lastingpeacein the
Middle East.

181. In the view of the Pakistan delegation any decision
that the Council may take must be a firm vindication of the
principle of the inadmissibility of territorial acquisition by
war. It is this principle, and this principle alone, that will
constitute the difference between a plan for peace in the
Middle East and a formula of capitulation, If we deviate
from this principle, we not only aggravate the situation in
the area: we help to convert it into an arena of perpetual
conflict. More than that, we tear away the very heart of the
Charter of the United Nations.

185. We now come to the question: what must the
Security Council do to convince Israel that the United
Nations cannot allow it to foreclose a peaceful settlement
of the Middle East problemand to disregardthe sentiments
of the majority of mankind? Israel’s continued defiance
has left no option to the Security Council except to go
further than the call embodiedin resolution 252 (1968). AS
a result of the consultationsheld among membersof the
Security Council under your auspices,Mr. President,I have
the honour to present the following draft resolutionin the

182. The Security Council will recall that resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 emphasized this principle. Resolution 252 (1968) reaffirmed it. In so far as the
City of Jerusalem is concerned, resolution 252 (1968)
13 Official
Plenary

Records
of the General
Assembly,
Meetings,
1681 st meeting.

183. It would be a travesty of the Charter of the United
Nations,a betrayal of its basicprinciples, if, under the guise
of the rectification of boundaries, or on the pretext of
makingthem secure,any proposalwere madewhich sought
to condoneor legitimize Israel’sincorporation of the city
of Jerusaleminto its territory. No one, we believe, will be
deluded by Israel’s talk of the unification of Jerusalem,
Any recommendationin contravention of the principle of
the inadmissibility of territorial acquisition by force with
respectto Jerusalemwill not only generatea hostility that
will last for generations,but will inflict a permanentinjury
on the sensibilitiesof the peoples of the entire Islamic
world. Let there be no mistake about it. Such a recornmendation will not only deepen the senseof outrage
suffered by 600 million Moslemsbecauseof the eventsof
June 1967,but will alsoinevitably alienatetheir sympathies
from its proponents.And from a purely pragmaticpoint of
view, any suchproposalwill be politically not viable.
184. Let me also invite the attention of the membersof
the Security Council to a central provision of the Charterof
the United Nations,namely, Article 24. Paragraph1 of that
Article readsasfollows:

180. All these statements serve to supplement the elements of the consensus which I outlined earlier. A
remarkably wide spectrum of countries has made it clear to
the Security Council that Israel’s actions in the city are
offensive and inimical to the universal religious interest and
that the question of the status of Jerusalem is an issue
which transcends the claims and counter-claims of the
parties to the Arab-Israeli conflict.

Session,

clearly and categorically rules out its annexation by Israel,
It is maintained that Jerusalemis one of the principal
subjects to be dealt with within the framework of resolution 242 (1967). If so, any recommendation relating to
Jerusalemrules out its annexation by Israel. It is main.
tained that Jerusalemis one of the principal subjectsto be
dealt with within the framework of resolution 242 (1967).
If so, any recommendationrelating to Jerusalemwithin the
ambit of that resolutionmustbe governedby the provisions
of resolution252 (1968).

Twenty-third

24

names of the delegations of Senegal, Zambia and Pakistan,
which they believe will command a unanimous vote:

expressed about my country and myself. Senegal and
Pakistan have enjoyed good relations of all kinds since my
country became independent. As for you personally,
Ambassador Shahi, I have known you for two years, we
have worked side by side for nearly two years, and I know
your perspicacity and talent.

“The Security Council,
“‘Recalling its resolution 2.52 (1968) of 21 May 1968
and the earlier General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V)
and 2254 (ES-V) of 4 and 14 July 1967, respectively
concerning measures and actions by Israel affecting the
status of the City of Jerusalem,

187. NOW, in my capacity as the representative of
SENEGAL, I should like to make a statement here on the
opinion of my Government on the problem before us
today. AS YOU know, numerous resolutions have been
adopted both by the General Assembly and the Security
Council; calling upon Israel to desist from changing the
status of the Old City of Jerusalem until a solution can be
found to the problem of the Middle East as a whole.

‘%lavz’ng heard the statements of the parties concerned
on the question,
‘Noting
that since the adoption of the abovementioned resolutions Israel has taken further measures
tending to change the status of the City of Jerusalem,

188. The problem of Jerusalem cannot be settled by
administrative or social measures alone, even if these
actions are presented as necessary or likely to bring
prosperity to the indigenous populations, This problem is
of a religious, legal and political nature. Jerusalem, the Old
Holy City, is the seat of the world’s three great religions.
The Geneva Convention of 1949 likewise defines the
position the occupier must adopt vis-a-vis the persons and
property of the occupied country or region. Finally, we all
know that efforts are being exerted at present to settle the
conflict in the Middle East as a whole in order that all
parties concerned may live decently and in full security in
their respective countries.

“Reaffirming the established principle that acquisition
of territory by military conquest is inadmissible,
“ 1. Reaffirms its resolution 252 (1968);
“2. Deplures the failure of Israel to show any regard
for the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council mentioned above;
“3. Censures in‘the strongest terms all measures taken
to change the status of the City of Jerusalem;
“4. Confirms that all legislative and administrative
measures and actions by Israel which purport to alter the
status of Jerusalem, including expropriation of land and
properties thereon, are invalid and cannot change that
status;

189. Last year, on 21 May 1968, the Security Council
adopted resolution 252 (1968) in which it expressly requested Israel to rescind the legislative and administrative
measures that country had already taken, and to desist
from any action tending to incorporate the Holy City into
the State of Israel. Unfortunately, it appears that the
authorities of Israel are using delaying tactics and do not, in
fact, intend to comply with the provisions of the said
resolution. I shall quote only a few passages from an article
which recently appeared in The New York Times:

“5’. Urgently calls once more upon Israel to rescind
forthwith
all measures taken by it which may tend to
change the status of the City of Jerusalem, and in future
to refrain from all actions likely to have such an effect;

“In ignoring the rights of long-time Arab residents of
the city and in refusing to recognize that others have an
attachment for Jerusalem that is equal to their own, the
Israelis are sowing the seeds of perpetual conflict. There is
little hope for Big Four efforts to promote peace in the
Middle East or any other effort, unless Israel modifies its
current policy of annexation. If the United States is to
play an effective role in promoting a Middle East
settlement, this country must make clear its commitment
to a settlement of the Jerusalem question that recognizes
the rights of the Arabs and the interests of the world
community in this age-old city of contention.”

“6. Requests Israel to inform the Security Council
without any further delay of its intentions with regard to
the implementation of the provisions of the present
resolution;
“7. Determines that, in the event of a negative
response or no response from Israel, the Security Council
shall reconvene without delay to consider what further
action should be taken in this matter;
?I. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution.”

190. I must remind you here that my country, in its
concern for legality, has always respected and continues to
respect the resolutions of the United Nations, particularly
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 29 November
1947. We made a formal commitment to do so in joining
the United Nations. We think that all Member States,
whether large or small, have a moral obligation to abide by
the decisions of our Organization and that annexation of
the territory of one country by another is unacceptable to
us. We can only deplore most vigorously the action of the

The draft resolution that I have just read out is selfexplanatory and it has been circulated as document S/931 1,
in English and French as the original text. I shall therefore
not explain its provisions. It is our belief that unanimity in
the decision to be taken by the Security Council will lend
unique authority to it.
J
186. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I thank
the representative of Pakistan for the sentiments he has
25

of Israel, at the very time when consultations
between Governments were in progress with a view to
finding a solution to the distressingproblem of the Middle
East. All violence must cease,all weaponsmust be silenced,
so that the tensionin the Middle East can die down and the
parties can be reconciled and devote themselvesin peace
and dignity to the harmoniouseconomic development of
their respectivecountries.
Government

191. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I would inform the
membersthat we will now passon to the draft resolution
that has just been submitted by the representative of
Pakistan and distributed in all the working languagesin
document S/9311. I should like to point out that the
original languagesof this text are English and French.
Moreover, paragraph4 of the draft resolution should read
asfollows in French:14

of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Zambia.
Against: None.
Abstaining: United Statesof America.
Paragraph5 of the draft resolution wasadopted by I4
votesto none, with I abstention.
195. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I shall
now put to the vote the draft resolution [S/9311] asa
whole.
A vote wastaken by showof hands.
77zedraft resolutionwasadopted unanimously.1s

“Confirme que to&es les mesures et dispositions
l&islatives et administrativesprisespar Israg qui ont pour
effet d’alttrer le statut dq J&wsalem,y compris l,expropriation de tewes et de biens immobiliers, sont non
valideset ne peuvent modifier ce statut. ‘,
I would ask the Council if it hasany objection to the draft
resolutionbeingput to the vote.
192. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish):I have no objection to the draft resolution being
put to the vote. However, I do wish to draw attention to
the Spanish version of the text. In the first and third
preambularparagraphs,and in paragraphs3, 4 and 5 the
word “status” in the original English and “statut” in the
original French has been translated by the word “condicion ,‘, which appearsin the corresponding paragraphsof
the Spanish text. In my opinion, that is not the best
translation. The appropriate word is “estatuto” which in
itself implies the essentianylegal concept that the word
“‘condition” lacks. Preciselybecause“estatuto” reflects the
existence of a legal basis, it is unnecessary to repeat the
qualifying adjective ‘iurz’dico” asin resolution 252 (1968),
since the word ‘estatuto” includes this concept. I do not
presumeto be expert in any language,and therefore I refer
to precedents.The word “status” in the original English has
already been translated by the word ‘estatuto” in resolution 252 (1968), and the subject of this debate is noncompliancewith that resolution.

196. The PRESIDENT: The representativeof the Soviet
Union has asked for the floor in order to explain hisvote
after the vote.
197. Mr. ZAKHAROV (Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics) (translatedfrom Russian): Mr. President,the position
of the Soviet Union on the question of Jerusalemhas
already been set forth in full in the Soviet delegation’s
statementon 1 July (1483rd meeting]. The Soviet Union
has consideredand continues to considerthat IsraeImust
immediatelyceaseits illegal action and arbitrary conductin
Jerusalem;it must withdraw its armedforcesfrom all the
occupiedterritories, including the Arab part of Jerusalem,
Once again we consider it our duty to stressthat the
situation in Jerusalem,as well asin the,Middle Eastareaas
a whole, makesit imperative to liquidate the consequences
of Israel’saggressionagainst the Arab States as soonas
possibleandto achievea peacefulpolitical settlementbased
on the well-known Security Council resolution of 22
November 1967. This is the clear and firm position of the
Soviet Union.

198. The Soviet delegationvoted for the draft resolution
on the groundsthat, basically, it reflects the outrageand
indignationof the Statesand peoplesof the variousregions
of the world at Israel’scontinuing aggression,
the atrocities
it hascommitted againstthe Arab population of Jerusalem,
andits cynical refusalto comply with previousdecisions
of
the General Assembly and the Security Council. The
resolutionjust adopted censuresin the strongesttermsall
measures
taken by Israelto changethe statusof the City of
193. I therefore requestthat the Secretariat take note of
Jerusalemwhich the Israeli aggressorsoccupied in the
this commentand makethe necessarychanges.1
4
course of their treacherousattack on the Arab Statesin
June 1967. The Soviet delegation regardsthis condemna194. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): A sepa- tion pronounced by the Security Council as a serious
rate vote has been requested on paragraph5 of draft
warning to the ruling circles of Israel that they will be
resolution S/9311. In accordance with rule 32 of the
responsiblefor the consequencesof continuing their
provisional rules of procedure, unless the co-sponsors aggressive
policy.
object, I shallput paragraph5 to the vote.
199. The obviousnessof the illegality of Israel’sactionsis
A vote wastaken by show of hands.
confirmed,in particular, by the fact that all membersof the.
Council have voted unanimously for the resolution asa
In favour: Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, whole. As I seeit, this gives the resolution we havejust
Hungary, Nepal, Pakistan,Paraguay, Senegal,Spain, Union
adopted particular significance. If Israel is once again
unwilling to heed the will and demandsof the peoples,aad

14 The complete text of the draft resolution was subsequently
reissued to incorporate the change mentioned by the speaker.

15 See resolution 267 (1969).

26

this unanimous decision by the Security Council, the
Council will once again have to hold an urgent meeting to
consider further action to be taken regarding Israel.

207. I have already drawn the Security Council’s attention
to the fact that the Arab States which joined in this
exercise of enmity have by their repudiation of the United
Nations Charter in relation to Israel, by their rejection of
the Security Council peace and cease-fire resolutions, by
their oppression of Jewish communities and other minorities, by their active pursuance of warfare against Israel,
deprived themselves of the right to invoke the tenets of law,
justice and human rights.

200. The Soviet delegation considers it essential to emphasize that, in the resolution just adopted, the Security
Council has totally and fully rejected the fruitless attempts
by the representative of Israel to provide a basis for the
legality of Israel’s actions in Jerusalem by claiming that the
occupation of that city has brought some kind of alleged
“benefits” to the Arab population. The Security Council,
having once again confirmed the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by military conquest,
has thereby made it clear that nothing can justify the Israeli
occupation of Jerusalem and other seizures of Arab
territories. This is an absolutely categorical and firm
warning by the Security Council to those extremist circles
,in Israel which are dreaming of territorial expansion, the
seizure of Arab lands, and new adventures. In the light of
ai1 these facts, Mr. President, the Soviet Union considered it
possible to support this decision of the Security Council.

208. Could this have been illustrated more clearly than in
today’s appearances by Arab representatives, for instance
that of the representative of Sudan? How does Sudan dare
to come to the Security Council and speak of law and
human rights? Its attitude towards Israel is well known; it
was reiterated by Sudan’s military leader, General
al-Numeyri, as recently as 2 June 1969, when he declared:
“The rBgime will work for-the strengthening of the Arab
nation, with the purpose of putting an end to Israel’s
existence.” And this was confirmed today by the Sudanese
representative in this Council. This posture in itself is
sufficient to disqualify Sudan completely in any Security
Council debate, particularly one concerning Israel.

201. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
representative of the United States has asked to speak in
explanation of his vote, and I now call on him.

209. However, Sudan’s criminality is not confined to
Israel.The following are excerptsfrom an appealaddressed
on 9 April 1969 by the SouthernSudanLiberation Movement to the ZimbabweAfrican People’sUnion of Rhodesia,
the South WestAfrican PeoplesOrganization,the Mozambique Liberation Front, the Popular Movement for the
Liberation of Angola, and the African Party for the
Independenceof GuineaandCapeVerde:

402.
Mr. YOST (United States of America): The United
States voted for the resolution just adopted by the Council
because it is consonant with our position on Jerusalem as
described in my statement to the Council on 1 July
[1483rd meeting].
203. In the separate vote taken on paragraph 5, the United
States abstained because the language of that paragraph, by
describing the actions which Israel has .taken as measures
“which may tend to change the status of the City of
Jerusalem”, and calling on Israel to rescind them, is
inconsistent with the clear language of the preceding
paragraph of the resolution, which confirms that the
measures in question cannot change the status of the city.
Moreover, we do not consider this suggestion practical and
believe it is likely to ,place the Security Council in an
invidious position in the future.

“Our people,the Africans of the SouthernSudan,have
been constantly subjectedto aggression
and attempts at
enslavementby the Arab Northern Sudanese
for over 143
years. Our desireand struggleis for political independencefor our country, the South Sudan.
“You have to know about the current butchery of the
SouthernSudaneseAfricans by the Northern SudanArab
troops. There are at least 1,000 Arab soldiersin each of
the three provincesof the SouthernSudan.Thesetroops
are heavily equipped with tanks. planes, and other
weaponsof human destruction. Whereverthese troops
went they left a trail of deathbehindthem: villagemen,
women, and children have beenand are beingmassacred
in cold blood.

204. In supporting the resolution, my Government wishes
to make clear that’ it does not consider itself committed to
any specific course of action during any future Council
consideration of this issue, We continue to believe that
Jerusalem cannot be dealt with on a pieceineal basis. We
rededicate ourselves to a determined effort to help bring
about agreement on a just and lasting peace in the area, in
the context of which Jerusalem,should not again become a
bone of contention among religions and nations, but an
example of unity.
,205. The PRESIDENT (translated from F’rench): I call on
the representative of Israel.

Arabs of the Sudan believe that they have the
mission of civilizing the African, just as the white
colonialistsbelievedin the 19th century andwhich many
believe today. Arabs believe that their languageand
religion are superior andshouldbe imposedif necessary
by force of armsand they aredoingit today in the South
Sudan.”

206. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, the Security
Council’s deliberations on Jordan’s complaint against
Jerusalem’s integrity, happiness and prosperity have come
to an end. The representatives of Jordan and other Arab
countries have turned this debate into a bacchanalia of
belligerence and abuse. It was venemous; it will remain
futile.

The New York Timesof 15 April 1968,in a lengthy report
under the title “Arab-DominatedGovernmentSlowly SubduingTribesmen”,estimatesthe numberof South Sudanese
killed by Governmenttroops at half a million. How are the
people of Israel, how is the world at large, to judge the
adviceand admonition of iuch StatesasSudan,Iraq, Syria
and Algeria? What are we to think of suchcounsel?Is the

“

.

27

.

.

complete absence of any moral or legal weight behind it to
be balanced by the dubious weight of numbers? What are
Israel and the world to think of a resolution adopted at the
instigation of such States?
210. The proponents of the complaint before the Council
could have found no more convincing a manner to
underscore the nature of this debate and its outcome than
by allowing Pakistan to present the resolution now
adopted. Could there be a situation that evokes less respect
than Pakistan’s donning the mask of law and justice? Has
not Pakistan’s outstanding contribution to international life
since its independence been war against a, neighbouring
country, occupation of foreign territory, persecution and
exile of millions of human beings? Here is what the
representative of India had to say about Pakistan in the
General Assembly on 4 October 1968:
“Pakistan is in the habit of preaching to others what it
does not practise itself. The condition of the minorities in
Pakistan, particularly that of Hindus, is one of abject
misery and terror. There is no security for their life or
their property in Pakistan. And, of course, they do not
have any fundamental rights to speak of.“1 4
What value should be attached to a resolution born of such
parents?
211. Mr. President, the representative of Jordan found it
appropriate to distribute this morning, in document
S/9303, photographs of new housing in Jerusalem. Nothing
could illustrate more tellingly the frivolous nature of
Jordan’s complaint than these pictures of new buildings
that will houseboth Jewsand Arabs, buildingsconstructed,
incidentally, on land owned privately by Jews. Jordan
destroyed Jerusalem;Israel is rebuildingit. Weare proud of
it, and shall not be deterredin our work. Indeed it is not
the welfare of Jerusalem’sArab communify that motivated
the Jordanian complaint, but plain, unadulteratedhostility
towards Israel. It wasnot love of Jerusalemthat guided the
Government, but hatred of Jordan. It was not ‘the spirit of
peace,which is Jerusalem’s,that inspired Jordan, but the
spirit of another city-Khartoum, in the Sudan-where the
infamous decision was adopted by the Arab States: no
peace,no negotiations,no agreementwith Israel,
212. However, it is not only Jordan’s motivation in
submitting its complaint that must be condemnedand
rejected, but alsoJordan’svery right to intervene in the life
of Jerusalem.Jordan’sconnexion with Jerusalemhas been
brief but tragic. It originated in aggression;it came of
defiance of the United Nations; it lasted through 19 years
of continued breach of international law, violation of
human rights, desecration of Holy Places, and wanton
destruction. No State in the entire world ever recognized
Jordan’s right to Jerusalem.Surely the expulsion of the
Jordanian aggressorfrom Jerusalemcould not have suddenly bestowed on Jordan rights which it had never
possessed.
Thus the view expressedby the United States
representative-that the easternpart of the united City of
Jerusalemconstitutes occupiedterritory-is unacceptableto
my Government.
16 Official

Records

213. Wehope that the Government of Jordan will realize
that the road it has followed by its complaint to the
Security Council doesnot lead to any solution. Wehope it
will understandthat, just asmilitary warfare againstIsrael
has brought no benefit to the people and Governmentof
Jordan, SO will political warfare against Israel prove
fruitless.
214. This is not the way to deal with a people which has
remainedin the throes of war for 20 years, and this is not
the manner for settling a conflict with a nation that ha;s
beenthrough 4,000 yearsof trial, tribulation, persecution,
resistanceand tenacity. Just as we hope that Jordan will
comprehendthat military or political harassmentwill not
sway Israel, we trust that it is evident that resolutionsof
the kind adopted at the present meeting cannot affect
Jerusalem’s
life. Life cannotstop in Jerusalem.Life will not
stop in Jerusalem.It will continue asit has during the last
two yearssinceJerusalem’s
rebirth and reunion, for this is
the will of the peopleand this is the historic destiny of the
city. Hatred will not arrestits growth. Belligerencewill not
undermine its happinessand prosperity. As the prophet
Isaiahsaid: “Jerusalemsheshallbe built, built for the glory
of all who venerate her, for the bliss of all who inhabit
her”.
215. The PRESIDENT (translated jkom French): I give
the floor to the representativeof Jordan.
216. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): After the adoption of the
Security Council resolutionon the attack againstLebanon
last December,Mr. Tekoahdisqualifiedthe Council.He said
the Council was not qualified to make such a decision,
becausethe Couficil was bankrupt. He then disqualified
religious leaders and secular leaders and many others.
During this debate he disqualified almost every single
memberwho spokeon the question.In his last intervention
he disqualifiedSudan, Pakistanand the United States. 1
think thosethree Member Statesof the United Nationsare
in good company, becausethey were all disqualifiedby
Mr. Tekoah.
217. Mr. Tekoah is the one who hasthe power to qualify
or disqualify at will any memberspeakingon this question.
What disturbsand shoulddisturb the CounciI are the other
utterancesof Mr. Tekoah.His answerto the unanimouswill
of the Security Council, the higheit organ of the United
Nations, is “Your resolution is instigated by the non.
member States who spoke here.” I think it should be
underlinedthat this comesfrom Israel,a Member Stat’ethat
owes its very existenceto this body. It comesfrom Israel.
which is the child of the United Nations. It comesfrom a
Memberwhich defiesthe very will of its mother, the United
Nations. I think this providessomefood for thought for
every member around this table. I think it makes it
imperative that the Council here and now start pondering
what action should be taken against defiant Israel. This
contempt, this arrogance,this deceit, this conceit, which is
blinding the mind of Mr. Tekoah shouldurge the members
during the remainingpart of the current month to ponder
what action should be taken by the Security Council
againstdefiant Israel.
218. I know of no other alternativeat presentbut to begin
very seriously thinking of invoking Article 41 of the

of the General Assembly, Twenty-third

Session,
Plenary Meetings, 1682nd meeting,
para.186.
28

Charter, the Article that calls for total or partial interruption of economic, diplomatic and other relations. In
particular, we should not shield or accommodate Israeli
aggression by sending Phantom jets or napalm or any
destructive weapons to Israel. It is those weapons which
create this intoxication, this arrogance. The Council,
entrusted with maintaining peace, should see to it that the
continuing aggression of Israel is brought to an end. It is the
duty of the Council to begin now considering what
measures should be taken against Israel. Sanctions now are
the only remaining alternative, particularly in view of the
fact that the Council has time and again warned Israel that
more effective measures will be taken to put an end to its
arrogance.

Mr. Rouhi el-Khatib will be going back to Jordan. Although
in exile from his beloved city, Jerusalem, he will be going
with new will and determination, with a genuine feeling
that the whole world rejects all Israeli actions and holds the
Israeli authorities responsible for the arbitrary Israeli
measures. He will assure the people of Jerusalem of the
determination of the Security Council in the event of a
negative response or no response from the Israelis, to
reconvene without any further delay in order to consider
further action-I take it, to consider invoking Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter. He will tell the people that
neither Israeli bluff nor Israeli deceit, neither Israeli threats
nor Israeli blackmail, helped the Israelis in the Security
Council, and that Israeli expropriation, confiscation, arbitrary arrest and deportation reinforced the unanimous will
of the Security Council to condemn the Israeli illegal
measures and to warn that such measures should come to
an end. This is the felicitous aspect of today’s conclusion of
our deliberations and the adoption of the resolution.

219. Not only has Mr. Tekoah just stated that this action
is instigated by States other than members of the Council,
but he has the audacity to ask the Council, immediately
after its unanimous decision, “What value should be
attached to a resolution born of such parents? ” Those are
his words. He asks what value should be given to the will of
the United Nations, the will of the Security Council,
reflecting world public opinion. The Council has once again
pronounced its decision concerning the Holy City of
Jerusalem. It has merely expressed the will of the international community. It has, above all, endorsed the rule of
law and rejected the rule of the jungle adopted by the
Israelis. It has emphasized once more the well-known
international principle that any territorial acquisition by
war is inadmissible and that measures taken by the
occupying Power to change the status of Jerusalem are null
and void and have no legal validity. The Council has called
for specific steps, enumerated in the resolution which was
read out by one of the sponsors. I need not repeat these
steps enumerated in the resolution. Members of the
Security Council, as well as other Governments which
through their delegations participated in the Council’s
deliberations, were prompted by international principles,
by a sense of duty and love for justice, to take their stand
and pronounce their judgement. Above all, they are
apprehensive about what the illegal Israeli measures will
bring to the city of peace and its people.

222. We are very happy to see that nobody around this
table was misled by the Israeli-fabricated allegations, the
last one of which was the claim that the buildings were
being built on Jewish land. This is false and distorted; there
is not an iota of truth in it. The lands are our Arab lands,
owned by Arabs. If it is the desire of the Council, the
records are available for the Council to see. But it is all right
for Mr, Tekoah to come at the very last minute of the very
last meeting on this question and indulge in more falsehoods and more misrepresentations. We are happy that no
member around this table was misled by these distortions
or by the Israeli smokescreen or by the Israeli diversionary
tactics.
223. Every member voted for the resolution and thus
condemned Israel, and by so doing served notice on
Mr. Tekoah that his distortions did not mislead anybody.
Today, Israel, more than ever before, stands alone. Would
the Israeli leaders say now, after this unanimous resolution,
that every Member State is out of step but Israel?
Apparently, this is the contention that Mr. Tekoah wishes
to convey to the Council. One wonders: Will the positive or
the negative and aggressive nature of Israel appear after this
resolution? Will they again call this a Gentile decision or
will they see it as a Charter decision, a decision dictated by
the values of the United Nations? Or would they wreck
what the United Nations is building? The answer to these
questions will determine whether the Israelis are for peace
in the Middle East.

220. My delegation is indeed thankful to all the colleagues
around this table who, with courage and determination,
stood for justice. We are also grateful to those delegations,
non-members of the Security Council, which, in the
exercise of specific duties, participated in our deliberations-namely, the delegations of Malaysia, Indonesia and
Afghanistan. We are grateful to the delegations of Greece,
Turkey and Bulgaria, and to their Governments, for the
statements they issued in support of the just cause of
Jordan. We are grateful to those who have participated in
conferences and who have supported genuinely and sincerely and with conviction, the just ,cause of Jordan. Our
complaint is just and therefore, I submit, the result could
not have been otherwise.

224. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Sudan. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table, and I call on him
to speak.
225. Mr. FAKHREDDINE
(Sudan): The representative of
Israel was absent from this chamber while the representative of Morocco was speaking this afternoon, at least
towards the end of his speech, That is probably why he is
so full of pride that he could take on all comers. Instead of
being full of pride, I think the representative of Israel
should pause and reflect a little on the resolution that has
just been adopted by the Security Council. The representative of Israel should feel disconsolate rather than proud

221. The presence of the honourable elected Mayor of
Jerusalem, Mr. Rouhi el-Khatib, who was with us during the
consideration of the question of Jerusalem-Jerusalem,
which is close to his heart-has not only allowed valuable
and factual information to be submitted to the Council, but
has also reminded us all of the serenity of our Holy City.
29

-disconsolate because the resolution that the Council had
just adopted has emphasized the isolation of Israel; it has
deplored and rejected and repudiated Israel’s actions.

23 1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Syria, I invite
him to take a place at the Council table, and I call on Mm
to speak.

226. I have not been here for very long, but I do
remember a time when the voice of Israel was mute in these
halls. I remember when it was very rare for an Israeli
representative to rise to exercise his right of reply when
Israeli crimes and violations were denounced in the United
Nations. Least of all did I hear-and I am referring to a time
about two years ago-the voice of the Israeli representatives
being raised against the great Powers.

232. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): It is already midnight and we
are entering into the Fourth of July holiday, The resolution
just adopted unanimously states the following in paragraph 6:

227. But now all this has changed. The voice is never still
and they have perfected a device. It is the “how-dare-you”
approach. It is directed mostly towards the Soviet Union,
mostly towards the socialist countries, but directed always
against any delegation, any Member State which criticizes
Israel. The Arab countries are, of course, a particularly
favourite target of the “how-dare-you”
approach: How dare
the Arab countries say anything about Israel? HOW dare
the Arab countries speak about, the oppression of minorities? Indeed; how dare the Sudan-he just said it-speak
about Israeli oppression?

We have heard a partial answer from the representative of
Israel, but greater authorities in Israel had already given a
full and complete answer. In The Christian ScienceMoktor
of 13 June 1969, we are informed as follows:

“Requests Israel to inform the Security Council without any further delay of its intentions with regard to the
implementation of the provisions of the present resolution.”

“At a Tel Aviv news conference June 2, Defence
Minister Moshe Dayan told this reporter that the total
number of houses destroyed is a ‘security matter’ but that
‘the figure is about 250’.

228. The representative of Israel lamented the fact that
Sudanese troops were equipped with modem weapons,
while he arrogated to the usurping Israelis the right to use
weapons against villages, to use napalm against villages. He
would say that this would be permissible because it would
be in the interest of the security of Israel. But he would
deny any security measures, no matter how lenient, no
matter how humane, to anybody else. He would certainly
deny the right to use any weapons against those in the
Sudan who are working against the unity of the country. In
the Sudan those who are working against the unity of our
country have often been found equipped with Israeli
weapons.

“Last October, Israeli Minister of Construction,
Mordechai Bentov, said 1,000 Israeli families would be
installed in new settlements inside East Jerusalem’s walled
portion.
“He said the units would include 2,500 schools, houses,
and commercial centres. Families, he added, would begin
moving in September, 1969.”
Thus, the full and complete answer has been already given
to the Security Council and we know what will happen in
September of this year. Therefore to recall paragraph 6 of
this resolution is very pertinent.

229. One could speak for a long time about the Israeli
iniquities, but I should like to emphasize that Israel, which
was, a creature of the great Powers, should have some shame
and should not speak against the great Powers in that
strident voice that it has now adopted. It is, again, a matter
of extreme amazement to my delegation that a State which
predicates its whole claim to existence on racial exclusiveness should speak about the Arab Sudanese and the
Southern Sudanese and say that the Arab Sudanese are
trying to impose their will on the Southern Sudanese, The
Israelis should not dare to point the finger of accusation in
the direction of the Sudan, The Sudan has harboured a
mixture of many ethnic strains, so much so that it is
nonsense to speak of the conflict in the Sudan as being of a
racial character.

233. The representative of Israel goes on speaking about
human rights unashamedly. There is another report from
the same newspaper, The Christian Science Monitor, of 24
May 1969, which states:
“There is not a single person on the west bank,
contends one cultured, Western-educated Palestinian
woman in Nablus, who does not have a family member, a
relative or at least a friend in prison or deported to East
Jordan. People can be arrested anytime, day or night.
They are held for months without ever appearing in court
or charges being brought against them. This is happening
all the time. An Israeli lawyer, Mrs. Fehcia Langer agrees.
She has been repeatedly threatened by fellow Israelis and
warned by military security authorities because she
defends accused Arabs . , . and other Arab internees in
court”.

230. We have had our share of troubles, because after we
became independent it was important for us to forge the
unity of the country. It was important that we should not
ahow those who did not like the Sudan to be independent
to have their way. One of those who does not like to see an
independent Sudan, who does not like to see an antiimperialist Sudan, is the State of Israel. Who are Israel’s
friends in this world? If Israel were truly to identify its
friends, it would have to count first and foremost amongst
them the Republic of South Africa, a country which stands
condemned, like Israel, before the whole world.

234. Finally, the representative of Israel again quoted
Isaiah, but he did not quote the full text which is as
follows:
“Woe to the rebellious children, saith the Lord, that
take counsel but not of me; and that cover with a
30

covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to
sin :

asked to participate in the debate. I believe that to use that
yardstick, many Zionists and Jews in this country do not
think that the United States should have been involved in
the Far East.

“2. That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not
asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the
strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of
Egypt!
’

241. I quoted something today from Mr. Litvinoff.
Mr. Tekoah should have ruled out the right of the United
States representative to be with us. He has criticized the
Soviet Union time and again; there it has no right to sit as a
judge. My friend from Pakistan and my colleague from the
Sudan and other colleagues, each one of them answered for
himself. Of course, out of courtesy to you, Mr. President,
he did not say anything about Senegal, But are we to find
fault with every person or people? There is no perfection.
Every one has some fault. If we were to find fault with each
one of you gentlemen and with us who spoke, he would
reduce the matter to the concept that we have no right to
participate because of our faults as peoples, if not as
individuals. He would be left alone to talk with God
because he considers the Jewish people the Chosen People
of God, and all of us subordinate to that people. I think he
went a little bit too far, and it is becoming childish. We
have tried to tell you time and again that we have no
rancour or malice against the Jews, and you come with
your sonorous voice, using certain words that really wound.
But we have got so used to those words that I believe if you
continue using them they will wound you, in the long run;
and I will feel pity for you because we do not want you, as
a human being, to be wounded.

“3. Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your
shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your
confusion.”
235. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): The representative of Israel
has again referred to Pakistan in abusive terms. He has
certainly been true to form. It is amusing that he quotes
Indian charges against Pakistan. I recall that last year he did
not spare India when India supported a Security Council
resolution not to his liking.
236. At the conclusion of a fruitful debate, I feel that
there are better things for me to do than to engagb in
argument with the re,presentative of Israel. I have no
appetite for his acce,nts of anger and disdain. He is entitled
to his consolation. I derive mine from contributing my little
to the work of the Security Council. What value can be
attached to a resolution moved by Pakistan here? I suggest
that he ponder the unanimous vote.
237. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I now
invite the representative of Saudi Arabia, the last speaker
on my list, to take a place at the Council table, and I call on
him to speak.

242. On this Fourth of July you got a nice gift from our
friend from the United States. He abstained. What more do
you want? Nobody around the table abstained but the
representative of the United States. What better gift on the
Fourth of July do you want? We hope that the indigenous
people of Palestine and the people of Jerusalem, after you
come to your senses in Israel, will celebrate their own
fourth of July.

238. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Allow me, first of
all, to extend my whole-hearted congratulations, it being
the Fourth of July, to my colleague, Ambassador Yost, and
to the Government of the United States and the American
people on the occasion of their national holiday. That is
why I shall be very brief. Since there will be no fireworks at
night, they should perhaps celebrate tomorrow with their
children and grandchildren and not feel too tired.

243. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I see
that the representative of the United Kingdom wishes to
speak, and I now call on him.

239. However, I always feel constrained to correct certain
distortions by Mr. Tekoah. Israelis used to speak of the
Jewish history in Palestine as far back as King David, King
Solomon and the establishment, for a short while, of Judea
and Israel. Today he said that Jewish history goes back in
Palestine 4,000 years. I must remind him that Moses lived
3,300 years ago and he was an Egyptian, Anyway, the Jews
were not known as Jews until Jacob’ moved from Ur of the
Chaldees. That is the important thing. Forget about when
Moses flourished. The fourth son of Jacob was called
Judah. But we may get lost in the forests of history late at
night, and perhaps my memory may be getting a little fuzzy
with regard to accurate dates.

244. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Before we
disperse, I would merely say that I, with many others I am
sure, greatly regret that we have had to listen to so much
bitterness tonight, and I would not wish to add to it in any
way, But reference has recently been made to the illomened date of the Fourth of July. That was the date, as
everyone knows, when certain British subjects in this
country, having become emotional and having, I regret to
say, resorted to violence, were SO unwise as to renounce the
wise and beneficial rule of His Britannic Majesty King
George III, All I can say is that I hope that tomorrow the
inhabitants of this country will spend the day sadly
reflecting on their historic error.

240. However, I must say that it was indeed foolish of
Mr. Tekoah to criticize not only the 15 members of the
Council who voted for the resolution but also all of US who

Themeetingrose at 12.15 a.m., on Friday, 4 July 1969.

31

3.

.
.
‘.,,
.

;
”

!

.

..

:.
J ,,f

.
/’
..

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United

Nations

UNITED
publications

may

your

bookslore

the world.
or Geneva.

Conrull

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler

CONSEGUIR

PlJ6LICATlONS

be obtained
or

from

write

to:

LES PUBLlCATlONS

p6blicationixdes

Nations

d&poriiairor
du monde
Nations
Unier,
Section

COMO

NATIONS

Unier

entier.
Informer-vow
des venles,
New York

PUBLICACIONES

DES

sont

en

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

NATIONS

vente

DE LAS

distribulorr
Soles

throughout

Section,

New

les

librairier

libroirie

et
ou

les

agencer

odrersez-vow

A:

UNIDAS

en venta en librerios
y carar
distribuidaror
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Secci6n

1.50 (or equivalent

York

UNIES

danr

NACIONES

and

Nations,

aupris
de votre
ou Genbve.

Las publicocioner
de Ias N&ones
Unidas
est6n
en todas
partes
del mundo.
Consulte
q IU librero
Ventar,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

bookstores

United

in other

currencies)

de
