A/RES/ES-11/6

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 March 2023

Eleventh emergency special session
Agenda item 5
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 23 February 2023
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/ES-11/L.7)]

ES-11/6.

Principles of the Charter of the United Nations underlying a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine
The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling also the obligation of all States under Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations, and to settle their
international disputes by peaceful means,
Reaffirming that no territorial acquisition resulting from the threat or use of
force shall be recognized as legal,
Recalling its relevant resolutions adopted at its eleventh emergency special
session and its resolution 68/262 of 27 March 2014,
Stressing, one year into the full-scale invasion of Ukraine, that the achievement
of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace would constitute a significant contribution
to strengthening international peace and security,
Recalling the order of the International Court of Justice of 16 March 2022, 1
Deploring the dire human rights and humanitarian consequences of the
aggression by the Russian Federation against Ukraine, including the continuous
attacks against critical infrastructure across Ukraine with devastating consequences

__________________
1

23-03722 (E)

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 4
(A/77/4), paras. 189–197.

030323

*2303722*

Principles of the Charter of the United Nations underlying a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine

A/RES/ES-11/6

for civilians, and expressing grave concern at the high number of civilian casualties,
including women and children, the number of internally displaced pers ons and
refugees in need of humanitarian assistance, and violations and abuses committed
against children,
Noting with deep concern the adverse impact of the war on global food security,
energy, nuclear security and safety and the environment,
1.
Underscores the need to reach, as soon as possible, a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in Ukraine in line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations;
2.
Welcomes and expresses strong support for the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and Member States to promote a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
Ukraine, consistent with the Charter, including the principles of sovereign equality
and territorial integrity of States;
3.
Calls upon Member States and international organizations to redouble
support for diplomatic efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
Ukraine, consistent with the Charter;
4.
Reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders,
extending to its territorial waters;
5.
Reiterates its demand that the Russian Federation immediately, completely
and unconditionally withdraw all of its military forces from the territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders, and calls for a cessation of hostilities;
6.
Demands that the treatment by the parties to the armed conflict of all
prisoners of war be in accordance with the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 12 August 1949 2 and Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, 3 and calls for the complete exchange
of prisoners of war, the release of all unlawfully detained persons and the return of
all internees and of civilians forcibly transferred and deported, including children;
7.
Calls for full adherence by the parties to the armed conflict to their
obligations under international humanitarian law to take constant care to spare the
civilian population and civilian objects, to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to those in need, and to refrain from attacking, destroying, removing or
rendering useless objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population;
8.
Also calls for an immediate cessation of the attacks on the critical
infrastructure of Ukraine and any deliberate attacks on civilian ob jects, including
those that are residences, schools and hospitals;
9.
Emphasizes the need to ensure accountability for the most serious crimes
under international law committed on the territory of Ukraine through appropriate,
fair and independent investigations and prosecutions at the national or international
level, and ensure justice for all victims and the prevention of future crimes;
10. Urges all Member States to cooperate in the spirit of solidarity to address
the global impacts of the war on food security, energy, finance, the environment and
nuclear security and safety, underscores that arrangements for a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in Ukraine should take into account these factors, and calls upon
Member States to support the Secretary-General in his efforts to address these
impacts;
__________________
2
3

2/3

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 972.
Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.
23-03722

Principles of the Charter of the United Nations underlying a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine

A/RES/ES-11/6

11. Decides to adjourn the eleventh emergency special session of the General
Assembly temporarily and to authorize the President of the General Assembly to
resume its meetings upon request from Member States.
19th plenary meeting
23 February 2023

23-03722

3/3
