S/PV.7706

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7706th meeting

Monday, 6 June 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2016/452)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-16049 (E)
*1616049*

S/PV.7706

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

(spoke in English)

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2016/452)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/452, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, and by Ambassador
Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permanent Representative of
Malaysia, in his capacity as the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler (spoke in French): The Security
Council has received the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2016/452) on the activities of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), which
details the work of the Mission since 26 February. The
report also sets out the political progress in Libya and
depicts the tragic humanitarian situation that is giving
rise to personal tragedies and collective suffering. I
therefore begin by emphasizing the humanitarian crisis
and the human tragedy afflicting Libya.
2/7

06/06/2016

In the few weeks since the preparation of the report,
more than 6,000 families from Sirte alone have fled
their homes to escape the ongoing clashes and military
operations against Da’esh, not to mention the day-today hardships of life under Da’esh. Many are taking
shelter in schools, universities and public buildings.
The number of displaced persons in Libya has reached a
staggering 435,000. The capacity of local communities
and aid agencies to host and provide assistance to them
has been stretched to breaking point.
In the month of May, 1,100 migrants died
tragically in the central Mediterranean Sea. On a single
day — 26 May — 500 migrants drowned off the coast
of Libya, including 40 children. To date, the number
of migrants who have drowned this year has increased
more than 30 per cent as compared to the same period
last year.
In a natural resources-rich country like Libya,
it is unacceptable that the health-care system is so
thoroughly dilapidated, that vital infrastructure has
been thoroughly damaged and that there are acute
shortages in health workers and essential medicines
and supplies.
All that is the consequence of the continued lack of
State authority in most parts of the country. Next week
marks six months since the signing of the Libyan Political
Agreement last December. The signing represented
the first time that the Libyan people had dared believe
again that peace and unity in Libya were attainable. It
was the first time they dared hope that guns, which had
brought untold suffering and destruction upon their
lives, could finally be silenced. Armed with nothing
but the legitimacy bestowed on them by the Libyan
Political Agreement, seven courageous members of
Libya’s Presidency Council took the bold step, on
30 March, to courageously cross the sea from Tunisia
to Tripoli. Still, the sense of hope and optimism with
which people across Libya welcomed the signing of the
Agreement and the arrival of the Presidency Council
in Tripoli stands in contrast today to their sense of
growing impatience and concern.
At this critical moment in Libya’s transition, facts
must be acknowledged as they are. It has been almost
five months since the Presidency Council submitted
a revised proposal for the Government of National
Accord. Today, Libya is still without a formally
endorsed Government. The implementation of the
16-16049

06/06/2016

The situation in Libya

Libyan Political Agreement has stalled because some
parties to the Agreement have failed to uphold their
commitments. The House of Representatives has an
integral role to play in Libya’s democratic transition.
However, it must make progress in fulfilling its
obligations under the Libyan Political Agreement to
hold a vote on endorsing the Government of National
Accord. Given the scale of the problems facing Libya’s
population, the country must have a functioning
Government, ministries and bureaucracy. The rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation and the escalating
military tensions linked to the fight against Da’esh
require boldness, determination and decisiveness.
I wish to take this opportunity to commend the
efforts of the Presidency Council over recent weeks to
seize the initiative and exercise leadership. It decided to
establish joint operation rooms to coordinate military
operations against Da’esh, and it instructed ministers
to begin work pending their formal swearing-in. Those
are steps in the right direction.
I welcome the League of Arab States declaration
of 28 May, which encouraged the acting ministers
of the Government of National Accord to work from
Tripoli until the House of Representatives formally
endorsed the Government. The League of Arab States
also recognized the Government of National Accord as
the sole legitimate Government for Libya and called
on Member States to refrain from communicating with
any other parallel executive bodies. I also commend the
efforts of the African Union and its High Representative
for Libya, former President Jakaya Kikwete. This
morning the Security Council heard a briefing by
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
(see S/PV.7705). The contributions of the European
Union to peace, development and the fight against
human trafficking are commendable and invaluable.
If there is any hope for the Libyan people to exit
from the current situation that has engulfed their
country, there must be clear lines and principles. As a
matter of immediate priority, I propose the following
six points.
First, the Libyan Political Agreement, endorsed
by the House of Representatives on 25 January,
remains the sole legitimate framework for managing
the remainder of Libya’s political transition until a
permanent constitution is adopted.

S/PV.7706

Secondly, the House of Representatives remains
the institution to endorse and swear in the Government
of National Accord. However, it must do so. After two
unsuccessful attempts, in February and April, it is high
time that the Speaker assume his responsibilities to
convene a parliamentary session free of intimidation
and threat, in order to take a vote on the proposed
Government of National Accord. I also suggest that the
House of Representatives request the League of Arab
States, the African Union, the United Nations and other
members of the international community to attend
those sessions as observers.
Thirdly, it is vital that the Presidency Council works
in its entirety, with all nine members. I encourage the
members who do are not attending the meetings to
rejoin the Presidency Council.
Fourthly, the Presidency Council will need to move
quickly to meet the basic needs of the Libyan people.
Immediate steps are needed to ensure that shortages in
cash availability, food and electricity are satisfactorily
addressed without further delay. The United Nations
and its partners in the international community are
ready to assist.
Fifthly, the Presidency Council is the sole
legitimate recipient of international security assistance
in its capacity as supreme commander of a united
Libyan army.
Sixthly, averting hostilities among the different
Libyan security actors involved in the fight against
Da’esh requires an inclusive interim security
arrangement, including temporary command-andcontrol arrangements for the army. There simply can be
no half-solutions.
There was considerable progress over recent days
and weeks in the fight against Da’esh. I commend all
those who have fought against terrorism in all parts of
the country, including in Benghazi and Derna. I deplore
the deaths of so many brave sons of Libya. Last week,
I visited Misrata and its hospital, with its wounded. I
have seen at first-hand the resolve and the commitment
to fight Da’esh.
However, I am also concerned about the military
situation in the country. The oil crescent region has
witnessed a build-up of military formations. Libyan
army units have moved into the area from the east.
Forces under the Presidency Council have been engaged
in clashes with Da’esh in areas west of Sirte. However,

16-160493/7

S/PV.7706

The situation in Libya

uncoordinated military actions on the ground have
raised the spectre of direct clashes among the different
forces fighting Daesh. The possibility of renewed
military escalation in Libya should be a matter of grave
concern for all. Libyans must not fight each other. They
must fight united against the common enemy.
Our Mission has been actively engaging with
all sides to help build consensus around a unified
security architecture abd gas assisted the Presidency
Council with expertise and good offices. However,
we must recognize that Libya is a country awash
with weapons — 20 million pieces of weaponry in a
land of 6 million inhabitants. Those weapons do not
fall from the sky, but come in increasingly through
illegal shipments by sea and by land. Those arms fuel
the conflict. The shipments must end, if there is to be
any serious hope of bringing peace to Libya. Weapons
should go only to regular forces after approval by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
The volatile situation in Libya is prone to lead to
further war crimes. All military actors in Libya must
act within the bounds of international humanitarian
law, and those who do not must be brought to account.
I recently visited the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to express
my support for the role that her Office can play in the
fight against impunity. The work of the ICC is needed
in Libya now more than ever. I ask all Member States
that share my concerns for the ongoing international
crimes in Libya to provide the Office of the Prosecutor
with all the required information — but, above all, with
financial resources to prosecute new crimes.
I would like to thank the Council for its close
engagement on Libya and for its support for a political
resolution there. As the report before the Council shows,
there is an urgent need for UNSMIL to re-establish its
presence in Libya.
The establishment of regular UNSMIL flights to
Tripoli has facilitated some direct contact with key
partners. However, such intervals of quick engagement
are insufficient. It is likely that the request for assistance
will increase as ministries and the bureaucracy become
functional again. It is essential that UNSMIL be on
the ground and ready to meet the immediate needs and
priorities of Libyans.
Allow me to add a few words in Arabic on the
occasion of the holy month of Ramadan.
4/7

06/06/2016

(spoke in Arabic)
Today is the first day of Ramadan, a month
traditionally associated with a commitment to peace,
justice, compassion and reconciliation. I hope that it
will in fact be a month of dialogue. I wish the people of
Lybia Ramadan Kareem.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Kobler
for his briefing and for his commitment.
I now to give the floor to Ambassador Ibrahim
in his capacity as the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011).
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): In accordance with
sub-paragraph (e) of paragraph 24 of resolution 1970
(2011), of 26 February 2011, I have the honour to report
to the Security Council on the work of the Committee
established by that resolution. The report covers the
period from 3 March to 6 June, during which time the
members of the Committee met three times in informal
consultations. At the outset, I would like to highlight
the Committee’s activity relating to the implementation
of resolution 2146 (2014).
Following a request from the Permanent
Representative of Libya to the United Nations on
26 April, on 27 April the Committee added a vessel
attempting to illicitly export crude oil from Libya to
a State on its sanctions list. Prior to the designation,
the Committee had written to the Member States
concerned to seek additional information on the vessel.
The reported State of destination, Malta, and the flag
State, India, responded in a fully cooperative manner,
on 27 and 29 April, and on 3 May, respectively.
After the designation, the vessel returned to Libya
and offloaded its cargo at Zawiya port. Promptly
thereafter, pursuant to a delisting request submitted
by the flag State on 9 May, and having received an
indication from the Permanent Mission of Libya to the
United Nations that it had no objection to the vessel’s
delisting, the Committee removed the vessel from its
sanctions list on 12 May. That was the first application
of resolution 2146 (2014), involving the cooperation
of Member States and Committee members and the
assistance of the Panel of Experts.
I would now like to provide a snapshot, in
chronological order, of the other activities of the
Committee during the reporting period.
16-16049

06/06/2016

The situation in Libya

S/PV.7706

In informal consultations on 3 March, the
Committee discussed the final report (see S/2016/209)
and recommendations of the Panel of Experts submitted
in accordance with resolution 2213 (2015). Since the
report is publicly available, I will not summarize its
findings. In general, the report was well received. The
main issues raised by Committee members during
the discussion of the final report included reported
violations of the arms embargo and how to enhance
the implementation of that measure, the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters to Libya, the loss of value of certain
frozen assets and how to avoid such occurrence, the
targeting of individuals that can be subject to sanctions
as per the relevant Security Council resolutions,
and the Panel’s limited access to Libya. Of the 26
recommendations, the Committee agreed to take
follow-up action on 4 and agreed to revert to 10 at a later
stage. One recommendation, pertaining to designation
of individuals, first requires action by a sponsoring
Member State. Another recommendation, pertaining
to the adoption of an implementation assistance notice
on the assets freeze, first requires the lifting of a hold
by a Committee member. Yet another recommendation
concerning the management of expert groups was
deemed as falling outside the Committee’s mandate.
The remaining nine recommendations were addressed
to the Security Council.

of Experts on 28 April, reporting a possible transfer
of military materiel to Libya in violation of the arms
embargo. On 23 May, the Committee received a request
for guidance from Egypt on the assets-freeze measure,
to which it responded on 3 June.

On 15 March, the Committee approved a
notification, submitted by the United Kingdom under
sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 19 of resolution 1970
(2011), in relation to the assets-freeze measure after
the hold placed by a member of the Committee was
lifted. On 31 March, the Council adopted resolution
2278 (2016), which extends the mandate of the Panel
of Experts until 31 July 2017. Subsequently, on 6 April
and 16 May, the Committee received from the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs proposals for
experts to serve on the extended Panel. The Committee
approved five experts on 28 April, and a sixth expert
on 23 May.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ibrahim for his very comprehensive briefing.

Following up on a recommendation contained in
the final report of the Panel of Experts, the Committee
updated some existing entries in its sanctions list
on 1 April, and issued a corresponding press release
and note verbale to all Member States. On 27 April,
the Committee received a letter from the Permanent
Representative of Turkey to the United Nations, in
relation to the final report of the Panel of Experts.
The Committee also received a letter from the Panel

On behalf of the Government of Libya, I would like
to commend the Security Council’s intention to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), a step that should be taken next few
days by the Security Council. It is also our hope that
UNSMIL will be able to move in full force to Tripoli as
soon as possible and that it will be able to work more
actively over the next few months to fulfil its mandate,
in particular to make progress on the implementation

Finally, the Committee met twice in informal
consultations on 3 June, the first time to hear a
presentation from the newly appointed Panel of Experts
on its programme of work under the extended mandate,
and the second time in follow-up on a recommendation
contained in the final report of the Panel, namely, to
hold a joint discussion with the Sanctions Committee
on the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and Al-Qaida. During the first discussion, the Panel
informed the Committee of its intended areas of priority
and focus, and the Committee members provided their
feedback. In the second discussion, following brief
interventions by both the Panel of Experts and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
Committee members emphasized the added value of
cooperation and information-sharing between the two
expert groups to enable the Security Council to gain
a comprehensive view of the threat of ISIL and other
terrorist groups in Libya. Committee members agreed
that a second joint meeting in which the two expert
groups would jointly brief the two Committees would
be useful.

I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating France on its accession
to the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June. I would also like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his very valuable briefing. I would also like to extend
my gratitude to Mr. Ramlan Bin Ibrahim for his update
on the work of the Sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

16-160495/7

S/PV.7706

The situation in Libya

of the Libyan Political Agreement and provide the
necessary assistance and support for State institutions
to be set up and to be up and running.
In the light of the total failure of Libyan
Governments over the past five years — Governments
that did not respond to the aspirations of the citizens of
Libya themselves — and against the backdrop of the
large-scale welcome for the Libyan Political Agreement
and the approval by the House of Representatives of
the Agreement on 23 January, despite some of the
challenges it faced, I would say that unity among our
partners when it comes to an international consensus
in support of the Government of National Accord is
crucial at this time.
It is a very positive sign that Security Council
resolutions have referred to the Government of
National Accord as the sole legitimate Government in
Libya. The resolutions also call upon Member States
to refrain from communicating with any other parallel
institution. However, that is not enough. More still needs
to be done because the success of the Government of
National Accdord depends upon the robust and honest
implementation of the provisions of the Libyan Political
Agreement, beginning with the implementation of the
security arrangements and the setting up of an armed
force to secure the city of Tripoli, in cooperation with
the police. Such a force must be properly equipped
and capable and should enjoy the full support of the
international community in order to be able to counter
any threat posed by one or more armed groups. Such a
force would allow the Government of National Accord
to move freely within the capital.
I reviewed the report (S/2016/452) of the SecretaryGeneral that is before the Security Council, and I
am able to say that it has some shortcomings at the
professional level when it comes to the way it describes
some aspects that are crucial to the Libyan political
scene. I made that point in identical letters addressed
to the President of the Security Council and to the
Secretary-General on 2 June, which will be issued as
document S/2016/508. I would like to reiterate that
the Secretariat should refrain from using unrealistic
terminology and erroneous or fictitious names, because
that only further complicates the political mix in Libya
and does not allow us to ease tensions and overcome
the impasse we are in today in order to fully implement
the Libyan Political Agreement. By way of example, it
is premature to talk today about forces controlled by
the Government of National Accord. Such a reference
6/7

06/06/2016

can be found in the report of the Secretary-General,
which states:
“As with previous administrations, a key
challenge facing the new transitional authorities in
Libya is the urgent need to address the widespread
proliferation of weapons and the large number of
armed groups. Although nominally under State
authority, the majority of these groups continue
to operate outside the effective control of the
Libyan State and Government. It is critical that the
Libyan authorities put in place a viable plan that
paves the way for the State to gradually exercise
an unqualified monopoly over the use of force as
outlined in the relevant provisions of the Libyan
Political Agreement. This includes the development
of professional State security institutions, the
successful demobilization and integration or
reintegration of fighters, and the implementation of
effective defence and police reform programmes.”
(S/2016/452, para. 82)
It is not enough for armed groups to declare their
support for the Government of National Accord for
them to be considered as having been placed under
the Government’s authority. That requires a binding
agreement in which the armed groups wholeheartedly
declare their approval of the Libyan Political Agreement
and the provisions set out therein, including the security
arrangements. The armed groups also must make it
abundantly clear that they intend to hand over their
weapons and that each member intends to join State
institutions. The majority of Libyans doubt that the
armed groups will accept those terms. In the absence
of such agreement, and given the lack of a professional
security environment, as indicated by the report of the
Secretary-General, such terrorist groups will continue
to pose a threat to the Government of National Accord
and the Government might indeed become a target for
terrorist activities or extortion, as has been the case
with other Governments, if the Government stops
financially supporting the armed groups.
It is crucial that the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord, together with the full
support of UNSMIL, establish a database containing
information on armed groups, their leaders, their
locations and lists of their members who wish to join
the State’s military and civilian protection forces to
facilitate their integration in the institutions of the
Libyan State.
16-16049

06/06/2016

The situation in Libya

UNSMIL is the sponsor of the Libyan Political
Agreement, and therefore has a key role to play as an
honest broker of the Agreement. UNSMIL must pay
attention and respond to each and every violation of
the Agreement and not simply sweep them under the
carpet, because any violation of the Agreement by any
party might encourage other parties to undermine its
implementation. If Council members want proof of
what I mean, they can look at the former members of the
General National Congress who have set up their own
State council and have appointed some controversial
persons to it.
UNSMIL needs to change the way it has been
operating and needs to become more actively involved
in events in Libya and provide suggestions and advice,
even if it is not directly asked for its advice. However,
UNSMIL’s response to our requests for support is
a herculean task, because of the absence of State
institutions or expertise in the different sectors of
the Libyan State, as we have seen over the past five
years. Many people in charge have not had access to
expert advice and did not even know what they were
actually seeking. They have not been able to envision
a functioning State structure for the team working for
them.
The implementation of the Libyan Political
Agreement, in accordance to an agreed timeline, and
support for the establishment of State institutions
need to be at the heart of UNSMIL’s mandate over
the next few months. Such a mandate needs to focus
on peacekeeping and a sustainable stability plan for
Libya, the elements of which were set out in a letter
(S/2014/632) dated 27 August 2014.

S/PV.7706

The Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord has a very difficult task before it.
The Council can be successful in its role only if its
members disregard the context of their appointment
and work in a unified way and collectively assume
responsibilty. They must put an end to institutional
divisions by replacing former leaders of institutions
with other leaders, in particular leaders of financial
and monitoring institutions, on the basis of who has the
most experience.
It is our hope that the efforts currently under way
will be fruitful, that the city of Sirte will be liberated and
that the presence of Da’esh there will end in the next two
weeks. But to date we have seen no plan for the city of
Sirte in the aftermath of its liberation, a plan that should
include the facilitated return of displaced persons, the
return to functioning of local authorities and security
entities, and the departure of armed groups from Sirte.
This is a crucial stage, because we do not want to find
Al-Qaida in Sirte after Da’esh leaves. We do not wish to
see a recurrence of the reprehensible practices carried
out by armed groups in various Libyan cities in the
past, including the confiscation of State property and
that of citizens, and human rights violations.
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
must guard against such violations and prevent them,
working jointly with the Presidential Council of the
national unity Government.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
the members of the Security Council to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

16-160497/7
