S/2012/139

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 March 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 7 March 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit the communication dated 6 March 2012, which I
have received from Mr. Abdurrahim el-Keib, Prime Minister of Libya (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-25520 (E) 070312 090312

*1225520*

S/2012/139

Annex to the letter dated 7 March 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
[Original: Arabic]
I have the honour to convey to you in my own name and on behalf of the
transitional Government of my country our heartfelt thanks and gratitude for the
sterling efforts exerted by the United Nations Mission in Support of Libya in
assisting the Libyan people to reconstruct their country at an extremely sensitive
stage of their history.
While we are most appreciative of what the Mission has achieved during the
first phase of its work, we look forward to even greater support in facing the
momentous challenges that lie before the Libyan State as it seeks to fulfil the
aspirations of its people. We are therefore encouraged to request an extension of the
Mission’s mandate for one year, in order to support Libyan efforts to undertake the
following:
– To manage the process of democratic transition, which requires technical
advice and the provision of assistance in order to facilitate the electoral
process in Libya and the preparation of the new Libyan constitution.
– To strengthen the role of the law and to reform and build a transparent system
of criminal justice, with a view to ensuring that detainees receive humane
treatment and underpinning national reconciliation.
– To reform and reinstate national security by implementing a national plan for
disarmament and the reintegration of ex-combatants, and by developing
security institutions.
– To recall arms, and secure and protect the Libyan borders.
– To coordinate and facilitate international assistance and the building of
Government capacities in accordance with the needs of the various sectors.
– To exert all other efforts that will contribute to the transition from a state of
revolution to a State.
I am happy to inform you, further, that the Government has enacted laws
concerning the re-establishment, arming and training of the national army, with a
view to ensuring that it is capable of protecting the country’s security and guarding
its borders. We should therefore like to request the Security Council to lift the arms
embargo which was imposed on Libya pursuant to Council resolutions.
I should like to take this opportunity to once again thank both you and the
team for all the efforts that have been exerted to assist the new Libya and to build a
State based on justice and the law.
Accept, Sir, the assurances of my highest consideration.
(Signed) Mr. Abdurrahim el-Keib
Prime Minister

2

12-25520
