24

General Assembly-Thirteenth Session

------------------------------------------

( c) Raise family levels of living by, inter alia, avoiding an inequitable distribution of national income.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
1259 (XW). Technical assistance to Afghanistan
The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 689 H (XXVI) of 28 July 1958,
Welcoming the adoption by Afghanistan, which was
formerly an important opium-producing country, of the
law of Kaus 2, 1336 (24 November 1957) prohibiting
opium cultivation in Afghanistan,
Believing that technical assistance in the field of economic and social development is necessary for the full
execution of the policy incorporated in the above-mentioned law and for minimizing serious economic and
social consequences,
Recognizing that the success of Afghanistan in this
field requires international co-operation,
1. Expresses iis appreciation of the policy adopted by
Afghanistan ;
2. Requests the relevant techni~al assistance organs
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies concerned to pay due attention to requests from the Government of Afghanistan for technical assistance in this
field.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
1260 (Xlll). Co-ordination of results of scientific
research
The General Assembly,
Noting the remarkable advances made in recent years
in the natural sciences, pure and applied,
Believing that the United Nations and the specialized
agencies should stimulate and encourage further the
general direction of scientific research toward the peaceful ends of economic progress and human welfare, and
in the interest of peace and international co-operation,
Recalling its resolution 1164 (XII) of 26 November
1957 on the development of international co-operation
in the fields of science, culture and education, and Economic and Social Council resolution 695 (XXVI) of
31 July 1958 on the survey which is to be prepared on
international relations and exchanges in the fields of
education, science and culture,
Recognizing the responsibility of the United Nations
for co-ordinating the activities of its organs and those
of the specialized agencies in accordance with Articles
58 and 63 of the Charter of the United Nations, and
noting that the Economic and Social Council has requested the United Nations and five of the specialized
agencies to undertake appraisals of their activities and
programmes for the period 1959 to 1964,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the other specialized agencies
concerned with the peaceful application of science, as
well as the International Atomic Energy Agency, to
arrange for a survey to be made on the main trends of

inquiry in the field of the natural sciences and the dissemination and application for peaceful ends of such
scientific knowledge, and on the steps which might be
taken by the United Nations, the specialized agencies
and the International Atomic Energy Agency towards
encouraging the concentration of such efforts upon the
most urgent problems, having regard to the needs of the
various countries; and requests the Secretary-General,
in arranging for such a survey, to take into account the
report of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization to be prepared in response
to Economic and Social Council resolution 695
(XXVI);
2. Invites the above-mentioned organizations to cooperate with the Secretary-General in this connexion;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
this survey to the Economic and Social Council at its
thirtieth session for comment and any appropriate recommendations ;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
transmit this survey to the General Assembly, together
with its comments and recommendations.

780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
1261 (Xlll). Advisory services in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Taking note of chapter VII, section X, of the report
of the Economic and Social Council,1
Recalling its resolution 926 (X) of 14 December 1955
requesting the Economic and Social Council to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirteenth session an
evaluation of the projects carried out under the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights
and recommendations concerning the future of the programme,
Recalling also its resolution 1163 (XII) of 26 November 1957, in which the General Assembly noted with
satisfaction the success of the seminar held in August
1957 at Bangkok (Thailand) and expressed the hope
that seminars on the status of women would be held as
frequently as possible in the future under the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights,
Noting with satisfaction the important results
achieved at the two seminars held during 1958 under
the programme of advisory services in the field of human
rights,
Having considered the plan presented by the Secretary-General to the Economic and Social Council for
holding seminars in the year 1959,2 and Council resolution 684 (XXVI) of 21 July 1958 approving this plan,
l. Expresses its satisfaction at the manner in which
the projects have been carried out under the programme
of advisory services in the field of human rights;
2. Approves the plan presented by the SecretaryGeneral to the Economic and Social Council for holding
seminars in the year 1959 and recommends that, if
possible, three seminars should be held in 1959, taking
• Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Twenty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 12, document E/3075/
Add.l.

Re11olntion11 adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

note of Council resolution 684 (XXVI) requesting the
Secretary-General to keep in mind the possibility of
organizing in the future an international seminar on a
subject of universal interest.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.

1283 (XIII). International Health and Medical
Research Year
The General Assembly,
Considering that active international co-operation and
the exchange of knowledge and experience in the field
of health and medical research are important factors in
improving the health and welfare of mankind,
Desiring to encourage further practical steps to combat widely prevalent diseases, such as malaria, tuberculosis, smallpox, cholera, cancer, cardiovascular ailments,
leprosy and poliomyelitis, which still represent a serious
threat to the health of the people,
Believing that these aims could be greatly furthered
by the organization of an International Health and
Medical Research Year,
I. Invites the World Health Organization to consider, in accordance with article IV of the Agreement
between the United Nations and the World Health Organization,3 the recommendation to organize, primarily
on a national basis, an International Health and Medical Research Year, preferably in 1961, and to adopt
methods for intensifying international co-operation in
this field with a view to, inter alia:
(a) 'Disseminating the knowledge gained from experience in combating these diseases ;
( b) Substantially expanding, co-ordinating and organizing joint scientific research in the prevention and
treatment of these diseases and in the rehabilitation of
patients;
( c) Exchanging experience in the use of atomic
energy in medicine ;
(d) Organizing popular health education on a broad
scale;
( e) Providing assistance to under-developed countries, including equipment, medicine, special literature
and qualified specialists ;
2. Further invites the "\Vorld Health Organization to
transmit its views on this matter to the Economic and
Social Council at its twenty-eighth session and to the
General Assembly at its fourteenth session.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
1284 (XIll). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the report of the Bnited Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,4
Bearing in mind that a substantial international effort
still needs to be made in order to achieve solutions for
'United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 19 (1948), No. 115.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/3828/Rev.1) and Supplement No.
llA (A/3828/Rev.1/Add.1).

zs

non-settled refugees, and in particular for those living
in camps,
Having considered the decisions taken by the Executive Committee of the United Nations Refugee Fund5
at its ninth (special) session pursuant to General Assembly resolution 1166 (XII) of 26 November 1957,
1. Welcomes the recommendation of the Executive
Committee of the United Nations Refugee Fund that
the protection activities of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees should be increased;
2. Takes note of the programme recommended for
1959 by the Executive Committee of the United Nations
Refugee Fund;
3. Notes that the High Commissioner has been authorized by the Executive Committee of the United
Nations Refugee Fund to appeal for the funds required
f9r the programme ;
4. Appeals to Governments of States Members of the
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies
to support the High Commissioner's programme, either
through financial contributions or through offers of resettlement or both.
d
t.
782 n p1enary mee ing,
5 December 1958.

1285 (XIll). World Refugee Year

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 4 together with the
resolution adopted by the Executive Committee of the
United Nations Refugee Fund at its ninth (special)
session on 26 September 1958,6
Convinced of the need to make a further world-wide
effort to help resolve the world refugee problem,
Having considered the proposal for a World Refugee
Year to begin in June 1959,
Noting that this proposal has two aims, namely:
(a) To focus interest on the refugee problem and to
encourage additional financial contributions from Governments, voluntary agencies and the general public for
its solution,
( b) To encourage additional opportunities. for permanent refugee solutions, through voluntary repatriation, resettlement or integration, on a purely humanitarian basis and in accordance with the freely expressed
wishes of the refugees themselves,
1. Urges States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to co-operate, in
accordance with the national wishes and needs of each
country and from a humanitarian point of view, in promoting a World Refugee Year as a practical means of
securing increased assistance for refugees throughout
the world;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take such steps
as he may think fit to assist in the promotion of a World
Refugee Year in accordance with the present resolution.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.
• Ibid., Supplement No. lJA (A/3828/Rev.1/Add.1), para. 21.
• Ibid., Supplement No. 11A (A/3828/Rev.l/Add.l), appendix II.
