242

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

with the Declaration contained in General Assembly reso­
lution 1514 (XV), which fully applies to the British Virgin
Islands;
4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to create such conditions in the Ter­
ritory as will enable the people of the British Virgin Islands
to exercise freely and without interference their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in accord­
ance with General Assembly resolution I 514 (XV), as well
as all other relevant resolutions of the Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the
British Virgin Islands themselves to determine their future
political status in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration,
takes note of the general elections held in the Territory on
l l November 1983 and reaffirms the importance of foster­
ing an awareness among the people of the Territory of the
possibilities open to them in the exercise of their right to
self-determination;
6. Notes the continuing commitment of the territorial
Government to the goal of economic diversification, par­
ticularly in the areas of agriculture, fisheries and small
industries, and reiterates its call upon the administering
Power, in consultation with the local authorities, to inten­
sify its efforts in this regard;
7. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalienable
right of the people of the British Virgin Islands to the
enjoyment of their natural resources by taking effective
measures to ensure their right to own and dispose of those
resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
8. Urges the specialized agencies and other organiza­
tions of the United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
take or intensify measures to accelerate progress in the
social and economic life of the British Virgin Islands and,
in that regard, notes with appreciation the contribution
which the United Nations Development Programme con­
tinues to make to the development of the Territory;
9. Notes with satisfaction the admission of the British
Virgin Islands as an associate member of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Car­
ibbean and its subsidiary body, the Caribbean Develop­
ment and Co-operation Committee, as well as of various
other international and regional organizations, and calls
upon the administering Power to facilitate further the par­
ticipation of the British Virgin Islands in those
organizations;
IO. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the British Virgin Islands at an appro­
priate time should be kept under review;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to the British
Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 Decemher 1984
18 Ibid.. chaps. IV, V and XXII

39/35. Question of the Cayman Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Cayman Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 18
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1 960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
the Cayman Islands, including in particular its resolution
38/45 of 7 December I983,
Noting the statement of the representative of the admin­
istering Power relating to the Territory, 13 in which he said
that his Government would fully respect the wishes of the
people of the Cayman Islands in determining the future
political status of the Territory,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the
Territory,
Noting that although the main sectors of the economy of
the Cayman Islands, specifically tourism, international
finance and real estate, continued to sustain some degree
of growth during the period under review, they have
shown signs of being affected by the world recession,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strength­
ening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Cayman
lslands; 19
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
Cayman Island_s to self-determination and independence
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, con­
tained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exer­
cise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration contained in General Assembly reso­
lution 1514 (XV), which fully applies to the Cayman
Islands;
4. Notes with appreciation the participation of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
as the administering Power, in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to the Cayman Islands, thereby
enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful
examination of the situation in the Territory, with a view
to accelerating the process of decolonization for the pur­
pose of the full implementation of the Declaration;
5. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the adminis­
tering Power to create such conditions in the Cayman
1" !hid.. chap. XXII.

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Islands as will enable the people of the Territory to exer­
cise freely and without interference their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), as well as all
other relevant resolutions of the Assembly;
6. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the
Cayman Islands themselves to determine their future
political status in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration
and reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness
among the people of the Territory of the possibilities open
to them in the exercise of their right to self-determination;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power for the economic and social development of the
Territory and urges it, in co-operation with the territorial
Government, to render continuing support, to the fullest
extent possible, to the development of programmes of eco­
nomic diversification that will benefit the people of the
Territory;
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalienable
right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of
their natural resources by taking effective measures to
ensure their right to own and dispose of those resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future devel­
opment and, in that connection, to continue its efforts to
persuade the Government of the United States of America
to relax its ban on the importation of turtle products from
the Cayman Islands;
9. Calls upon the specialized agencies and other organ­
izations of the United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
continue to take all necessary measures to accelerate pro­
gress in the social and economic life of the Cayman Islands
and, in that respect, notes with appreciation the continued
contribution of the United Nations Development Pro­
gramme to the development of the Territory;
10. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the Cayman Islands at an appropriate
time should be kept under review;
l l. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to the Cayman
Islands at an appropriate time and in consultation with the
administering Power, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984
39/36. Question of Montserrat
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Montserrat,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 20
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Montserrat, including in particular its resolution 38/46 of
7 December 1983,
20 Ibid., chaps. IV and XXIII.
21 See NAC.1091769, para 9.

243

Noting the statement of the representative of the admin­
istering Power relating to the Territory, 13 in which he said
that his Government would respect the wishes of the
people of Montserrat in determining the future political
status of the Territory,
Noting the statement of the Government of Montserrat
that independence was inevitable and desirable and that
the Government would work towards that end,21
Reaffirming the responsibility of the administering Pow­
er for the economic and social development of the
Territory.
Noting with concern that during the period under review
the general slowdown in the world economy also affected
Montserrat, particularly in its vital sectors, such as
tourism, construction, agriculture and manufacturing,
Welcoming the establishment of a Civil Service Training
Centre by the Government of Montserrat and noting that
the review of the organization and training needs of the
civil service was expected to be completed in 1984,
Welcoming the contribution to the development of the
Territory by the United Nations Development Programme
and those specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system operating in Montserrat and
noting in particular the increase envisaged by the Pro­
gramme for the period 1982-1986,
Aware of the special problems facing the Territory by
virtue of its isolation, small size. limited resources and
lack of infrastructure.
Recalling the dispatch. in I97 5 and I982. of United
Nations visiting missions to the Territory.
Mind/iii that visiting missions provide an effective
means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Montserrat;22
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Montserrat to self-determination and independence in
conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1 514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exer­
cise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration contained in General Assembly reso­
lution 1 514 (XV), which fully applies to Montserrat;
4. Notes with appreciation the continued participation
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ire­
land. as the administering Power. in the work of the Spe­
cial Committee in regard to Montserrat, thereby enabling
it to conduct a more informed and meaningful examina­
tion of the situation in the Territory with a view to accel­
erating the process of decolonization for the purpose of the
full implementation of the Declaration;
5. Reaerates that it is the responsibility of the adminis­
tering Power to create such conditions in Montserrat as
will enable its people to exercise freely and without inter­
ference. from a well-informed standpoint as to the avail­
able options, their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence in accordance with General Assembly
22 Offiua/ Record, or t/J(' (,"ene,·.i/ ISSl'lllhl,·, J'hirt1·- ninth Session. Supple­
ml'tl/ \'o i•' (AJ:\9/2:i). chap. X\111
