UNITEDNATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

NEW

RECORDS
YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1767) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda

....................

1
1

.................

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 13 April 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l1264).............................................

,

Page

1

;
L

:

S/PV. 1767

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEENHUNDREDANDSIXTY-SEVENTHMEETING
Held in New York
President: Mr. Talib ELSHIBIB

on Tuesday,

16 April

1974, at 3.30 pm.

the understanding that they will be invited to take a place
at the Council table at the appropriate moment.

(Iraq).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic ‘of Cameroon and the United States of America,

At the invitation of the fiesident, Mr. I. Fahmy (Egypt),
Mr. F. Al-Sayegh (Kuwait), Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia)
and Mr. H. Kelani (Syrian Arab Republic) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
3. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): With the work of the special
session of the General Assembly in full swing, the Security
Council has been convened at the initiative of the nonaligned and developing countries to consider some important questions; it is again compelled to examine the
question of the latest act of aggression by Israel against the
peace-loving State of Lebanon. It is clear from the
statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon
[1766th meeting/, and from the letter from the representative of Lebanon that during the night of 12/13 April
1974 Israeli armed forces made a new incursion into
Lebanese territory.
Under cover of darkness, with their
usual furtiveness, armed detachments of Israeli troops, on
the orders of their Government and their High Command,
deliberately invaded the territory of the sovereign State of
Lebanon, killed and wounded several Lebanese civilians,
destroyed 31 dwellings in six peaceful Lebanese villages,
seized 13 Lebanese and abducted them to Israel.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1767)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 13 April 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1264)
The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
‘The situation In the Middle East:
Letter dated 13 April 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/11264)

4. This criminal act of the Israeli aggressors is yet another
link in the chain of the crimes they have already committed
and continue to commit. The Israeli extremists are striving,
by means of terrorism elevated to the level of State policy
and by means of intimidation and aggression, to carry out
their predatory plans for the annexation and appropriation
of foreign lands and the Israelization of the Arab territories
they seized in 1967. All this is a flagrant violation of the
principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of
territory by means of war or the use of force, a principle
organized and affirmed by the United Efations.

1 The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at its 1766th meeting, and with the
consent of the Council, I propose to invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel, under the relevant Articles
of the Charter and in accordance with- rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the Council’s discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
(Lebanon) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places ar the
Council table.

5. During the past six years the Security Council has
already considered questions relating to Israel’s acts of
aggression against Lebanon more than 10 times. Today, in
its consideration of this new act of international banditry
committed by Israel, the Council cannot but take into
account the long list of Israel’s crimes of aggression against
Lebanon, which it has considered in the past.

2. The PRFSIDENT: In addition, in accordance with the
decision also taken at the same meeting, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Egypt, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the Syrian Arab Republic
to participate, without the right to vote, in the discussion,
under the relevant Articles of the Charter and in accordance
with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. I would
request the representatives mentioned to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on

6. ‘In recent years the Council has warned Israel many
times that, if its acts of aggression against Lebanon
continue, the Council will consider the question of adopting adequate, effective measures, in accordance with the
1

relevant provisions of the Charter, to ensure that its
resolutions are carried out. However, the Government of
Israel, as can be seen from the fact that it officially
sanctioned this latest armed incursion into Lebanese territory, is continuing to defy the Council and violate its
decisions, counting on the assistance and support of its
protectors in the Council.

course of international contacts and meetings, and against
acts of violence, which serve no positive purpose and bring
about the deaths of innocent people. In an equally firm and
decisive manner, we oppose any attempts to influence the
policy of States by means of inhuman acts of terrorism.
12. The Soviet .Union is equally decisive in its opposition
to the idea that acts of a terrorist nature committed by
certain factions or irresponsible individuals can be used by
an aggressor State to justify the policy of aggression and the
terrorism pursued by Israel as part of its State policy. We
condemn in the most categorical manner the barbarous and
piratical incursions and attacks inflicted by one State on a
neighbouring State under any pretext, for no pretexts can
serve to justify attacks, arbitrary actions and banditry
committed by one State against another. We strongly
oppose the “law of the jungle” in relations among States.
elms we strongly condemn the terrorist methods used by
Israel in its international policy and its elevation of
terrorism to the level of State policy.

7. As the representative of Lebanon rightly stressed in his
letter and his statement, the repeated criminal acts of the
Israeli militarists in Lebanon are carried out as part of the
Israeli Government’s policy of intimidation and State
terrorism towards Lebanon.
8. We cannot overlook the fact that this latest nocturnal,
gangster-like operation carried out by the Israeli annexationists against Lebanon, which caused loss of life and the
destruction of dwellings, is commended in every possible
way by the Israeli Government, as if it were a “heroic
action”. Attempts are made to cover up and justify this act
of international banditry by references to so-called “retaliatory measures”. Attention has already been drawn here to
the statement, unprecedented in its cynicism, made on 13
April by Moshe Dayan, the Israeli Minister of Defence, in
which on behalf of the Israeli Government he threatened to
continue the acts of aggression against Lebanon. In this
statement Dayan, on behalf of the Israeli Government,
threatened Lebanon-an
independent, sovereign State, a
Member of the United Nations-with
the destruction and
devastation of the whole of the southern part of the
country. Frightful and monstrous is the barbarity of the
second half of the twentieth century.

13. The Israeli Government’s assertions that the piratical
incursion of Israeli troops into Lebanese territory, the
murder and abduction of Lebanese citizens and the
destruction of peaceful Lebanese villages were carried out
as “retaliatory measures” against the activities of a Palestinian organization provide no justification and do not
stand up to critical analysis. The Council, as we all
remember, has decisively condemned any attempts by Israel
to cover up and justify this aggression and any other attacks
on other States by references to what it calls “reprisals”. In
this connexion we must note in particular that in resolution
270 (1969) of 26 August 1969, which indeed is concerned
with Israel’s acts of aggression against Lebanon at that time,
the Council decisively condemned and rejected military
reprisals. A similar statement concerning the intolerability
and inadmissibility of military reprisals on the part of Israel
against another Arab country-Jordan-appears
in resolution 248 (1968) adopted in March 1968. Thus the Council
has clearly and specifically condemned Israel for the
military crimes, which Israel has gone to any lengths to
justify, with its references -to what it calls “retaliatory
measures”.

9. Such statements and the armed attacks of the Israeli
militarists call to mind the worst times of the domination
of the Hitlerites over the foreign territories which they had
temporarily occupied during the Second World War. They
pursued a scorched earth policy and sought the total
destruction of a peaceful population on the pretext of
“retaliatory measures” against the activities of patriots.
10. Such actions and statements on the part of the Israeli
Government are all the more intolerable and inadmissible
since, as has been convincingly shown in the letter dated 12
April from the representative of Lebanon /S/11263],
Lebanon bears no responsibility for the events which took
place on 11 April in the Israeli settlement of Kiryat
Shmona. In his letter the representative of Lebanon
indicates how unfounded and futile are the assertions by
Israel that the persons who committed the act of terrorism
in Kiryat Shmona had penetrated into Israel from Lebanon;
he rightly stressed that “Neither the Lebanese Government
nor the Lebanese people could be held responsible for the
actions of non-Lebanese operating outside Lebanon,
whether in Israel or anywhere else”[ibid., para. 41.

14. The root of the evil and of the continuing threat to
the cause of peace in the Middle East is twofold: the
consequences of Israel’s aggression against the Arab countries in June 1967 have not yet been eliminated and,
moreover, the Israeli armed forces, aided by imperialist and
Zionist forces, have continued without interruption to
commit new acts of aggression against neighbouring Arab
States.
15. The General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev,
speaking on 11 April, at a dinner in Moscow in honour of
the President of Syria, Mr. Hafez Al-Assad, said:

11. The position of the Soviet Union with regard to acts
of international terrorism is well known. It has been stated
repeatedly both in the Council and in other United Nations
organs. We are most decisively opposed to international
terrorism. The Soviet Union argues from a position of
principle agginst acts of terrorism, which disrupt the
diplomatic activities of States and of their representatives,
transport communications among States and the normal

“The courageous struggle of the Arab peoples, the
united actions of the Arab countries and the firm support
rendered them by the socialist States and all peace-loving
forces-all this has led to a weakening of the aggressor’s
position. The myth of the invincibility of the Israeli army
has been dispelled. The Arab peoples have proved that
2

discussed here by the representatives of Lebanon, Egypt,
Kuwait, Syria, Saudi Arabia and the Soviet Union. Therefore, I do not intend to go into detail about the merits of
the complaint of Lebanon. I merely wish to try to place the
problem in its true context.

they will never reconcile themselves to the occupation of
their lands.
“We are all familiar with the decisions of the Security
Council which opened the way for a settlement of the
essential points of conflict. For the fust time, an
authoritative international forum has been establishedthe Geneva Conference-within
the framework of which a
lasting and just settlement can and must be achieved.

19. Our attitude obviously must be dictated by our
natural solidarity with the Palestinian people and with
Lebanon, but it is further justified by the legitimate nature
of the cause that we defend and by our attachment to the
principle of justice, which has been set down in golden
words in the Charter of the United Nations.

“However,
it is evident that the situation remains
explosive. It cannot be otherwise until the main sources
of tension are removed, the occupation of Arab lands is
ended, the consequences of Israeli aggression are eliminated and reliable guarantees are provided for the security
of all the countries of the Middle East.

20. When all is said and done, what are we dealing with
here? We are dealing with the very grave injustice which is
incarnate in Israel, the creation of which was and remains a
permanent source of conflict which has developed and
grown until it has acquired the scope and size that it
possesses today. A simple backward glance will in fact
remind us of what Palestine was 26 years ago and a simple
comparison will show us what it has become today and
what has happened to the Palestinian people. Then they
lived in peace-they lived in security on their own lands and
in their own country. There was a feeling of tolerance, of
community and of, I would say, fraternity which linked the
diverse elements of the Palestinian population. Nothing led
one to believe that there would be an obstacle to their
efforts to continue living such a harmonious existence, such
a peaceful and promising life. But what haa happened to the
Palestinian people and to the Palestinian earth? The
Pa!estinian people, whose lives and existence were one over
the centuries with the geography and with the earth of
Palestine itself, were evicted from their homes. Their
aspirations, however just they were, were stifled, as was
their eagerness for justice and for human dignity. That
people was uprooted and condemned to deteriorate, condemned even to extinction by Israel, whose fate had to be
created on the ideology of zionism. Those who occupy
Palestine today and who say that they speak in its name
have come from all parts of the world except Palestine. The
true Palestinians were there earlier, yet they were evicted
and condemned to poverty. They have been forced to live
on international charity. The true Palestinians are those
who are living in distress and despair, which weighs on our
conscience today. Their blood has been sacrificed on the
altar of injustice. They have been forced into a dark and
endless tunnel haunted by spectres.

“It is essential for everyone to realize this. The danger is
that, as some of the heat has been taken out of the
situation, the aggressor and his protectors can renew their
efforts to avoid a radical, comprehensive solution of the
problem It is no coincidence that what I would call
“ersatz plans” for a Middle East settlement have recently
been put in motion. In practicai terms this means the
substitution of various kinds of “partial” agreements for a
general settlement.
“The position of the Soviet Union is clear and
consistent. Our policy has been and will continue to be
directed unswervingly against aggression and in support of
the legitimate rights of the Arab peoples. We are for a just
peace in the Middle East, and that means the withdrawal
of Israeli troops from all the territories occupied in and
since 1967, the guaranteeing of the security and sovereignty of all the States of the area and respect for the
legitimate rights of the Arab people of Palestine.”
16. The Soviet delegation fully supports the protest of the
Lebanese Government against Israel’s latest act of aggres-s&n against Lebanon. We strongly condemn Israel’s policy
of continuing its acts of aggression against Lebanon and
other Arab States.
17. In deciding what should be done in this case the
Council must, in our view, take account of the following
points. Repeatedly, the Council has not only condemned
Israel but has warned that country that, if it continues its
armed attacks on neighbouring Arab States, the. Council
w’ill consider the question of adopting adequate, effective
measures in accordance with the. Charter. The time for this
has come. The Soviet delegation considers that the Security
Council must not only strongly condemn Israel’s latest acts
of banditry, but must also take effective measures to halt
the acts of aggression and banditry committed by the Israeli
militarists. The time has also come when those who wish to
protect Israel should stop preventing the Council from
taking an appropriate, necessary and just decision on this
question.

21.. There are, to be sure, many resolutions-sort
of ends
in themselves-which
have remained a wonderful bandage
for the wound of a guilty conscience that we carry with
respect to that people, a people whose sole crime was that *
they were tolerant and whose only fault was that they were
weak. And as all the weak have done, they placed their
hopes in the United Nations, and more particularly in its
most competent organ in this question.
22. The Palestinian earth itself has been disfgured by a
policy of the settlement of Jews coming from several parts
of the world. Towns and villages have been destroyed. Holy
places of all religions have been abused and desecrated. No
one can justify the death of innocent people; no one can
approve of questioning basic human freedoms; nor can one
deny to the Palestinian people their right to existence, their

18. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) (interpretation from
French): Once again my delegation, meeting a political and
moral imperative, feels duty-bound
to speak on the
question of the Middle East. We speak after most of the
aspects of the question before us today have been broadly
3

porters and won brilliant victories .in their war .against
aggression. Their just struggle has won the resolute support
of the third world and the people of all countries. Although
the Israeli Zionists have suffered disastrous military defeat
and found themselves in unprecedented political isolation,
their aggressive nature will not change and they will
inevitably continue to make troubles and put up desperate
struggles. However, the arrogance of the enemies is but a
temporary phenomenon. Their momentary rampancy only
shows ‘their intrinsic weakness. We believe that the Arab
and Palestinian peoples, further strengthening their solidarity and uniting themselves with the third world and all
the forces that can be united and persevering in struggle,
will certainly foil all the super-Power schemes of manipulating the Middle ,East situation, defeat the Israeli aggressors, recover their occupied territories and regain their
national rights.

right to a homeland; more particularly, no one can possibly
deny to the people of Palestine their right to mourn and to
cry. In their desperation and as a gesture and an act of
despair, they have sometimes committed acts that are
reprehensible and they have sometimes committed acts that
should be condemned. But they cannot be held responsible.
Those responsible for those acts are Israel. As a result of its
policy of domination, its policy of genocide and of
violence, Israel has forced that people to take up a
murderous struggle in order to live, or rather to survive.
23. It therefore becomes, to say the least, cynical and
fallacious to consider Lebanon, a peace-loving and quiet
country, responsible for the acts of despair committed by
the Palestinian people. The punitive expedition of the night
of 12 and 13 April committed by the regular armed forces
of Israel against Lebanon was an act of State banditry that
cannot be justified under any pretext. I feel sure that the
Council will adopt the measures dictated by the gravity of
that act of banditry.

29. The Chinese Government and people have always
deeply sympathized with the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples and have always firmly supported them in their just
struggles to oppose Zionism and hegemony, to recover their
lost territories and regain their national rights. The Chinese
delegation holds that the Security Council should uphold
justice, sternly condemn the Israeli Zionist aggression,
enjoin Israel to stop all aggressive acts and firmly support
the just demand of the Lebanese Government and people in
resisting aggression and safeguarding national independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

24. Israel has never, least of all today, stood for peace on
the basis of the most sacred and fundamental principles of
the Charter and on the pertinent resolutions of the United
Nations. Israel’s true desire is to subordinate law to force. It
is the duty of the Council to compel violence to bow to the
rule of law. Every Member of the United Nations must be
allowed to enjoy the fundamental rights guaranteed by
international law.
25. The destruction of Lebanese towns, the massacre of
innocent human beings, the kidnapping of old people and
peasants committed not by uncontrollable elements, but by
an organized authority and one that publicly assumed that
authority, is a challenge to common sense. It is a challenge
to the United Nations and to the international community
as a whole.

30. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Exactly one year ago
the Council was convened to discuss the complaint of
Lebanon against Israeli terrorist action on its territory. The
Council today is again meeting to discuss a similar issue
involving another case of official terrorism committed by
Israel, a Member of the United Nations, on the territory of
Lebanon, another Member of this Organization, under the
pretext of taking retaliatory measures for a raid conducted
by some members of a Palestinian liberation movement
against the Israeli village of Kiryat Shmona.

26. It is the imperative duty of the Council to take up that
challenge, particularly at a time when the United Nations is
exerting all its efforts to establish a new era in international
relations, relations that are based on justice, respect for the
sovereignty of States, their security and the equality of all.

31 It is not my intention to comment at length on the
problem of terrorism Not only have i already done so on
previous occasions but this matter has already been so
frequently dealt with by other speakers with far greater
eloquence. Allow me, however, just to repeat what I said in
this chamber almost exactly one year ago

27. Mr. CHUANG Yen (China) (translation from Ozinese):
Recently the Israeli Zionists brazenly sent their armed
forces to intrude. again into Lebanon where they damaged
villages, abducted and killed civilians, incurring a new blood
debt to the Lebanese and other Arab peoples. Furthermore,
the Israeli Defence Minister Moshe Dayan blatantly clamoured that Israel would continue its raids into Lebanon
until all of southern Lebanon is deserted. This is not only a
wanton violation of Lebanon’s sovereignty and territory,
but also a provocation against all the Arab countries and
peoples. The Chinese Government and people sternly
condemn the Israeli Zionists for their fresh crime of
aggression and firmly support the just stand of the
Lebanese Government and people in opposing aggression
and safeguarding national independence, sovereignty and
territorial inviolability

“ . . . the problem of terrorism and counter-terrorism,
as the result of the Middle East question, cannot be
considered apart from its root causes. These root causes
are mainly twofold. The first is the injustice which has for
so long been inflicted upon the Palestinians, who are the
indigenous inhabitants of what is today called Israel.
Thousands of these people have been driven from their
homes and forced to live in foreign countries, dependent
upon the meagre charity of strangers, and eating the
bitter bread of exile. These conditions have continued to
exist for [more than] 25 years, and the number of
refugees has been swelled by the repeated aggression of
Israel upon the homeland of the Palestinians.

28. In the fourth Middle East war last October, the heroic
Arab and Palestinian peoples, united as one, took up arms,
dealt heavy blows at the Israeli Zionists and their sup-

“The second root cause is the continued occupation by
force of arms by Israel of territories belonging to three
4

.neighbouring
Arab
paras. 19 and 20.1

countries.‘?

(I 708th

meeting,

is nothing new: the Council has in fact condemned Israel on
previous occasions, and has in fact warned that country
that such flagrant violations of peace must not be repeated.
Resolution 280 (1970) declared in very clear ‘terms that
“such armed attacks [could] no longer be tolerated” and
that if Israel were to persist in launching such incursions
into the territory of its neighboursthecouncil would find
it necessary to consider “taking adequate and effective
steps or measuresin accordancewith the relevant Articles
of the Charter to implement its resolutions”. My delegation
would like to urge the Council once again to take those
“adequate and effective steps” referred to in that resolution
in order to prevent a future recurrence of such acts of
official terrorism.

Efforts to eliminate this second root cause are now taking
place, apparently with a realistic chance of success.
32. Under the circumstances, it is particularly tragic that
the atmosphere should be negatively influenced by the
lastest Israeli action against Lebanon. It is particularly
painful to note the statement made by Mr. Dayan, the
Defence Minister of Israel, as reported by the newspapers,
and I quote i%e New York Times of Sunday, 14 April:
“Defence Minister Moshe Dayan warned the Lebanese
Government . . . that if it failed to police Arab guerrillas,
Israel would continue its punitive raids until all of
southern Lebanon was abandoned. ‘The people will find
it impossible to live there’, the Defence Minister said.
.‘Their homes will be destroyed and the whole area will be
deserted. . . . If we cannot live in peace. . . then eventually
the entire southern part of Lebanon won’t be able to live
in peace’..”

38. In conclusion, my delegationwould like to reiterate its
firm support for the just causeof the Palestinianpeople and
of the struggle of the Arab countries to liberate their
territories occupied by Israel.
39.. Mr. EFON (United Republic of Cameroon) (interpretation from French): In opening the meeting of the
Council yesterday, Mr.. President, you mentioned, in
moving terms, the sudden death of Ambassador Taylor
Kamara, a former Presidentof the Security Council, whose
devotion to the cause of the United Nations was appreciated by everyone. My delegationassociatesitself with the
condolenceswhich you extended on behalf of the Council
to the Government and people of Sierra Leone on the
occasionof this cruel loss.

33. The latest raids and destruction perpetrated by Israeli
forces on Lebanese villages, followed by such a defiant
statement by its Minister of Defence, could hardly pave the
way for the new era of peaceful relations between Israel
and its Arab neighbours. Such action could only result in
disastrously widening the gulf between Israel and its
neighbours and would furthermore intensify the struggle of
the Palestinians and force them in their desperation to
resort to more violence and extreme methods.

40. After the armed attack committed by Israel against
severalLebanesevillagesin the courseof the night of 12113
April last, my delegation would like to expressonce again
its deepconcern at the wave of violence which is developing
again in the Middle East. Doesthis surpriseus? Well, in his
recent report on the United Nations Emergency Force in
the Middle East the Secretary-General made a point of
indicating his concern over this situation: “Although quiet
now prevails in the Egypt-Israel sector, the situation in the
area remains unstable and potentially dangerous.”
[S/I 1248, para. 68.J

34. My delegation has again and again reiterated its
considered view that unless these two root causes are
removed, until the Palestinian refugees are allowed to enjoy
their inalienable rights and return home in accordance with
United Nations resolutions, it would be illusory to hope
that acts of violence born out of political despair and
frustrations
will cease, nor can there be any realistic
prospects of lasting peace in the area.
35. Having said that, it does not mean in any way that
Indonesia condones acts of violence and terrorism against
innocent men, women and children We condemn such acts
of violence. We are not prepared, however, to view acts of
violence committed by desperate and frustrated people
deprived of their rights and chased away by violence from
their homeland in the same light as the acts of violence
committed by a Government as its official policy.

41. In the statement of the representativeof Cameroonof
8 April [I765th meeting], attention was drawn to the fact
that the situation remained tense and alarming in the
Middle East and that it was important to take swift and
determined action to seeto it that an era of peace,justice
and prosperity for everyone replacedthe prevailing state of
war or armed peace That desire for peace does not,
unfortunately, seemto be the priority concern of all the
parties directly concerned, for in launching a raid of
unprecedented violence against several Lebanesevillages,
killing and abducting innocent civilians and alsodestroying
their goods, and by openly uttering threats of even more
massivereprisalsagainst Lebanon, the Israeli Government
has once again demonstrated the obstinacy with which it is
pursuing its policy of aggressionagainstthe Arab countries,
a policy which the international community has always
firmly condemned.

36. While we consider the violence-which
we do not
condone-committed
by the Palestinians as the desperate
expression of the legitimate aspirations of a people that has
been unlawfully deprived of its rights, of its homes and its
lands, we cannot but condemn the latest acts of violence
perpetrated by Israeli armed forces, which, in playing the
role of self-appointed gendarmes, raised and ravaged
innocent Lebanese villages. This act of State terrorism on
the part of Israel cannot be tolerated, as it constitutes a
grave violation of the principles of the Charter and leads to
lawlessness in international relations.

42. Such acts of violence angermy delegationparticularly
becausethey were again aimed against a friendly country
whose aspiration to peaceand whose well-balancedpolicy

37. The case of Israeli incursion into Lebanese territory, as
well as into the territories of other neighbouring countries,
5

in the region is familiar to everyone. Because Israel’s policy
of force gravely infringes the fundamental principles of the
Charter, because it is a policy which is liable to jeopardize
the slim chances for peace which have existed since the
signing of the disengagement agreement of 18 January 1974
and as a result of the current mediation efforts, and because
the Israeli armed attack was incommensurate with the
pretext invoked to justify it, my delegation censures and
condemns it vigorously. We should like to assure the
Government and people of Lebanon of our sympathy in
this its hour of tribulation.

international law to take all reasonable steps to prevent the
organization on its territory of irregular forces or armed
bands for incursion into the territory of another State. But
having said that, violence cannot justify more violence. My
delegation on previous occasions has made clear our view
that a Government-organized operation into the territory of
another sovereign State cannot be justified under the
Charter. We believe that for the international community to
accept such action as tolerable or justifiable would be a step
towards reversion to a state of international anarchy.
46. At the same time, may I make clear our view that the
international community condemns the killing of innocent
people in incidents of the sort that occurred last week at
Kiryat Shmona, in any view a brutal and a vicious action
which the British Government has already condemned. I
should also like to make it clear, if it needs to be clarified,
that my Government deeply sympathizes with the lot of
the Palestinian refugees, and over the years we have made
our sympathy clear in a practical way by our contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Furthermore,
my
Foreign Secretary, speaking in the House of Commons in
the first foreign-affairs debate since the Labour Government came into office, expressed the view that there would
be no permanent peace in the Middle East unless a
settlement provided for-and I use the word he used-a
“personality”
for the Palestinian people. But however much
we may understand the misery and the despair which leads
men to commit acts of violence, brutal acts of this kind are
not the way to win international sympathy for the cause of
the Palestinians.

43. The situation created by the recent act of Israeli
aggression against Lebanon highlights once again the urgent
need for the United Nations to seek with more determination than in the past a just, equitable and lasting solution
to the Middle East crisis. The taking into account of the
lawful and inalienable right of the Palestinian people and
the withdrawal
by Israel of its troops from the Arab
territories occupied by force since the June 1967 war
would be favourable preconditions
for a peaceful settlement. From that angle my delegation is ready to support
any initiative on the part of the Council whose purpose
would be not only to draw the logical and immediate
conclusions from the recent Israeli armed attack against
Lebanon, but also to accelerate the process of implementation of resolution 242 (1967), which, in our view, can
best guarantee the vital interests of all the peoples of the
Middle EasL.
44. Mr, RICHARD (United Kingdom): It is a dreadful
paradox that this Council should be meeting today against
the background of the sixth special session of the General
Assembly. The special session is devoted above all to the
search for a consensus of the nations of the world which
will give us all a fairer international economic system. Yet
the economic measures in which we must all co-operate to
help the plight of ordinary people everywhere cannot avail
if those same people are denied the basic human rights of
living in peace and in security, unthreatened by the
constant possibility of armed attack.

47. We had hoped that the cycle of senseless violence and
counter-violence which we have so long seen in the Middle
East had at last been ended following the October war. We
had hoped that the Geneva Conference, the disengagement
agreement between Israel and Egypt and the contacts
undertaken even in the last few days by Mr. Kissinger with
a view to achieving a similar disengagement agreement in
the Israel-Syrian sector would have paved the way to a
lasting
settlement
in accordance
with
resolution
242 (1967). It would surely be a dreadful tragedy if a new
spiral of violence and counter-violence, of terrorism and
retaliation, of indignation and condemnation were to dash
those hopes of peace yet again. I think it is our duty, the
duty of this Council and the United Nations, to do all in
our power to prevent this. Let us concentrate on contributing in whatever way each of us can to the task of
building a just and a lasting peace in the Middle East. That
task demands tact, restraint and consideration. It means
perhaps more balanced responses than those made recently
in hot anger. It demands above all from all parties a degree
of statesmanship and a vision which is difficult enough to
aim for let alone to achieve. It demands from the Arab
peoples that they refrain from expressing their indignation
in deeds, and it demands from Israel that it exercises a
restraint towards its neighbours in circumstances such as
those of the last week, which must at times seem almost
impossible. But it is only in the context of such an
approach that the sort of incidents we have been considering will be avoided and all the people of that region of the
globe may bye allowed to enjoy the security and the
prosperity which is their right.

45. The incidents which have led to the meeting of this
Council particularly concern the fate of ordinary people in
two countries. This meeting was called at the request of the
Government of Lebanon to discuss raids by Israeli armed
forces against a number of villages in southern Lebanon in
which, according to the Lebanese representative’s letter,
two civilians were killed and others wounded, 13 Lebanese
civilians were kidnapped and 31 houses were destroyed.
This is not the first time, as we all know, that this Council
has met to consider a Lebanese complaint following action
of this kind by the State of Israel. On previous occasions,
my delegation has made clear that we deplore all acts of
violence and terrorism in the Middle East wherever and by
whomsoever they are committed. We can understand,
sympathize with and indeed to an extent associate ourselves
with the strong indignation that the tragic incident at
Kiryat Shmona aroused in Israel. We can also agree that if it
were established that the three terrorists entered Israel from
Lebanon-I
stress the word “if’ because the Lebanese
Government deny it, and the Council is certainly in no
position to adjudicate upon it-it would be right in our view
to remind the Lebanese Government of its duty under
6

48. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(France) finterpretution from
French): At a time when a ‘difficult’ negotiation is- progressing slowly in order to open the road to a just and
lasting settlement to the conflict in the Middle East, the
Security Council has been convened on the request of the
Government of Lebanon once again to examine new acts of
violence followed by new reprisals. And thus the efforts of
all sides to achieve peace must not only overcome the major
obstacles that underlie the conflict but also take into
account unforeseen events which suddenly create dangerous
tension that might well jeopardize the results already
obtained.
49. In their letters addressed to the President of the
Council and in the statements they made yesterday the
representatives of Lebanon and Israel have submitted their
respective complaints. The facts they put before us give US a
rather clear idea of what occurred on 11 April in Kiryat
Shmona and on the night of 12/13 April on Lebanesesoil.
But there is still an element of uncertainty. Nothing can
establish with any degreeof certainty that the operation
carried out by a Palestiniancommando group originated in
or received support from Lebanon. However, and regardless
of the reasonsthat impelled those who acted thus, my
Government must nevertheless condemn such acts of
violence, which have causedthe loss of numerousinnocent
lives.
50. As I stated a year ago, on 18 April 1973 /1709th
meeting], before the Council in similarcircumstances,I do
not believe that the Palestiniancausehasgamedin any way
by this attack on the most basic human rights. Today I
would add to that statement that even if they sacrificed
their lives those who massacredwomen and children did
not thereby beomeheroes.
51. But if we condemn that act of violence we condemn
ho, and for the same reasons, the raids and reprisals
undertaken by Israeli forces on Lebanesesoil-first, because
we cannot admit the principle of reprisalsitself since it is
contrary to fundamental law; secondly, becausewe refuse
to equate the acts of more or lessuncontrolled groupswith
those of a Government that is called upon to respect the
laws and rules governing the United Nations; and, finally,
becauseFrance attaches the greatest importance and value
to respect for the security and integrity of Lebanon,whose
worthy efforts thus far to remain outside the conflict
despite the presence on its soil of 300,000 Palestinian
refugeeswe have acknowledged.
52.. That is a fact that the Israeli Government shouldhave
taken into account before proferring threats to Lebanon.
What, however, is sure is that the attack on Kiryat Shmona
and the operation carried out by the Israeli authorities at
the very moment when violent combat is taking place in the
nearby Golan Heights can only increasethe tension and
make even more difficult the search for peace. We
understand full well that such events may have repercussionson the efforts that are being made to that end at the
moment. All this confirms our conviction that today it is
less possible than ever for the international community
representedby this Council to shirk its responsibilities.
53. That being the case,my delegation considersthat the
Council should pronounce itself in the clearest fashion

against all acts of violence, regardlessof their origin or
reasons.It could well reiterate the warning it issuedon 19
May 1970, in resolution 280 (1970), addressedto the
Israeli Government concerning the territoriai integrity of
Lebanon. The Council could also make an appeal to all
parties, in the Interests of peace, to refrain from any act
that might jeopardize the hopes that the international
community hasplaced on the negotiationsunderway.
54. If the Council were to pronounce itself unanimously
on those different points, I believe this body would be
living up to the main role that the United Nations is called
upon to play in the searchfor a peaceful settlementin the
Middle East.
55. The PRESIDENT: The next speakerinscribed on my
list is the representativeof Israel, on whom I now call.
56. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The last two speakershave
referred to Lebanon’sresponsibility for the terrorist attacks
that have been carried on for years now againstIsrael from
Lebanon and to the so-called peaceful vocation of the
Lebanese Government. I think that what every visitor,
every journalist in Beirut or in other parts of the Lebanese
territory is aware of-and the representativeswho have just
spoken are undoubtedly also fully cognizant of it-is that
Lebanon has in recent years become a centre of terrorist
operations against Israel in the Middle East and in other
parts of the world.
57. What good is there in an official Lebanesedenial,
presented for obvious tactical reasonsin the course of a
Security Council debate, of Lebanon’sresponsibility for the
latest massacrein Kiryat Shmona, if the terrorist organizations which maintain their headquarters in Lebanon’s
capital officially confirm that they are responsiblefor the
attack? To add to the various proofs and facts contained in
my statement yesterday, I should like today simply to put
on record one of the paragraphsin the official agreement
between the Government of Lebanon and the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the umbrella organization of all
the terrorist groups, an agreementdated 3 November 1969,
which still remains in force. It states: “Frontier access
points would be designatedand crossingfacilitated for the
fedayeen.” This is taken from the Le Mode weekly
selectionof 24 April 1970.
58. I think it is necessary, in order to describe the
magnitude of the problem which mankind confronts when
it considers the menace of Arab terrorism, to put the
following facts before the Council. From July 1968 till
December 1973, at least 161 persons were arrested in
connexion with international Arab terror in various parts of
the world, and in particular in Europe. Their acts have
included the massacreof 27 passengers
and the wounding
of 80 others at Lod in May 1972, the murder of Israeli
athletes at the Munich Olympics in September 1972, the
slaughter of 32 passengersand the wounding of many
others at the Rome airport in December 1973, not to
mention numerous hijackings of aircraft and attacks on
civilian targets. Of the 161 terrorists arrested, only three
today remain in prison,, All the others have been freed,
whether willingly or under the pressureof blackmail by
Arab terrorist organizations.

59. The organ of the United Nations Association of the
United States-Inter-Dependent-says
the following in a
recent issue:
“Statistics compiled by an eminent specialist, Brian
Jenkins of Santa Monica, California, show that in the six
years ending December 31, 1973, the casualty toll in all
acts of international terrorism was 268 dead and 571
wounded. These victims were innocents attacked in places
other than the terrorists’ homeland. The cost in measurable destruction in the same period was $163 million
plus $32 million in ransom, plus hundreds of millions
more spent on countermeasures. Yet only three Arab
terrorists are held in Europe, none has been severely
punished.”
60. While it is common knowledge that the Arab States,
and in particular Lebanon, continue to harbour the terror
organizations and to support them politically, militarily and
financially, certain other Governments have displayed an
attitude of callous indulgence towards the Arab terrorist
organizations, all of which, as I already pointed out, are
affiliated to the so-called Palestine Liberation Organisation.
61. The release of most of the Arab terrorists detained by
various countries after murderous attacks against innocent
civilians, the permission granted to the Palestine Liberation
Organisation to maintain offices in a number of cities.
outside the Middle East, the invitations extended to its
leaders to visit various capitals and their participation in
international conferences and ceremonies, the failure in the
United Nations by the representatives of such Governments
to take firm and concrete measures against this scourge,
have all encouraged and given succour to these assassins.
62. In all candour, the question does arise whether it is
appropriate for Governments which conduct themselves in
this manner to deny Israel the fundamental right to defend
itself and to protect its citizens against the barbaric attacks
of Arab terrorists.
63. There was nothing new in the Soviet representative’s
statement. We have heard the same unfounded charges, the
same distortions in years past They have always reflected
the most unhelpful role played by the USSR in the Middle
East, a role that hampered the attainment of peace and
encouraged Arab aggression. It is significant that in these
very days, while Syrian acts of aggression are taking place
along the cease-fire line, it was in the course of a visit to the
capital of the Soviet Union that President Assad of Syria
declared that as far as his country is concerned the October
War is still continuing That was on 11 April 1974. On 15
April 1974, Radio Damascus quoted President Assad as
having said on the same day, also in Moscow: “Syria is
determined to continue the war until Israel is defeated”.
64. Listening to the statement of the representative of the
USSR, one could not but wonder, “Will there really be not
a single constructive word or thought in the entire
pronouncement”?
There was none. Not a word about the
right of every State to be free from armed attacks by
irregular forces, by murderous gangs, organized and
operating from the territory of neighbouring States. Not a
word about the right, under the Charter of the United

Nations, of every State to self-defence. Not a word about
the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
[Geneml Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), annex], initiated, I think, by the Soviet Union and stipulating:
“Every State has the duty to refrain from organizing,
instigating, assisting or participating in . ,. . terrorist acts in
another State or acquiescing in organized activities within
its territory directed towards the commission of such
acts, when the acts referred to in the present paragraph
involve a threat or use of force.”
There was not a word in the Soviet representative’s
statement about Lebanon’s obligation to put an end to a
situation which is contrary to the principles of the Charter,
to the provisions of the Declaration on Principles of
Friendly Relations, to scores of resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly.
65. The Soviet concept, according to Ambassador Malik, is
that while international terrorism should be disapproved,
Israel should do nothing at all to protect itself against the
attacks by the terrorists. The people of Israel desire peace
and they have sought peace throughout the years of Israel’s
independence It is because they desire it that they shall
defend themselves against Arab aggression, whether it
comes by means of regular armies or through the use of
irregular terrorist bands.
66. If the Soviet representative wished to indicate his
country’s interest in peace in the Middle East, he should
have spoken of measures to stop terrorism, first of all in the
Middle East, but also in the world at large, and not of steps
to be taken against those who are‘victims of international
terrorism.
67. The Soviet representative was followed by the Ambassador of China, to whom I would say that slogans cannot be
a useful contribution to the examination of any situation,
especially when such slogans are based on distortion. When
those who speak in almost Kafkaesque terms-and this
applies to both speakers to whom I have just referredwhen those who consider that an Arab anti-liberation terror
directed against the very life and liberty of the Jewish
people is a liberation movement, also slander Israel as an
aggressor, enlightened public opinion and Israel know for
certain that the very opposite is true. To both these
statements, 1 shall therefore answer with an ancient Chinese
fable. Two men were near-sighted, but instead of admitting
it, both of them boasted of keen vision. One day they heard
that a tablet was to be hung in a temple, so each of them
found out beforehand what was written on it, and when the
day came they both went to the temple. Looking up, one
said: “Look, aren’t the letters, the characters, ‘brightness
and courage ‘? ” “And the smaller ones there, you can’t see
them, but they say, ‘Written by so-and-so in a certain
month on a certain day’ “, said the other. A passer-by asked
what they were looking at. And when told, the passer-by
laughed and said: “The tablet has not been put up yet, so
how can you see the characters on it? ” You are like those
two short-sighted
gentlemen, Ambassador Malik and
Mr. Representative of China, competing with each other
without seeing or wanting to see what is really going on in

the Middle East situation. Now, so that my use of a Chinese
fable should not, Heaven forbid, bring about, as it did on
another occasion, a Soviet accusation of an IsraeliChinese
conspiracy, let me add also a Russian proverb in response to
both these statements, a proverb which says: “Slander, like
coal, will either dirty your hand or burn it”.
68. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has indicated that he wished to take the
floor. I therefore invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.
69. Mr. KELANI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from French): The representative of Israel has repeated
once again today his charge with regard to Syria’s responsibility for the tension prevailing at the present time on the
Syrian frontier. Syria has agreed to Security Council
resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973) of 22 and 23
October 1973 and has demonstrated its willingness to apply
the spirit and the letter of those two resolutions.
70. Resolution 339 (1973) lays down that the forces of
the two sides should be. returned to the positions they
occupied at the time the cease-fire went into force.
However, the Israeli troops were not withdrawn from the
territory they occupied after 22 October, which means,
quite clearly, that Israel refuses to put this resolution into
effect, as it had agreed to, and persists in occupying this
territory contrary to the unanimous will of the Council.
Israel has thus taken the initiative in committing aggression
against Syria from the very time when resolution
339 (1973) went into force.
71. Three days ago, Israel occupied a new Syrian position
in Mount Hermon, a position where Syrian forces had been
stationed long before the October 1973 war. The occupation by Israel of new positions reflects its policy of
persistent aggression, expansion and provocation, which has
brought the present situation to a grave stage of escalation
and persistent hostility which grows worse each day.
72. The PRESIDENT:
Lebanon..

I call on the representative

of

73. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): The statement made yesterday by my Foreign Minister [I 766th meeting] fully
brought to the Council’s attention the details of the attack
conducted by Israeli forces against Lebanon on the night of
12/13 April, and he expounded the Lebanese position on
this matter. There are however a few points that I should
like to put into their proper context and to amplify for the
sake of the record.
74.. The representative of Israel has attempted to lead the
Council into other matters and problems not pertaining
directly to the case that we have brought before the
Council. He has wandered so far. as to become even a
story-teller here in the Council.
75. On many occasions since the October 1973 war the
Israeli radio and news media have admitted the existence of
manifestations of Arab commando activities inside Israel
and inside the occupied Arab territories. Not very long ago,
on 5 April, it was admitted that the incident that took

place at a bus station in Tel Aviv was conducted by such
elements. The same news media, radio and television, from
Israel, especially in Hebrew, have aired many interviews
with representatives of television and Israeli people responsible for security affairs. It was generally admitted that
many operations were conducted inside Israel and the
occupied territories by such elements.
76. On 8 April, exactly three days before the attack on
Lebanon, Mr. Schlomo Hillel, Minister of Police, recognized
in an interview with Mr. Idzi Ledat that operations were
actually being carried on inside Israel by a group of about
250 persons-Arabs-and
he said openly that the 400,000
Arabs living in Israel should not be held responsible for the
acts of 250 people.
77. It has also been recognized by Israeli news media that
cells of resistance exist in many areas: in Nablus, in Gaz.a, in
Jerusalem, in Tel Aviv and its vicinity and elsewhere.
78. Now let me make a point about the developments that
took place at Kiryat Shmona on 11 April. The operation
conducted by the three commandos began at 7.30 in the
morning; at 9 o’clock Radio Israel stated, in Hebrew, that it
was not known where the perpetrators came from, In the
news bulletin at 10 o’clock that morning the same thing
was repeated. At 11 o’clock the operation was already over
and the Israeli Government’s verdict was made-automatically made, so quickly made-that the perpetrators had
come from Lebanon.
79. Immediately following that, Mrs. Meir and Mr.. Dayan
began making threats at Lebanon. Even on the day of the
operation of Kiryat Shmona, Mr. Hillel, the Minister of
Police, stated-and this was quickly put in a different
context by the representative of Israel in order to forestall
this argument: “I do not know whether the perpetrators
came from outside or inside. We have to distinguish
between operations conducted by elements from inside and
those conducted by elements coming from outside.”
80. But Mr. Hillel was to retract that statement the
following day. Following the funeral of the victims of the
operation of Kiryat Shmona, he said that the perpetrators
came from Lebanon and that Lebanon must be held
responsible.
81. I can understand the situation that Mr.. Hillel had to
face. We all know and we have seen on television the
reaction of the people of Kiryat Shmona against Mr. Hillel
and those responsible for security there. The Israeli authorities had to find a scapegoat to satisfy the people who were
angered by the massacre that took place in Kiryat Shmona.
The scapegoat, as usual-and we do not have to go very far
to search for one-must be Lebanon, which lies close on the
northern border of Israel. Therefore, following tradition, a
reprisal had to be taken against Lebanon. Reprisal is a
policy prohibited and condemned by international law and
not permitted by the Charter of the United Nations,
especially when carried out against a-State Member of the
United Nations which has no responsibility whatsoever for
acts undertaken by individuals.
82. About midnight of 12/13 April, Israeli artillery began
shelling the Valley of El Slouky between Bentjbeil and

Taibe, and at about 1 o’clock units of the Israeli armed
forces penetrated Lebanese territory, breaching for the nth
time the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
They attacked the villages of Wadi Sloki, TaibB, Mohaibeb,
Blida, Ai’taroun, Yarin and Douhaira, and they shelled the
regions of TaibC, KfarkaIla, Jovarel Salhani, Siddikin,
Djebel el Batm and lb1 el Sally. Two people were killed,
two were injured, 3 1 houses were destroyed and 13 persons
were kidnapped.

Lebanese Government. Mr. Tekoah immediately raises the
point. He takes them to task. Why? Because they have
praised Lebanon; because they have mentioned that
Lebanon has a certain vocation. He wanted to hear in the
Council the falsifications, the lies we have repeatedly heard
to the effect that Lebanon is the centre of international
gangsterism, of international terrorism. Besides the absurdity of this allegation, I think that to intelligent people-not
only here in the Council but everywhere-it
is laughable.

83. We have before us the reports of the observers
contained in documents S/l 1057/Add.402, 404, 405,408,
and others. These official documents of the United Nations
confirm these acts of aggression conducted by Israel against
Lebanon. In reviewing these documents and all the previous
documents sent by the observers to the Secretary-General
and the Security Council, we fail to find a single instance in
which the observers mentioned that a breach of the Israeli
border had taken place from Lebanon. This is a very
important point that I wish to bring out. When we asked
the United Nations and the Security Council to reinforce
the observation system on the Lebanese border, we acted in
good faith. We wanted the United Nations to be our
witness. We would have welcomed more observers to help
us in our task on the Lebanese-Israeli border. We have
received some observers. Israel, on the contrary, has refused
to allow these observers to operate on its side of the border.
That is based on two assumptions. First of all, they do not
want the presence of United Nations witnesses to their
criminal assaults against Lebanon. Secondly, they have been
acting in bad faith against Lebanon.

86. It is very stange that those who try to vilify the
reputation of Lebanon are precisely those people who since
1968 have launched scores of murderous attacks against
Lebanon. We all recall the insidious attack on the airport of
Beirut on 28 December 1968 and the destruction of part of
Lebanon’s civilian air fleet-13 planes standing on the
defenceless and civilian airport of Beirut. That attack was
followed by many others later on. I have a long list here
and I could keep the Council perhaps for one hour to recite
the details of all the attacks against Lebanon since then.
But I only give you this very briefly: those attacks by air,
land and sea, which were staged at intervals since 28
December 1968, have resulted in the death of 140 civilian
Lebanese citizens; 290 were wounded; 300 houses were
destroyed; many bridges and civilian installations were also
destroyed,.
87. And now it is ironic to read about Mr. Dayan’s threat
to turn southern Lebanon into a desert. Is this the kind of
contribution
he and his people wish to make to the
development and progress and peace of the Middle East? Is
this the new technique of a people who boast and claim
that they have made the desert bloom? What we are being
offered, indeed, is absolutely the opposite: the promise of
destruction and devastation, of turning the blooming fields
and orchards into wasteland. This is not the talk of modern
statesmen governed by the ethics of international law, of
international order; it is talk reminiscent of the dreadful
calamities that Genghis Khan or Hitler, as we were
reminded by Ambassador MaIik this afternoon, brought to
many suffering countries and peoples in the past.
Mr. Dayan’s reckless statement is symptomatic of the
policy pursued by the Zionist terror organizations, and later
by the Government of Israel, for four decades against the
Arab States and against the Palestinian people. This policy
has brought nothing but turmoil and, worse, bloodshed and
tears to the countries and peoples of the Middle East. The
Israelis brought these ordeals not on the Arabs alone but on
themselves. Israeli families and Arab families are now
mourning their dead; they are all sorrowing over the dead
victims of the blind, adventurous and expansionist policy to
which the authorities of Tel Aviv have been clinging so
stubbornly.

84. We believe in the United Nations and we believe in the
authority of the Security Council. We want the authority of
the CounciI to be strengthened and its role to be reinforced.
Every time we have had a complaint, we have come to the
Council. But Israel, as members know, has a clear contempt
for the Council, which it has expressed on many occasions,
and for the resolutions of the United Nations, and it has
refused to come to the Council to bring its complaints, if it
has any real complaints, against Lebanon. We have invited
the Israeli representative and the Israeli Government on
many occasions to bring any substantiated case against
Lebanon to the ‘Council. On the contrary, they wait until
we bring our case. They attack; we bring our case to the
Council; they follow us to the Council. What for? Out of
respect for the Council? No, Only to use this forum as a
spring-board for their propaganda. This is the use that Israel
makes of the Security Council and of the other organs of
the United Nations. We have a very vivid example in the
statement made by Mr. Tekoah yesterday. Well, that is a
stale statement; we have heard it here in the.Council before;
we have heard it in various committees and in the General
Assembly, It was only brought up to date to fit the new
development in Kiryat Shmona.

88. Lebanon definitely does not assume any responsibility
for the act of Kiryat Shmona. It was conducted by three
persons who were in Israel. There is no proof whatsoever
that they had gone there from Lebanon. The allegation of
the Israeli representatives that the Israeli patrol had seen
some footprints and had followed those footprints and
determined that those people had come from Lebanon is
unsubstantiated and is in contradiction with the facts.
Before that so-called Investigation of the footprints was
made, contrary to the statements already made by the

85. Israel in its actions against Lebanon attacks on two
fronts; it launches against us a two-pronged attack: one on
the ground to kill, to wound, to destroy; the other on the
international front to vilify the reputation of Lebanon, to
disfigure the standing of Lebanon in the international
community. We are grateful to the representatives who have
expressed their feelings today towards Lebanon, and their
opinion about Lehnnon and the policy conducted by the
10

i

could not be held resnonsible for the action of its itizens
outside Israel-its citizens: Israeli citizens. But since,then
we have learned what happened: there is ample evidence
that those who abducted Eichmann from Argentina were
not only citizens of Israel but agents of Israel, sent by the
Israeli Government to abduct Eichmann. Still, Mrs. Meir
came to the Council and washed her hands of it, saying,
Israel was not responsible for their acts.

Israeli authorities- that the perpetrators
of the Kiryat
Shmona incident had come from Lebanon, they immediately rushed to put the blame on an act of infiltration
from Lebanon which they later claimed to substantiate
with so-called evidence that there were some footprints.
89. And regarding the Kiryat Shmona operation itself, we
were not there to know exactly what happened; we are not
in a position to know all the details. All we know about
what happened is derived from the press-from
the news
media. Yet Mr. Tekoah comes to this Council and tells it
that the commandos went into the building, took the
children and started to hurl them out of the windows. That
has been denied and is not substantiated.

96. Israel is not responsible for the acts of its own agents
outside of Israel, but Lebanon must be held responsible for
acts committed by non-Lebanese on non-Lebanese territory. This is a new approach to international law.
97. We have 300,000 Palestinians on our land. What are
we being asked to do with them? Throw them into the sea;
be the agents of Israel and destroy them; commit genocide? Those people belong to Palestine; that is their
homeland; they have their homes and properties there. The
solution is for them to be empowered to exercise their
inalienable rights-rights
which have been adjudicated to
them in many resolutions adopted by the Security Council
and by the General Assembly of the United Nations. It has
been recognlzed by many nations-indeed,
a growing
number of nations-that the Palestinian people must enjoy,
like every other people, its right to self-determination for a
homeland. That is the solution, and that will bring about or
help to bring about peace and security in the Middle East.

90. Again, the commandos had sent a warning and a
request to the Israeli Government, according to the
spokesman for the Organization of the Popular Front, for
the release of 100 Palestinian prisoners. However, instead of
either negotiating or acting in a temperate manner, the
Israeli forces attacked the building with recoilless guns and
with grenades, and the three commandos, it seems, made
good their threats that they would blow up the building.
91. I am not here to justify exactly what those three
people did there. My Foreign Minister yesterday expressed
in his name, and repeated in the name of the President of
Lebanon, that we deplore acts of violence of this nature
which result in the killing of innocent victims. And I repeat
that we do deplore them.. But what I wanted to show is the
fact that Israel and its representative here try to dramatize
these operations beyond the facts that they definitely
know.

98. Now, there is one point I should like to make
concerning the statement of Mr. Tekoah yesterday, in
which he showered slanders and calumnies on Lebanon.
Naturally, we do not expect testimony of good behaviour
from Israel’s spokesmen and officials. Israel is a State which
stands condemned by international organs, by the majority
of States. A State which is isolated in the international
community because of its aggressive, expansionist and
military arrogance is the last State entitled to issue verdicts
on morality and legality concerning the conduct of other
States and certainly not concerning Lebanon.

92. Mr. Dayan said, after the operation against Lebanon,
“We tried to do this in a civilized manner.” They tried to
do this “in a civilized manner”. That is a new definition of
civilization; and it seems that according to the Israelis,
Lebanon needs to be civilized-the Lebanon of 6,000 years
of history and civilization needs to be civilized at the hands
of the groups of aggressors and criminals coming from
Israel.

99. Criminal Israel, which has introduced violence and
terrorism into the Middle East, which brought to our area
nothing but instability, turmoil, aggression and bloodshed,
is not entitled to pass a sardonic, ironic judgement on
Lebanon-“peaceful
Lebanon”,
“innocent
Lebanon”,
“law-abiding
Lebanon”, “virtuous
Lebanon”, “helpless
Lebanon”, “chaste Lebanon”, “ pure and honest Lebanon”,
As a matter of fact, I am not the one to say it, but Lebanon
is indeed all of that, although it is not up to me to say so.
But 1 know, and everybody knows, that Lebanon happily
enjoys the widest possible relations of friendship with the
majority of the countries of the world because of its
peaceful policy, its friendly policy, its civilized policy,
because throughout its history Lebanon has never harmed
anyone, never attacked anyone and has never committed an
act of aggression.

93. We all recall the statement made last year by the
Foreign Minister of Israel in Vienna that Lebanon “is the
least civilized country in the world”. A person’must be
either ignorant or of bad faith to make such a statement.
Naturally, we know that Mr, Dayan and Mr. Eban are not
ignorant-they
are known to be scholarly-but
their statements smack of bad faith towards Lebanon”
94. What is the responsibility of Lebanon when individuals
go and commit acts of murder anywhere in the world or in
Israel? What is Lebanon’s responsrbility in this case? Is it
our responsibility because we have 300,000 Palestinians
living on our land, in misery in the camps?
95. For once 1 agree with a theory of Mrs. Meir’s-a theory
she developed once here in the Council concerning the
Eichmann case. I have cited this case before in the Council,
and I think it pertinent to ‘refer to it once more. Mrs. Meir,
in this Security Council, after Argentina had lodged
complaint aga&t Israel for the abduction of Eichmarm,
developed the theory that under international law Israel

100. Finally, this is perhaps the twelfth time-1 have lost
count-that we have come to the Council seeking justice.
Each time we have walked out with a resolution that gave
us moral and political satisfaction. But all those resolutions
have not stopped Israel from repeating its aggression against
Lebanon. We have said before,-and we repeat it now, that
11

the Security Council has been set up to maintain peace and
security in the world, and particularly to. protect small,
weak and defenceless nations from the onslaught of
militaristic nations.

invokes the right of self-defence. Selfdefence against
whom? Against Lebanon? Did any Lebanese troops invade
the territories that were invaded by zionism in Palestine?
Let him answer the question. Palestine was partitioned. I
was present when it was partitioned. I do not have to
rehash what I have told the Council time and again since I
have been addressing the General Assembly and the
Council on this issue.

101. There are being launched at us threats of dislocating
and disrupting the civil life of Lebanon, of destroying
southern Lebanon. Such attacks and threats are contrary to
Article 2 of the Charter. I do not have to remind members
of the Council of that provision, but I should like to insist
that Article 2; paragraph 4, states the following:
“All
Members
shall
refrain
in
their
international
relations
from
. _.
~-the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State”, and was included in
the Charter on the insistence of small, weak and defenceless
nations. That is why we have come to you before, and that
is why we come to you again.

110. Can Israel arrogate to itself the responsibility of
collective punishment? Collective punishment is forbidden
in both national and international law. If individuals,
whether they allegedly came from beyond the frontiers, or
were in Israel, perpetrated that tragedy on innocent people
and on themselves, does it mean that Israel has the right of
reprisal? What is the Charter for? Then, everyone has the
right of reprisal.

102. Are we to walk out every time with only resolutions? Or is the Council going to act to make the aggressor
refrain from pursuing his aggression? Perhaps we may
ultimately get the message that the Council cannot do
anything to protect us, that all it can do is satisfy us with a
resolution. And then we may draw the conclusion that we
must depend on ourselves for our defence. Is it Lebanon’s
vocation .to turn into a militaristic State in the Middle
East? Throughout history we have refused to do that, and
we refuse to do it now.

111. I wish our new colleague from the United Kingdom
were here, but Mr. Jamieson is an old friend. I want to tell
him how civilized his country is. You are familiar with what
the Irish Repubiican Army is doing in Northern Ireland and
in England. As far as I know, about a thousand innocent
people have been killed. By whom? By members of the
IRA. Mr. Jamieson, have you sent any detachments or any
gunboats to Dublin, or destroyed the airport, as the Israelis
did in Beirut? You never hear that the United Kingdom
took the matter into its hands in such a drastic manner.

103. We have confidence in the Security Council, in the
United Nations, in the goodwill and friendship of nations,
and on them we rely.

112. Then there is another civilized country, France, and,
more so, Spain. Do not think I am discriminating and
putting Spain in the balance-both of you, you-know about
the Basques. They are across the border from the Pyrenees,
Some of the Basques want independence from Spain. We
have seen articles and pictures of the so-called freedom
fighters-as they call themselves, as everybody does these
days who wants secession or independence-wearing
hoods
and giving press conferences on French soil. Did Spain send
any detachments across the Pyrenees to punish those
Basque rebels or liberators, whatever the name you want to
label them by? No. Only Israel has the right to chastise
Lebanon, which has never done anything to hurt the Jewish
people.

104. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of Saudi
Arabia to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
105. Mr BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Thank you, Mr. President and members of the Council, for allowing me to speak
again.
106. As I see things, I am afraid that the meetings of the
Council may become an exercise in futility. However, there
is no other recourse but to submit the problem to the
Council, for after all I recall that when I attended the
meetings at San Francisco when the United Nations was
founded, the hope of the world was fastened on the
Council for the preservation of peace and security.

113. In fact, the three or four thousand Jewish people in
Lebanon have shops and banks, and are free to move. They
forget all that. Lebanon should have a civil war and punish
anyone who does something to regain his homeland-none
other than the Palestinians, whom the Israelis call terrorists,
and who are labelled freedom fighters, not by the Arabs
only, but even by some of the Japanese. What happened in
Lod was deplorable. But the Palestinians have fired the
imagination of the youth of the world. I have been warning
the Council and the General Assembly time and again that
the Palestinian youth has fermented and leavened, so to
speak, the Arab youth-and other youth for that matter.

107. Are we going to have other meetings without
accomplishing anything constructive? I hear there is not
even a draft resolution in the making as yet. And, assuming
that a draft resolution is to be worked out, who is going to
implement it? 1 think we should do some soul-searching
and fiid out whether anything constructive can emerge
from the United Nations and the Council.
108. I am afraid the representative of Israel has characterized the Council as being almost a nonentity.

114. As the Ambassador from Lebanon just mentioned,
since Lebanon never was and never will be a militaristic
country, what do you expect the Lebanese to do? To go
and chase every Palestinian-three hundred thousand? HOW
do we know what will emerge from the camps? They are
not going to report to the Lebanese, “We are going to fiit
Israel.” They do it on their own account. There are splinter

109. Of course, the ritual is here. Letters are circulated.
And we sit around these tables. We have been doing that
since 1947 on this problem, and more so since after 1948,
and nothing has been accomplished. Of course, Mr. Tekoah
12
_.---

--

‘-

_ --

.,

.

\\

\
that those three men who sacrificed their lives sho$ also
‘\a
die. They have mothers and fathers and sisters.

groups of the Palestine liberation movement. They may be
here in New York, Some of them may be sitting there. How
do ‘we know?

120. Do you think we like what is happening? I told you
that we had peace before you came from Central and
Eastern Europe with your new ideology. You want to live
with us in peace? This is not the way to achieve peace.
Time and again 1 have told you that this will bring more
bitterness, more rancour, more hatred, and violence will
breed violence, and there will be no end to the links in a
long chain of future events.

11’5. You, Mr. Tekoah, invoke the right of self-defence? I
am not holding a brief for the Palestinians. Whether they
are using the right methods or the wrong methods is beside
the point. But you forget your own terrorism which you
started in that peaceful land. Most likely, those Palestinians
thought, “Well, look, because of Zionist terrorism there is
now a State. So why do we not resort to the same acts as
the Irgun Zvai ieumi, the Stern gang? ” I told the
Palestinians that the only gap was that the major Powers
were with the Israelis in the partition of Palestine. That is
why they succeeded. If they did not have the major Powers
behind them, terrorism would not have been enough for
them to establish a State.

121. What shall we do? Have another two or three
meetings? Perchance a resolution will emerge, with a
preamble as usual, and two or three operative paragraphs.
And then there will be, in that room there, all kinds of
caucuses and people will exchange views. “Condemn? ” No.
That is a big word. Somebody might veto that word
“condemn”. “Deplore? ” No. But what happens? You will
deplore that those 18 people were killed, and I do not
know how many were wounded, and you will deplore that
Israel saw fit to take the law into its own hands. And then,
as I said yesterday and as I repeat again-there is benefit by
repetition-another
incident will happen.

116. I know that the Western Powers have their internal
problems. That is why when they speak they temporize. As
we say in Arabic, “When you shoe a horse you send the
nail, but sometimes you hit the hoof and hurt the horse.”
117. But who brought these people into our midst? You
Western Powers brought them into our midst. Why do you
not do anything around this table to solve that problem,
not by way of revolution but by ultimatums? You do not
want to. Why? Because the Zionists have permeated your
legislatures, your financial operations, your exports. More
power to them. The Jews have a challenge everywhere-and
they succeed. We do not begrudge them success. But why
do you not stop them from hurting us? What have we done
to you Western countries? We opened our doors to you to
develop our countries.

122. It is within the power of those who created Israel to
put a stop to this. Who created Israel? I am not going into
the history and genesis of the matter, my good friend
Mr, Richard, but I researched the question, even in London,
between 1929 and 1939. You were losing the war against
the Kaiser, you and the French. It was hanging in the
balance in 1916-1917. I am a contemporary of that war. In
the 1920s I was a young man. And the price of the Balfour
Declaration was for international Zionism to railroad the
United States, into the First World War. Whereas in 1916,
when the Arabs were fighting on the side of the British,
Lawrence and all, you said: “You will all be free from
Ottoman rule”. And then we found, in 1922-and I
demonstrated in the streets of Beirut and Damascus-that
there were Mandates, and the Mandates were colonial
arrangements in disguise.

118. Many of us now are veering towards another great
Power out of bitterness-towards
the Soviet Union. Why
not? The Soviet Union considers the Middle East not very
far from its frontiers. And as I have said time and again, the
chess game is played on the checkerboard which is our
region. But it is not a game played with wooden pieces. It is
played with the destiny of our people.

123. Now, the Second World War, unfortunately, made
the Western Powers bankrupt. It is not unusual for a world
war to make any nation bankrupt. And the empire
dissolved. Then who took over? Our friends the Americans.
We have warned them time and again, since 1945-when
Mr. Stettinius was Secretary of State, and later-that while
we have nothing against the Jews we do not want a new
ideology in our midst. And Mr. Truman saw fit to work,
openly and behind the scenes, for the partition of Palestine.

119. Now, the tradition of Judaism. I happen to be a
student of that religion, which is natural. I grew up in the
area, and I am a student of Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
By what yardstick-do
not mention the Talmud to me; go
to the Bible; yesterday I cited some passages from the
prophet Micah-by what yardstick of justice or humanity
do you, the leadership of Zionism, hailing from Central and
Eastern Europe, destroy the houses of poor peasants? The
peasant can go to the Government and bring about the
downfall of the Lebanese Government-that
is what you
think. The poor peasants. You raze their houses. It is not
the first time you have been razing houses. You have razed
houses in the Gaza Strip; you have razed houses on the
West Bank. And, good Lord, I am afraid that if somebody
opposed you from amongst the Oriental Jews, you would
probably raze their houses too because they are Oriental
Jews. Anyone that is against you, raze their houses. Is that
human? Now those people, the martyrs as the Palestinians
have called them, who kil,led those poor people in that
village across the border from Lebanon-and we deplore the
killing, as well as we deplore, as I said yesterday, the fact

124. All the trouble began from that day. And when the
State Department sent one of the Ambassadors-I
think it
was Mr. Wadsworth-to
tell Mr. Truman that it was not in
the best interests of the United States to precipitate a crisis
in the Arab world, Mr. Truman said, and it is in his
memoirs: “HOW many Americans of Arab origin do I have
in my constituency? ”
125. This is bad liolitics, with all due respect to the late
Mr. Truman and his activities in other fields than this. So in
fact it was the United Kingdom which started this trouble. I
am sure it would not have done it if it had foreseen what
13

would I be the consequences. Then our American friends
took over, and it is within your power, if you want it, both
of you or separately, to bring an end to this. Say to Israel:
“All right, have you forgotten that we created you? What
are you doing to Lebanon? Live in peace if you want to,
but you cannot have that militaristic, not only attitude, but
activity against a small country”.

the ideology came from the continent of Europe-all the
time telling us “we were in this country 2,000 years ago”?
132. One more word about the Arabs. You call everybody
Arab. Arabism is a culture, it is a way of life; it has nothing
to do with blood or colour or race. Islam, likewise, is a
religion, and religion does not constitute a nationality; it is
the culture, the way of life, the language, the common
interest that constitute a people and a nation. And why
should not the Arab States-leaving aside the Palestinians’
for the moment-be afraid when the Zionists want to keep
their indoctrination of 16 million Jews in the world and
ingather them in Palestine? Who in the area would not be
nervous that this people would expand and control-not
necessarily geographically-but
economically and financially, the whole area?

126. But what are you doing about it? Oh, dCtente. What
do we get, we Arabs, from the dCtente between you? Of
course we do not want you to fight with the Russians,
because you will blow up and we will blow up with you,
and the Jews will also blow up, and the Christians and the
Moslems-all human beings. The whole world will blow up.
And who will benefit?
127. I want to say a few words across the table. The
motivation of religion for a political and economic end is
puss&, is gone. Ideologies are being used nowadays for
political and economic ends. Ideologies replaced religions as
motivations. And also the motivation of the ideology is
gone.

133. And if in this twentieth century geography is not and
should not be the sole motivation, as In the case of the land
of Palestine, why do our American friends not open Texas
for them and give them 10 times the area of Palestine? They
need motivation? I know Jews; 90 per cent of them are
secular nowadays-in
fairness to them, like the Christians.
And the Moslems are also getting to be secular. I do not like
them to get that secular, but they are getting to be secular.
If you want to live as a community, as a nation, let those
who created you provide you with the land.

128. Look at the Soviet Union trading with the capitalist
States. There is nothing wrong with it; it is a new approach.
There should be a new approach to world affairs. And it is
true that our Asian friends, the Chinese, sometimes take
issue with the Soviet Union, but this will be .forgotten. I
witnessed that happening between the Soviet Union and the
United States in the early 1950s. We called it the cold war.
We did not freeze. And one day you will bury the hatchet.
In other words, the United Nations, including the Security
Council, will be a window-dressing
for the small Powers,
including my own country and poor Lebanon.

134. You have said this is a fait accompli; all right, it is a
fait accompli, but live with us-if you want to-within
reason, not always by creating trouble in our midst. You
will not succeed and you will create trouble for yourselves
and for us. For Heaven’s sake-just for humanity’s sake-1
am trying to jolt this into your consciousness: you cannot
survive even if you bring 10 million Jews into the land, for
in about 15 years we will be 150 million. And how can you
live with a hostile Arab world surrounding you? It is not
practical.

129. You make your deals by Mr. Kissinger going to
Moscow or to Peking and then Mr. Brezhnev coming to
Washington, and we are false witnesses to what is happening. It takes Baroody to tell you that. And the world should
know that it is so. And this gentleman coming from
Russia-he is not a Russian-by way of Shanghai laughs at
it, while people, his own people and Palestinian people,
perish. This is no laughing matter. I do not know how
long-maybe some will say it is high time for Baroody to
leave the United Nations-I will stay, but I am warning you
that whether I stay here for some time or I quit tomorrow
we need a new approach to international affairs. We are
duplicating what 1 witnessed in the League of Nations.
What is the gist of it?

135. We do not hate you-as you always say we hate you.
You made people hate you because you destroyed their
homes-the Palestinians. You took their farms. You said
they fled. Suppose they fled? Not all of them fled; those
who heard about Deir Yassin in 1948 fled; many who did
not hear about Deir Yassin remained in the Holy Land of
Palestine. Suppose they panicked’and fled, do they not
have a right to their land? Think of that.
136. I think you have developed a psychosis .and some of
the Palestinians have developed a psychosis too: a psychosis
of ultranationalism. Why do you not live side by side?
What are you afraid of? You have technology, you have
industry, and I am sure that you can live side by side in a
binational State. Look at Switzerland, look at Lebanon.
There are many sects, there is a confessional arrangement.
But you do not want that because you have become like
the horse with the blinders. You see a road that you want
to follow and you do not want to look at what is going on
in the world, and finally the world will get tired of you-if
it gets tired of us we do not mind, there are too many of
us-and 1 have told you that I would hate to see innocent
Jews become scapegoats if one day something goes wrong
economically and they say: “Aha, the Jews! ” That is
nothing new-not in our world. It has happened in Europe.

130. I remember seeing my Austrian colleague sitting
there in the Council-and it heartens me for it is one of the
most civilized countries in Europe. How come, finally, that
at one time you would talk behind the scenes to the Soviet
Union and to the United States about liberating Austria
from occupation, and they would not listen. There was the
bugbear of communism, on one hand, and then Marxism,
the apostle of materialism, on the other side. But, finally,
they came to an agreement, and Austria is sitting with us as
a full-fledged independent State.
131. It is within your power if you want to accomplish
things. Why do you not put an end to these incursions by a
people which came from the continent of Europe-at least
14

Lebanon. Are you deaf? Did you not hear? Are you
short-sighted?
Did you not see? You spoke about a
“tablet”. Read the resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations-of
the General Assembly and Security Council.
There in black and white, in the five working languages of
the Council and the Assembly, you will find the condemnation of Israel for aggression and the demand that it
should liberate the occupied territories and live with its
neighbours in accordance with the Charter. Have you not
seen this? It must mean that you are short-sighted,
together with your Government, your Dayan and the other
extremists who, in the second half of the twentieth
century, are threatening half of the State of Lebanon with
destruction. It is monstrous!
It is barbarity, cruelty,
Hitlerism and fascism in the Zionist version. There is a
tablet for you. Read the tablet-it has one inscription: “Get
out of the occupied Arab territories”. Then everything will
be settled, and there will be peace, security and tranquillity
in the Middle East. You do not see this tablet. That means
that you are not merely short-sighted but blind. It is time
for you to notice these things, and the sooner you do so,
the better it will be.

137. If Mr. Tekoah wants to research what I am saying, he
will find that centuries before Hitler they picked on the
Jew when there was something wrong. That was during the
age of religious intolerance. And now it could be ideological
intolerance, political intolerance. When religion loses its
grip on people something replaces it-ideological intolerance, national intolerance.
138. If you want to commit suicide like the Massada 1 will
deplore it. Why should you? But you, the leaders, will
always survive; the people will be sacrificed. People are like
sheep. Some leaders shear enough wool to clothe themselves and their entourage; others cut all the wool, and if
the sheep perish they take to their heels and go to another
land.
139. Did the influential in Nazi Germany suffer? Ninety
per cent of them were abroad. I saw them in the 1930s in
Europe. The humble Jewish people, the tailors, delicatessen
men and those who had small shops, those were the people
who really bore the brunt and finally were persecuted and
perished.
140. And why do you want to let it happen again? And
of all places in Palestine, where the three monotheistic
religions grew up and flourished and had a message for the
whole world? Why do you want it to happen in Palestine?
And you, the major Powers, what are you going to do? I
do not want now to use the term “super-Powers’*.
According to the Chinese, the super-Powers are two. I am
referring to the major Powers members of the Security
Council, including France and the United Kingdom, What
are you going to do about it? Will you send an ultimatum
stating that this has gone on for too long and that you want
to put an end to it? Or shall we come again and again and
again to the Security Council in exercises in futility? This
is the question.

145. I quoted a recent statement-an official statementof the Soviet side, the speech of Mr. Brezhnev. The position
of the Soviet Union is clear, and consistent. Our policy has
been and will continue to be directed unswervingly against
aggression, in support of the legitimate rights of the Arab
peoples, and towards the achievement of a just peace in the
Middle East. This means the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from all the territories occupied in and since 1967.
146. There is the tablet. Open your eyes, Mr. Tekoah, and
advise your Government to open its eyes, and you will
notice the inscription on the tablet; it is not only in
hieroglyphics, but also in English, French, Spanish and
Russian-in the resolutions of the United Nations. There are
the tablets of international opinion. You and your country
are condemned. You are alone and isolated; you are
supported by only one great Power, and by no one else.

141. I do hope something constructive will be done so
that we may not find ourselves going in circles. I may have
taxed the patience of my colleagues but I think we should
call a spade a spade and do some plain talking instead of
beating around the bush.

147. We are in favour of guaranteeing security in the
interests of all the States of the area, including your own.
We are in favour of respect for the legitimate rights of the
Arab people of Palestine. That is our principle and our
“tablet”. Read this inscription, do not be blind, deaf or
short-sighted, and do not reproach others with being
short-sighted.

142. The PRESIDENT: There are no more names on the
list of speakers of those wishing to make a statement. I
therefore propose now to call on those members who wish
to exercise their right of reply.
143. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation from Russian): I should like to reply briefly to

148. I have a very short comment to make on another
point-the appeal by my distinguished friend, Mr. Baroody,
to the major Powers. There is no need to appeal to the
Soviet Union, Mr. Baroody; our position is clear and is one
of principle; I have just stated it. Appeal to the other major
Powers, Much depends on them. But when you appeal to
the major Powers, Mr. Baroody, do not forget your own
strength. Recent events have shown that the Arab world
needs to be firmly united. Ensure that it is so. When you
rely on the major Powers, do not forget to rely on
yourselves and on your own strength and on the unity of
the Arab world. You have the means of bringing influence
to bear both against the aggressor and on those who
help him.

some of the comments made by the representative of Israel,
Mr. Tekoah. I could be proud of the fact that he accorded
so much attention to me, the Soviet representative, in
connexion with my statement. Accordingly, I draw the
conclusion that my statement hit the mark. He accuses
others of being short-sighted, but he himself is not only
short-sighted but deaf. He concentrated for the most part
on me. But all those who spoke before me condemned your
country, as the aggressor, for this latest act of aggression.
Why was I singled out in your response?
144. The Security Council has condemned your country
more than 10 times for similar acts of banditry against
15

149. Mr. TEKOAH

(Israel): I should like first of all to

refer to the statement made by the representative of Syria
and to say categorically that all the -positions that are
maintained today by the Israeli Defence Forces along the
cease-fire line have been so maintained since before the
cease-fire.
1.50. My second observation to his statement is that he
forgot to mention one significant fact, namely, that the
Government of Syria refused to accept the 22 October
1973 call of the Security Council for a cease-fire until two
days later. He will find reference to this crucial fact in the
correspondence between the Secretary-General and me
distributed as a Security Council document /S/11047].
15 1.. We all heard what the representative of Lebanon had
to say about the massacre in Kiryat Shmona. We listened
carefully to his words and we noted that he could not hold
back his sympathy for the perpetrators of that cruel and
barbaric slaughter. We all noted how he came here to
suggest that in the Kiryat Shmona carnage not the terrorists
but their victims and the victims’ defenders were at fault.
That shocking pronouncement will not remain unnoticed.
It is customary for him to refer to the existence of
Palestinian refugees on Lebanese soil. If he would have read
my statement of yesterday, he would have noted a historic
fact. These Palestinians have been in Lebanon since 1948
and for more than two decades the Lebanese-Israeli frontier
was an example of tranquillity. Why use them as a pretext
now for terrorist operations by gangs usually coming from
abroad and establishing their headquarters, training camps
and operational bases on Lebanese soil?
152. I shall add only one further remark on this particular
point. It ishigh time to be correct and to avoid falsification
also about the number of Palestinians in Lebanon. The
reports of the United Nations, the reports of UNRWA, the
reports of the Secretary-General speak of 160,000. The
representative of Lebanon feels himself free whenever he
wants to refer to 300,000, to 250,000 and so on. I
understand his discomfiture in view of the fact that his
country has become, and is considered by the entire
enlightened world, a centre of international terrorism. The
Israeli representative does not come before the Security
Council to prove that. This fact is known universally; it is
reported by the international press daily; correspondents of
international media of information are free to meet with
leaders of these terrorist groupings in Beirut and to send on
Lebanese wires abroad the stories and threats and statements made by these leaders.
153. Can the representative of Lebanon deny the existence of these headquarters, training centres, recruitment
offices, operational bases of terrorist organizations in Beirut
and in other parts of Lebanon? Can he deny that agents of
these organizations have freely left his country on missions
of death not only to Kiryat Shmona but also to other parts
of the world, in particular Europe, frequently carrying
Lebanese passports, boarding planes in Beirut, carrying with
them explosives and other weapons of death? Can he deny
the aggreement signed by his Government on 3 November
1969,with these terrorist organizations giving them freedom
of movement on Lebanese soil, giving them rights among
which is the right to cross the frontier, as quoted by me
from a paragraph contained in that particular agreement?

154. On what did the representative of Lebanon try to
base his case that the murderers in Kiryat Shmona didaot
come from his country? On the fact that there were Israeli
radio broadcasts while the murders were still taking place,
as he himself admitted, stating that the facts were still~not
fully known. By bringing this kind of evidence before the
Security Council the representative of Lebanon has
achieved the very opposite of his purpose. The townlet of
Kiryat Shmona, which was the target of this atrocious
attack, is only one kilometre from the Lebanese border. If
the Israeli authorities had desired to make, as the Lebanese
representative alleged, Lebanon into a scapegoat, it would
have been very simple for them to say that the geographic
location of Kiryat Shmona is sufficient proof of the fact
that the murderers crossed the border from Lebanon. The
Israeli authorities did not do that. They waited until there
was evidence that the three terrorists in fact had crossed the
frontier, and it was only then that the official announcement was made. But at the very same time the terrorist
organizations in Beirut were free to speak of the attack that
was taking place in Kiryat Shmona. They already knew the
full details of it; they already knew and published and
circulated the names, the ages, the origins of the three
assassins.
155. These are the facts and this is the balance of truth
and falsehood, of right and wrong. And as for the true face
of this so-called scapegoat-Lebanon-let
Lebanese leaders
describe it themselves. For instance, Mr. Pierre Gemayel,
leader of the Phalangist Party, demanded on 30 November
1973 that
“No pretext should be given to Israel to shell southern
Lebanon. None of the Lebanese leaders tried to enter to
the root of the problem in order to discuss the real causes
which have been turning southern Lebanon into a centre
of demolition and destruction since until now this matter
was dealt with in a cowardly manner full of lies while
using justifications and hollow slogans and unwilling to
see the truth.”
That is a Lebanese leader speaking, a member of the
Lebanese Parliament, not the Israeli representative. And
then he continued:
“There is no way to tackle the problem without
observing the truth as it is. We must first of all ask how to
arrest the activities carried out on the borders by
irresponsible and undisciplined groups. Secondly, we
must see whether these activities are useful to the
Palestinian cause, as they are harmful to Lebanon. The
question is how can we expect that Israel would not carry
out retaliatory operations while we turn our borders into
a centre of sabotage against her.”
156. Mr. Raymond Edde, leader of the Lebanese National
Bloc, stated on 13 March 1974-only a few weeks ago“The south must be the cardinal subject before the
Government because of the continuing hostilities there.
The army should be present on the borders in order to
prevent attempts by fedayeen who defy orders of their
commanders regarding the crossing of the border and the
firing of rockets. The army must detain them.”

,_

-

,I’

when the dangercanbe removed through an appealto the.authorities of the neighbouring country, no case,of
necessity has arisen. But if such an appeal is fruitless or
not possible”-this has been the casewith Lebanon-“or
if there is danger in delay, a caseof necessityarises,and
the threatened State is justified in invading the neighbouring country and disarmingthe intending raiders.‘“*

157. And if that were not enough, the leaders of the
Lebanese Government themselves have something to say
about the true picture of so-called peaceful Lebanon. It
seems that this innocent virtuous Lebanon speaks in two
different voices: one, a voice of propaganda meant for the
gullible on the assumption that apparently they are to bb
found also around this Security Council table; and the
second voice, when there is no escape from truth, when
these leaders have to face parliamentary debates, when they
have to face questions of other Lebanese statesmen. And
thus the Prime Minister of Lebanon himself declared, on
5 March 1974:

160. Now, this statement of international law does not
date back a hundred years or 200 years: it was written a
number of years ago on the basis of an authoritative
interpretation of international law as it standstoday under
the Charter of the United Nations. I have had the
opportunity already to refer to the inalienablefundamental
right of every State under Articie 51 of the Charter to
self-defence.There is only one way for Lebanon to make
Israeli defence actions unnecessaryon Lebaneseterritory,
and that is for the LebaneseGovernment to live up to its
international obligations and to put an end to the existence
and operation of terrorist gangson and from
._ its
.-. soil.

“Lebanon is resolute. Lebanon is resolute in her
decision to continue her co-operation with the fedayeen.”
It is now obvious what the results of this co-operation and
the close ties between the Government of Lebanon and the
terrorist gangs are.. The Minister of Defence of Lebanon
declared, on 14 February 1974:

161. I should like to refer to only one point raisedby the
representativeof the USSR. He found it advisableto speak
of Israel’sallegedisolation in the international community.
1 wonder whether those who make such statementsrealize
the meaning of isolation in general, and in respectof Israel
in particular. Do they realize, for instance, that in all
democratic countries, even in those whose Governments,
for reasons of material expediency sometimes do lean
towards the Arab States, the peoples, as demonstrated in
public opinion polls, are squarely on Israel’s side? I would
even venture to say to the representative of the USSR that
if such a free public opinion poll were allowed also in his
own country the results would be the same, and the
support of the peoples of the So&d< Ur& for .%%l’s
struggle would be as strong as in other parts of the world.

“The Lebanese army will not undertake a policy of
forcibly preventing some fedayeen groups from carrying
out operations through Lebanese territory. The army
leaves these operations to the fedayeen command headquarters.”
And three days earlier, on 11 February
of Defence of Lebanon said:

1974, the Minister

“I have a list which shows that fedayeen activities in the
southern region have not ceased, and that the bombing
with missiles of Israeli villages on the southern border by
fedayeens is one of the most important reasons for Israeli
attacks.”
158. Now, I suggest that these statements are an accurate
reflection of the true situation-and
not the concocted
propaganda and allegation to which the Council has been
subjected, yesterday and today, by Lebanese representatives.

162. As for the attitude of the Governments themselves,
we attach great significance to it. But it is no secret that
this attitude is frequently influenced by suchconsiderations
as the number of Arab votes in international organizations,
the size of Arab territories and of Arab populations, and
the need for Arab oil. Theseconsiderationshave of course,
no relation whatever to the merits of Israel’sposition and
to the righteousnessof its cause.

159. The representative of Lebanon spoke of Israeli
actions taken on Lebanese soil in the past. He forgot to
mention one central fact: and that is that every single
Israeli action was a counteraction to a long chain of
ceaseless murderous attacks that came from the territory of
his country. And on that I should like to quote a statement
made by an international law authority, Professor Goodheart, and published in the Daily Telegraph of 29 July
1968. The renowned international jurist says:

163. Moreover, this situation is not new. It is not new for
Israel; it is not new for the Jewish people. We have always
been a small nation, devoid of large territory or vast riches.
Our strength hasalways beenin the realmof the spirit, in our
faith, in our civilization, in the values of morality and
justice which we have enunciated and upheld through the
ages.

“The claim made by the Arabs that they have the right
to support the guerrillas and at the same time to
repudiate all responsibility for them is an astonishingone.
Israel is entitled to take the necessarycountermeasuresin
its self-preservation.

164. Those who held different beliefs, those who disagreedwith us, those who opposed us, have always been
more numerousthan ourselves.Yet, throughout history we
have always remained faithful to our heritage and have
always refusedto abandon it and to join the majority. We
knew at all times,in all periodsof history, that it waseasier
to yield, to give in and to give up, and to become part of
the multitude. We chosenot to do that.

“On this point Oppenheim and Lauterpacht stated the
law thus:
“ *When,to give an example, a State is informed that a
body of armed men is being organisedon neighbouring
territory for the purpose of a raid into its territory, and

1 L.F.L.
Oppenheim,
International Law: A l?eatise, 7th ed., H:
Lauterpacht,ed. (London,Longman’s,
GreenandCo., 1955),vol. I,
p. 266.

17

165. Have those who speak of Israel’s isolation, as the
Soviet representative did, given any thought to the question: What would have happened if at the time the Jewish
people was the only one with a monotheistic religion it had
discarded it because the entire world rejected the idea of
one God? What would have happened to the birth of
Christianity and Islam, both rooted in Judaism? What
would have happened to the vision of the Hebrew prophets
inscribed at the gates to the United Nations-the vision of a
world at peace, of swords being turned into ploughshares, if
the Jewish people had said to itself, “We are isolated
because all nations believe in war. Let us therefore join
them in the glorification of war, and stop preaching
peace”?

170. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): I wish to make onIy a few
points in exercise of my right of reply.
171. First of all, Mr. Tekoah, in his usual manner of
falsifying facts, even events and words that take place and
are spoken here before the Council. immediatelv wanted to
note that 1 held back my sympathy concerning the
massacres of Kiryat Shmona. Yesterday my Foreign Minister said very clearly that he had no embarrassment in
stating his opinion and the opinion of the President of the
Republic, and I did reiterate that. He is playing on words,
and in his usual manner of falsification and vilification
Mr. Tekoah tries to lead the Council into error.
172. Regarding the Palestinians in Lebanon, Mr. Tekoah
cited the fact that according to the UNRWA report we have
160,000 Palestinians there. It is true that according to that
report we have such a number living in the camps and
receiving rations from UNRWA. But apart from that
number, we have a large number of Palestinians living in
Lebanon-living,
like everyone else, in apartments-to
whom we have extended many facilities so that they may
live a better life. They are in business; they are doctors;
they are lawyers; they are bankers; they are professors; they
are students in the universities; they belong to a class that
no longer needs the alms of the United Nations-7 centsworth of rations a day.

166. The Jewish people was isolated when, 3,000 years
ago, it proclaimed the concept that all men are born equal
because they are all created in the image of one God. The
Jewish people was all alone when, thirty centuries before
the abolition of slavery, it established by binding law that
slaves must be freed after six years of servitude. When the
Crusaders massacred entire Jewish communities including
those in the land of Israel; when the Inquisition burned
Jews at the stake; when pogromists butchered Jewish
women and children; when the Nazis annihilated them in
gas chambers and crematoria, we were isolated. Do not,
therefore, throw at us the epithet of isolation when our
children and women are again being murdered-this time by
Arab terrorists. Do not taunt us with isolation when we are
still defending, as we have been for centuries, our very right
to life as individuals and as a people, different but equal
with others.

173. Mr. Tekoah always refers to the enlightened world
that knows the facts about Lebanon. I have always failed to
know which is the enlightened world. It seems that, according to Mr. Tekoah, who is defending his isolation and the
isolation of his Government and its aggressive policy, the
only enlightened people in the world are the aggressive
leaders of Israel. That is a new definition of “enlightenment”, and I think the Council would be well advised to
take note of it.

167. We shall not be impressed nor deterred. The Jewish
people has never betrayed itself and never will, small as it is,
surrounded by those who are more numerous, as it has
always been. That has been our strength in all ages:
isolation from injustice, isolation from a refusal to distinguish right from wrong; isolation from the belief that
material power, numerical strength and the power of
violence are supreme. That is a condition about which the
Jewish people has never had any regrets. In fact, it is not
isolation at all but a conscious choice, a conscious
preference for and alliance with the right and the just and
the humane even in times when only a few uphold those
tenets.

174.. Regarding what happened at Kiryat Shmona, I again
repeat that, according to recorded broadcasts from Israel at
11 o’clock, immediately following the conclusion of the
operations at Kiryat Shmona, Radio Israel categorically and
automatically stated that the perpetrators of that act had
come from Lebanon, and the Israeli Government has based
its verdict against Lebanon on that information.
175. There are many points that Mr. Tekoah has raised to
which I am not going to reply at this particular stage. But I
should like particularly to refer to the statement attributed
to the Minister of Defence of Lebanon. It is a fact that the
Minister of Defence meant that the Lebanese army does not
assume alone the responsibility
for the prevention of
infiltration into Israel from Lebanon. The Palestine Liberation Organization itself has been doing everything in its
power to prevent any infiltration from Lebanon into Israel.
The fact that the Prime Minister of Lebanon has stated that
Lebanon supports the cause of the Palestinian people does
not mean that Lebanon supports the acts of violence or
that the Prime Minister of Lebanon is encouraging or
allowing or permitting any infiltration from our borders
into Israel on a mission of acts of violence. His statement
means simply that he, as well as the Lebanese, without
exception, support the cause-the
right cause-of the
Palestinian people, a cause seeking rights recognized as
theirs by the United Nations.

168. For thousands of years, our people has found in this
situation sufficient strength and inspiration to persevere
and even to outline its detractors, because the Jewish
people has always known that its ideals and values, its
identity, the protection of its heritage, the righteousness of
its cause are more precious than the plaudits of others. That
is true also today.
169. Mr. CHUANG
Yen (China) (frunsiation
from
Chinese): The Israeli representative’s earlier reference to my
statement is beneath refutation, It is notorious that the
Israeli Zionists have incurred huge debts in blood by their
wanton violation of the national rights of the Palestinian
people and the sovereignty and territory of Arab countries
and peoples. It is futile for the Zionists to whitewash their
undisguised crimes of aggression, however hard they may
try. The more one tries to cover them up, the more glaring
they become.
18

policy and their threats and concentrate on one policy, and
only one, that of a sane, constructive, steady approach to
peace-peace alone. If Israel has the courage to work
sincerely for it and to risk it, that will prevent orchards
from becoming a wasteland and will indeed make the deserts
bloom.

176. We have those Palestinian people of all categories and
of all shades. Who is responsible for their presence in
Lebanon, but Israeli terrorism, Israeli terrorism and Israeli
policy which has kept them in refugee camps for 25 years?
177. The melodramatic statements of Mr. Tekoah cannot
efface the memory of the Zionist and Israeli atrocities in
the Middle East against the Palestinian people. The path of
terrorism in our area is indelibly marked with the footprints
of Israeli terrorists.

181.. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): We regret that the
representative of Israel used his right of reply for a
completely unworthy and shameful tactic. He attempted to
convey the idea that the policy of the Governments of the
countries which strongly condemn Israel’s aggressive and
expansionist policy do not have the support of their
peoples. We must state as decisively and categorically as
possible that the Soviet people and the whole of Soviet
public opinion has supported and continues to support the
policy of the Soviet Government on the Middle East
question” The Soviet people and Soviet public opinion
strongly condemn Israel’s acts of aggression against Arab
States and its policy of expansion and annexation of
foreign lands. The Soviet people and Soviet public opinion
has always rendered and will continue to render all possible
support to the just cause of the Arab peoples fighting for
the restoration of their legitimate rights and the liberation
of their land. It is perfectly clear that the State of Israel
finds itself in deep political, moral and diplomatic isolation,
and the sooner the rulers of Israel grasp this situation the
better, for it is the practical manifestation of the condemnation of Israel’s adventuristic policy by the whole of world
public opinion and an overwhelming number of the peoples
of the world.

178. As I have remarked once before, if the Palestinian
people and individuals have taken arms in their hands, that
is their business. We have nothing to do with it in Lebanon
as a Government and as a people. But we have to remember
always that the Israeli Government has raised terrorism to
the rank of a State policy. We were reminded of that fact
today by Ambassador Malik.
179. In application of that policy, plans are hatched at the
ministerial level and handed to regular units of the armed
forces of Israel to carry them out. They are issued by
people whose prime responsibility
at this stage is to
promote and help in the promotion of conditions of
tranquillity in the area, to better foster the chances of a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. The Lebanese
Government has always recognized its responsibility and
worked, laboured and supported every effort to promote
conditions of peace. It does so particularly at this stage
when such delicate and intricate negotiations are being
undertaken to achieve that objective.
180. I think Mr. Tekoah would do well to tell his
Government and his people that there is a road to peace,
that they should scrap their aggressive and destructive

The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.

19

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may be obtained
your bookstore

from
bookstores
and. distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATiONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaims
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adresses-vous
a : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAIC

IlOJIYqHTb

H3AAHHIF

OPl-AHH3AWiU

OB%EAHHEHHhIX

HAUZiR

H3naiwsi
Otraiftmausis
(M%ensHeHHbxx
Haqml
MOW(HO ~ynmb
a KHHXKHLIX yamJHH~X H arewrcmax
so acex pakmax
rdupa. HammiTe
cnpaem
06 KvlaHHRx
B
Barnerd KHWXHOM Mara3HHe
WIIH n~uui~e
no anpecy:
Opranmau~~
O6’beAkiHeHHblX
Haunit,
Cexum
no npoafwce
W~A~HHR, HLW)-Ffopx
HIIU XeHesa.
COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE-LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Lftho

In United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en vents en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

2.00

7482001-May

1980-2,200
