A/55/PV.83

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

83rd plenary meeting
Friday, 8 December 2000, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 18
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Observance of the fortieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples
The President: The General Assembly, in
accordance with decision 55/410, adopted at its 61st
plenary meeting on 14 November 2000, will observe
this morning, under agenda item 18, the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.
The General Assembly is today observing the
fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples. This Declaration, together with the
Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, has laid the foundation for the role and
responsibility of the United Nations in upholding the
principle of the right to self-determination.
In December 1960, the representative of
Cambodia, in introducing the draft resolution
containing the Declaration, pointed out that the
sponsors of the draft were anxious that the Declaration
should be yet another step forward in the process of the

emancipation of peoples. He also stressed the need for
all countries concerned to support the Declaration in
order to ensure peaceful development and freedom for
all those peoples who had not yet gained independence.
The General Assembly, composed at the time of
99 Member States, adopted the Declaration by an
overwhelming majority. Within a year, the Assembly
had established a Committee to monitor the
implementation of the Declaration, and in 1962 it
issued a preliminary list of some 64 Non-SelfGoverning Territories to which the Declaration applied.
The Declaration proclaimed the necessity of
bringing to a speedy and unconditional end colonialism
in all its forms and manifestations. The Assembly
declared that all peoples have the right to selfdetermination and that, by virtue of that right, they may
freely determine their political status and freely pursue
their economic, social and cultural development. Year
after year, the Assembly has reaffirmed the principles
enshrined in the Charter and has reiterated that the
administering Powers have a special responsibility to
promote to the utmost, within the system of
international peace and security, the well-being of the
inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
under their responsibility.
The membership of the United Nations has more
than doubled since the adoption of the Declaration. A
total of 189 Member States, many of them former NonSelf-Governing Territories, are now called on to
observe the anniversary of this historic document and
acknowledge the urgency of realizing its goal: the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-78992 (E)

*0078992*

A/55/PV.83

eradication of colonialism. At the Millennium Summit
three months ago, Member States reiterated the right to
self-determination of peoples.
Today there are still 17 Non-Self-Governing
Territories to which the Declaration applies and to
which the Assembly will continue to give its full
attention. One of these — East Timor — has exercised
its right to self-determination and chosen the path to
independence. Just over a year ago the people of East
Timor, in a free and fair referendum, voted for
independence. Since then, the process towards national
reconciliation and nation-building has been carried out
with the support of the United Nations. The Territory is
currently under the administration of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), and it is making strides in preparing the
necessary
conditions
for
independence.
The
international community has followed closely these
historic developments in East Timor and the important
role played by the United Nations.
I am therefore very pleased to be able to
announce that, at the invitation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello of UNTAET, I will be visiting East
Timor early next year. The purpose of my visit is to
familiarize myself with the situation in East Timor and
with the work of UNTAET firsthand. In the light of the
Millennium Summit and the current discussions on the
reform of peacekeeping, the visit should also be
particularly interesting, given the complex and
multidimensional nature of the UNTAET peacekeeping
operation.
To conclude, I should like to stress that the
fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration,
at the dawn of the millennium, offers us an opportunity
not only to look back at the successes the United
Nations has achieved in the field of decolonization, but
also, more importantly, to look ahead and reiterate our
commitment to fulfil its objectives and redouble our
efforts to that end.
I now give the floor to the Under-SecretaryGeneral of the Department for General Assembly
Affairs and Conference Services, Mr. Yongjian Jin,
who will deliver a message from the Secretary-General.
Mr. Jin (Under-Secretary-General, Department
of General Assembly Affairs and Conference
Services): The Secretary-General is away and has
requested that I deliver the following message on his

2

behalf. The Secretary-General’s message on the
occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples reads as follows:
“The Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
adopted by the General Assembly 40 years ago,
represented a universal reaffirmation of a historic
process of emancipation, freedom and self-rule.
The Declaration was not only an expression of
support by the overwhelming majority of United
Nations Member States for the liberation struggle
of colonial territories, but also became a forceful
tool with which to spur on the implementation of
the Charter’s provisions on Non-Self-Governing
Territories.
“The United Nations success in the area of
decolonization can be most vividly observed in
this very Assembly. More than 60 nations
represented in this Hall have achieved
independence and joined the United Nations as
sovereign States in the four decades since the
Declaration was adopted. While there is good
cause for celebration, there is also a need for
awareness of the challenges ahead, as the United
Nations faces the task of completing the
implementation of the Declaration and all the
relevant resolutions of the Organization on
decolonization.
“During the past decade, the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples has played an important role in
maintaining a spotlight on the remaining 17 NonSelf-Governing Territories, not least in providing
a forum for their peoples to voice their thoughts
and aspirations regarding their future.
“The
principles
enunciated
in
the
Declaration resonate with force at the dawn of the
new Millennium. In spite of all that has been
accomplished, the Declaration is yet to be
implemented in the remaining Non-SelfGoverning Territories. I take this opportunity to
reiterate an appeal to the administering Powers
concerned to cooperate in this endeavour by
assisting the Special Committee in the discharge

A/55/PV.83

of the important mandate entrusted to it by the
General Assembly”.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Peter
Dickson Donigi of Papua New Guinea, Chairman of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Mr. Donigi (Papua New Guinea), Chairman of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples:
The General Assembly is today observing the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. That historic Declaration embodied the
international community’s conviction that the peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories should enjoy the
rights and freedoms enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and that the continued existence of
colonialism was in contradiction to the United Nations
ideals.
The General Assembly has continued, throughout
the intervening period, to urge Member States to
comply with its Declaration and has continued to guide
the work of the United Nations on decolonization.
Through the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, the General Assembly has kept the situation in
the Non-Self-Governing Territories under constant
review and has adopted concrete proposals to bring
about the speedy elimination of colonialism.
Today we observe the anniversary of the
Declaration at the same time as the International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism is coming to
an end. It is regrettable that four decades later, and
despite the successes the United Nations has seen in its
efforts to promote the decolonization process,
colonialism persists. Without wishing to minimize the
challenges ahead, however, the Special Committee
remains convinced that, with the cooperation of the
administering Powers, progress towards implementing
the Declaration can be achieved. Thus, efforts for a
sustained, purposeful dialogue should continue and
intensify.
The overwhelming support for the decolonization
process continues unabated. Many countries, mine

included, which came to independence under the
watchful eye of the United Nations, are in this General
Assembly today, commemorating the adoption of the
Declaration that gave renewed impetus to the cause of
decolonization.
The message of the Special Committee to the
international community and to the Non-SelfGoverning Territories on this special occasion is very
clear: we will continue to work to carry out the
mandate entrusted to us by the General Assembly,
which has been reaffirmed and strengthened by
successive decisions and resolutions of the Assembly,
until the objectives of the Declaration have been
attained.
Mr. Bakoniarivo (Madagascar) (spoke in
French): On behalf of the Group of African States,
which Madagascar is chairing for the month of
December 2000, it is my honour to speak today on the
subject of agenda item 18, entitled “Observance of the
fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples”. That Declaration, adopted by the United
Nations under resolution 1514 (XV) on 14 December
1960, has marked the history of international relations
and reflects the commitment of the international
community to the purposes and principles of the
Charter, including the right of peoples to selfdetermination.
This anniversary is of particular importance to
Africa, which shall the continents has paid the heaviest
price as a result of colonization. Indeed, when the
United Nations was established in San Francisco in
1945, only four African States were in a position to
join this international Organization as independent
countries. The rest of the African continent was still
under colonial domination.
Furthermore, when the United Nations was
created in 1945, two thirds of the present Member
States were not yet independent. At present, 17
territories are still not autonomous and are demanding
their freedom and their right to self-determination. This
bears witness to the fact that undeniable efforts for
decolonization have been made, but much remains to
be done.
In this respect, we wish to express our gratitude
to the United Nations, particularly to the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of

3

A/55/PV.83

Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples — for
the efforts made to implement resolution 1514 (XV) in
all the territories to which the Declaration applies, with
a view to bringing a speedy and unconditional end to
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations, in
application of Article 73 of the United Nations Charter
and the Declaration; for organizing regional seminars,
which made it possible to assess the achievements of
the first International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism, adopted by the General Assembly in
resolution 46/181 of 19 December 1991; and for
planning the strategy and the future activities of the
United Nations regarding decolonization.
We also wish to pay warm tribute to the
courageous freedom fighters who write the whole of
the history of their struggle in letters of blood, at the
cost of their lives.
Forty years have elapsed since the adoption of the
Declaration whose anniversary we are observing today;
but, unfortunately, we have to note that many problems
of the last century will probably still exist in the new
century. Decolonization is one of many.
While enormous progress has been made in
eliminating colonialism during the last decade, much
still remains to be done to ensure the total eradication
of this scourge. The exercise of the inalienable rights of
peoples of non-autonomous territories, particularly as
regards small island developing States and their
vulnerable social sectors, requires the continuation and
consolidation of our efforts so that the United Nations
can complete its decolonization work.
The main challenge we must face during the
upcoming
2001-2110
decade,
and
in
this
commemoration is to complete the efforts that were
made during the past decade to ensure that in the new
century the world will be free from the yoke of
colonialism.
According to the Millennium Declaration recently
adopted by all the world’s leaders in resolution 55/2,
“We are determined to establish a just and
lasting peace all over the world in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
We rededicate ourselves to support all efforts to
uphold the sovereign equality of all States,
respect for their territorial integrity and political
independence ... [and] the right to selfdetermination of peoples which remain under

4

colonial domination and foreign occupation”.
(para. 4)
We hope that during the new decade the Member
States will redouble their efforts in the specialized
agencies and other United Nations bodies to ensure the
full and effective implementation of the Declaration
and of other relevant resolutions of the United Nations
on this subject.
May this event give new energy to our common
struggle for universal and effective respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without regard
to race, sex, language or religion. We also hope that
this commemorative meeting will strengthen our
commitment to the values and ideals of the United
Nations to bring out a world of peace, equity and
justice.
Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): I feel greatly
honoured to address this body in my capacity as
Chairman of the Asian Group for the month of
December 2000, on an occasion of particular
significance to us: the observance of the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of the historic Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples.
We are privileged to deliberate on the observance
of the fortieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Declaration at the beginning of the new millennium,
when our Organization is assessing its past actions in
all spheres of its work, including that of
decolonization, concerning which the General
Assembly has solemnly reaffirmed its strong
commitment to the right of peoples to selfdetermination. In the past four decades since the
adoption by the General Assembly of this important
document, decolonization has greatly accelerated
around the world. The presence in the General
Assembly of so many formerly colonized nations is the
brightest testimony to this.
By launching in 1990 an International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism, the United Nations
reinforced its efforts to achieve the objectives of the
Declaration. Enormous efforts have been made in this
regard by the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration over
the past decades. I would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the Special Committee and to its
Chairman, Ambassador Peter Donigi of Papua New

A/55/PV.83

Guinea, for their outstanding commitment and for their
untiring efforts to fulfil the mandate.

document has played in the history of mankind and the
United Nations.

Despite the impressive progress made since the
adoption of the Declaration and the establishment of
the Special Committee, the process of decolonization is
not entirely complete. We cannot ignore the fact that 17
cases of Non-Self-Governing Territories are still under
review by the Special Committee. The United Nations
and the international community at large are dutybound to bring colonialism to a complete end. Progress
in decolonization is closely connected with the
protection and implementation of the right of the
peoples of the Territories mentioned above to selfdetermination. This requires the joint efforts of the
United Nations, the peoples of Non-Self-Governing
Territories and the administering Powers.

It was that Declaration that set forth the
fundamental principle of self-determination, which
remains one of the cornerstones of contemporary
international relations. The Declaration set in motion
the process of decolonization, which enabled many
peoples
in
the
former
Non-Self-Governing
Territories — despite their small size and population,
geographic remoteness and limited natural resources —
to exercise their choice to freely determine their
political status and to freely pursue economic, social
and cultural development.

The majority of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories are small islands that confront unique
problems arising from their small size and population,
their limited natural resources and their vulnerability to
natural disasters. It is therefore essential that the
international community be sensitive to their needs and
responsive to their requests for assistance. In this
respect, the role of the United Nations programmes and
specialized agencies is of utmost importance for
accelerating progress in their economic and social
sectors.
Last July the Special Committee adopted a
resolution proposing that the current session of the
General Assembly declare the decade from 2001 to
2010 as the Second International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism. It is our earnest hope that
the proclamation of the Second Decade will further
accelerate the process of decolonization and bring it to
a successful end. This is a goal and a constant
challenge which must be pursued without pause for as
long as there remain Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European
States.
In a few days, on 14 December, the peoples of the
world will mark the fortieth anniversary of the
adoption by the General Assembly of a document of
historic significance: the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
While observing that upcoming event today, it is
important to emphasize the outstanding role that

A review of the efforts of the United Nations over
the past four decades since the adoption of the
Declaration offers grounds for believing that
decolonization is one of the most significant
achievements of this Organization. Indeed, the
successes in pursuing this process are well known. Let
me recall some of them. Dozens of former colonies,
inhabited by more than 80 million people, have gained
their long-awaited independence. All eleven Trust
Territories have exercised their right to selfdetermination by obtaining independence or free
association with an independent State. Due to its
untiring efforts in the implementation of this document,
the United Nations family of nations has been
replenished with the essential number of new
Members, and has become a unique global
Organization of universal nature.
At the same time, however encouraging the
outcome of the process launched by the Declaration,
there is an obvious need to intensify our common
efforts aimed at bringing it to its logical conclusion.
One should not forget that the United Nations is still
responsible for 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories
which continue to strive to determine their future.
The Group of Eastern European States expresses
its hope that today’s decision by the General Assembly
to proclaim the Second International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism will contribute to the final
elimination of colonialism in all of its forms and
manifestations. It is also our belief that the Special
Committee on Decolonization will continue its
undaunted commitment to putting the last vestiges of
the colonial era behind us.
Exactly three months ago, the heads of State and
Government gathered at the Millennium Summit

5

A/55/PV.83

adopted the Millennium Declaration, in which they
undertook to rededicate themselves to support all
efforts to uphold the right to self-determination of
peoples that have not yet attained a full measure of
self-government. Thus, the lofty principles and goals
enshrined in the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
40 years ago have once again found solid support.
In this respect, it is important that in the years to
come all Members of the United Nations redouble their
efforts towards reaching the ultimate goal of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples in order to bring about
the complete and speedy eradication of colonialism.
Let us work together to that end.
Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation has the honour to address the Assembly, on
behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, on the occasion of the commemoration of an
event that is of special importance to the United
Nations: the fortieth anniversary of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, which was adopted by the General
Assembly in resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960.
For the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, this anniversary is doubly important and
symbolic. Of the 33 States members of our group, 12
were included in the General Assembly’s list of NonSelf-Governing Territories in 1960.
A process of integration has taken place in our
region as in few other regions of the world. What at
first was only Latin America was gradually enriched by
the addition of the nations of the Caribbean that gained
their independence and entered the United Nations as
Member States. Today, we can testify to the fraternity
and unity of our Group.
Our region has played a key role in the grand
process of decolonization promoted by the United
Nations, even prior to the acclaimed Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. Indeed, in the negotiations on the Charter of
San Francisco, the Latin American republics emerged
as the voice of those who still had no voice, and, since
1945, they have been fighting for the exercise of the
right to self-determination and for the decolonization
of the fraternal peoples of the Caribbean, Africa, Asia
and the Pacific.

6

Regrettably, there are still 17 Non-SelfGoverning Territories on the United Nations list, eight
of them situated on the American continent. The
Special Committee on Decolonization must continue its
work until those Territories are decolonized.
In the majority of the Territories that remain on
the list, their peoples should be able to exercise their
right to self-determination and thus freely to choose
independence, integration or free association with an
independent State.
Also on the list are special cases such as the
dispute over sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands,
located in our continent. This matter should be
resolved through negotiations between the Government
of the Republic of Argentina and the Government of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations.
Moreover, we should also like to point out that,
this year for the first time, the Special Committee on
Decolonization has finally adopted by consensus a
resolution on Puerto Rico, which, among other things,
reiterates that the Puerto Rican people constitutes a
Latin American and Caribbean nation that has its own
and unequivocal national identity.
We hope that in the years ahead, the Special
Committee will make substantive progress in its review
of the situation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
It should be remembered that, in 1998, the Special
Committee decided to embark on a critical review of its
work. This review was completed on 20 March 2000,
when the Special Committee completed the elaboration
of an informal programme of work that could be used
as a model to be applied on a case-by-case basis to the
respective Territories.
The Special Committee must necessarily be given
the support of the administering Powers, duly taking
into consideration the aspirations of the inhabitants of
the Territories in order to elaborate the respective work
programmes during the year 2001 in accordance with
United Nations resolutions on decolonization.
Lastly, and for all the reasons set out above, the
Latin American and Caribbean Group wishes to
express its support for the proclamation of the period
2001-2010 as the Second International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism.

A/55/PV.83

Ms. Suñé Pascuet (Andorra): The Western
European and other States Group (WEOG) is pleased
to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the adoption of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
(spoke in Spanish)
The 1960s witnessed the emergence of a large
number of States throughout the world. Thus, our
vision of the planet was enriched as we began to take
into consideration other voices and other visions. This
benefited this house as well — the United Nations —
which acquired the special texture of a mosaic of
peoples, the characteristic that makes the Organization
and, particularly, the General Assembly a unique entity
in which all members are equally represented.
The WEOG expresses its commitment to all
peoples that are emerging from colonialism. In both the
economic and social aspects, we wish them to achieve
full development.
(spoke in French)

The President: The observance of the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples is now concluded.
Agenda item 18
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples on its work during 2000 (A/55/23
(Parts I-III))
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/55/72 and
Corr.1, A/55/303, A/55/497)
Draft resolutions (A/55/L.58, A/55/23 (Part III),
Chapter XIII, G-para. 7 and H-para. 8)

At the dawn of the third millennium, the world is
new. Nevertheless, we cannot ignore the weight of
history. States are undoubtedly equal by law, but now
we must work in a supportive, responsible and
balanced way to eliminate the great inequities in
economic and social development that persist.

The President: I call on the Rapporteur of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Mr. Fayssal Mekdad of the Syrian Arab Republic, to
introduce the Committee’s report.

The recent Millennium Summit highlighted the
difficulties and challenges before us. The WEOG
States, a regional group made up of countries with
developed economies, will be able, I am certain, to
meet the challenge of our times and fulfil the hopes of
our planet.

Mr. Mekdad (Syria), Rapporteur of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples: In
my capacity as Rapporteur, I have the honour to
present the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples for consideration by
the General Assembly. The report is contained in
document A/55/23 (Parts I-III) and covers the work the
Special Committee carried out during 2000.

(spoke in English)
During the past decade some positive
developments related to decolonization have taken
place, most recently in 1999, when the people of East
Timor chose the path to independence. Still, progress
has been limited, and it is our hope that more can be
done in the coming years. We must seize the moment
and find in the spirit of freedom that engulfed the
world 40 years ago the inspiration and the hope to
build a new world where nations are equal in rights,
responsibilities and levels of development. We must go
beyond political independence and towards equal and
fair interdependence. This is a goal that is dear to the
WEOG States.

The report is being submitted in accordance with
paragraph 8 of resolution 54/91, regarding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The
Special Committee was requested to continue to seek
suitable means for the immediate and full
implementation of the Declaration and to carry out
those actions approved by the Assembly regarding the
International Decade for the Eradication of

7

A/55/PV.83

Colonialism in all Territories that have not yet
exercised their right to self-determination, including
independence.
The report of the Special Committee consists of
three parts. All its recommendations for action by the
General Assembly are presented in part III of the
report.
Part I contains the general introductory chapters,
which describe the organization of the Committee and
its activities on all the matters entrusted to it, and its
relations
with
United
Nations
bodies
and
intergovernmental, non-governmental and regional
organizations. It also reflects the Committee’s action
relating to international conventions. I draw the
Assembly’s attention, in particular, to section J of part
I, which outlines the future programme of work that the
Committee proposes to carry out during the year 2001,
which, subject to a decision by the General Assembly,
will be the first year of the Second International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.
Part I also includes, as an annex, the report of the
Pacific regional seminar, held in Majuro, Marshall
Islands, to review the political, economic and social
conditions in the small island Non-Self-Governing
Territories. I commend this report for the Assembly’s
careful perusal, as it describes the seminar’s frank and
open discussions, the views of the participants and
their recommendations. The Special Committee gave
due consideration to these recommendations of the
seminar in formulating its future plans.
Part II of the report provides a procedural account
of the Committee’s deliberations regarding the
substantive issues on its agenda. These include the
dissemination of information on decolonization; the
question of sending visiting missions to the Territories;
economic and other activities that affect the interests of
the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
military activities carried out by the administering
Powers in the Territories under their administration;
and the implementation of the Declaration by the
specialized agencies and international institutions
associated with the United Nations. It also contains
information from the Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations and describes the action taken by the
Committee regarding each of the 17 Non-SelfGoverning Territories.

8

Finally, as stated earlier, Part III of the report
contains all the recommendations of the Special
Committee to be placed before the Assembly some of
which have been considered by the Fourth Committee.
All the draft resolutions and decisions will be
presented in proper order by the Rapporteur of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) in his report to the General
Assembly.
The Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples has formulated specific proposals for the
elimination of the remaining manifestations of
colonialism.
During the period under review, it has examined
the implementation by Member States of resolution
1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions on
decolonization. It has continued to pay special attention
to the situation in the small Territories and has
recommended the most suitable measures that would
enable the people of those Territories to exercise their
right to self-determination. It has taken steps to enlist
worldwide support among Governments and regional,
national,
international
and
non-governmental
organizations to achieve the objectives of the
Declaration and to implement the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations.
Mr. Santos (Mozambique), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
It has requested the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to provide
economic, social and other assistance to the Non-SelfGoverning Territories. Throughout the period under
review, the Special Committee has continued its efforts
to engage the administering Powers in a dialogue and
to seek their cooperation in the discharge of the
mandate entrusted to it. The Special Committee seeks
to work formally with all administrating Powers in a
spirit of cooperation.
The proposals contained in the report of the
Special Committee are based on a case-by-case
examination of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
under its mandate. These were formulated and adopted
after due consideration of all aspects of the situation
prevailing in those Territories, including the
constitutional and political situation and socioeconomic developments.

A/55/PV.83

In the fulfilment of its tasks, the Special
Committee has benefited from the substantive
information provided in Secretariat working papers on
each Non-Self-Governing Territory. These working
papers are based on information provided by the
administering Powers under Article 73 e of the Charter.
As in the past, valuable information has also been
received from representatives of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories who participated in the meetings
of the Special Committee and in its regional seminars.
Media reports and information provided by regional
non-governmental organizations and experts have also
been useful sources. However, in the view of the
Special Committee, the sending of visiting missions to
the Non-Self-Governing Territories themselves remains
the best way of obtaining first-hand knowledge of the
realities in the Territories.
The Special Committee has not been able to send
visiting missions for several years. However, in their
absence, regional seminars have provided a useful
alternative. These seminars are held in the Caribbean
and the Pacific regions, often in host countries situated
in the vicinity of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
and sharing the problems that small island territories
experience. The seminars thus continue to serve as an
opportunity for Committee members to have direct
contact with some of the peoples of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories. The seminars have also been
crucial in bringing together representatives of NonSelf-Governing
Territories,
non-governmental
organizations, experts and scholars to interact and to
exchange views on the status and developments in the
Territories. The participants share information on
issues of common concern, present papers and make
recommendations on various aspects of the process of
decolonization. Furthermore, they have direct access to
the members of the Special Committee in an informal
environment, to discuss their views and concerns and
to learn about the Special Committee’s activities. I
draw the Assembly’s attention again to the report of the
Pacific regional seminar annexed to the Committee’s
report.
The report of the Special Committee notes with
satisfaction that in compliance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, New Zealand, as
the administering Power concerned, continued to
participate actively in the work of the Special
Committee. The delegation of France participated in
the Committee’s work during the consideration of the

question of New Caledonia. Although the delegations
of the United Kingdom and the United States did not
formally take part in the work of the Committee, both
administering Powers have expressed their desire to
continue an informal dialogue with the Committee.
Throughout the reporting period, Portugal participated
in the meetings of the Special Committee during its
consideration of the question of East Timor. The
Committee acceded to the request of Spain to
participate in the proceedings on the question of
Gibraltar and to the requests of Argentina, Brazil — on
behalf of the States members of the Southern Common
Market plus Bolivia and Chile — Paraguay and
Uruguay to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Falkland Islands (Malvinas).
With respect to the work of the Special
Committee regarding the social and economic aspects
of the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
the Chairman or Acting Chairman continued to attend
the meetings of the Economic and Social Council on
the implementation of the Declaration by the
specialized agencies. In addition, pursuant to a
proposal to hold a joint meeting with the Economic and
Social Council, the Special Committee established a
working group entrusted with the preparation of such a
meeting.
This year, the Special Committee, pursuant to its
decision of 6 July 1999 concerning Puerto Rico,
considered a report on that issue and adopted a
resolution (A/AC.109/2000/24). By the terms of its
resolution, the Special Committee, among other things,
reaffirmed the hope that the Government of the United
States of America would expedite a process that will
allow the Puerto Rican people to fully exercise their
inalienable
right
to
self-determination
and
independence in conformity with resolution 1514 (XV)
and Special Committee resolutions and decisions on
Puerto Rico. It also encouraged the Government of the
United States to order the halt of its armed forces
military drills and manoeuvres on Vieques island, to
return the occupied land to the people of Puerto Rico,
to halt the persecution, arrests and harassment of
peaceful demonstrators and to respect the right to
health and economic development; it also welcomed
the release of Puerto Rican prisoners and expressed
hope that the President of the United States would
release all political prisoners serving sentences on
cases related to the struggle for the independence of
Puerto Rico.

9

A/55/PV.83

The Special Committee discharged the tasks
entrusted to it by the General Assembly during the year
in a cooperative, transparent and pragmatic manner. It
held both formal and informal meetings and
consultations in order to reach consensus and formulate
its recommendations. Its consultations included
member States, non-members of the Special
Committee, administering Powers and representatives
of Non-Self-Governing Territories. Altogether it held
15 formal meetings and 15 informal meetings and
numerous informal consultations carried out by officers
of the Special Committee.
Allow me very briefly to outline some of the
actions and recommendations being put before the
Assembly for its consideration. The Special Committee
examined the issue of information regarding Non-SelfGoverning Territories transmitted to the SecretaryGeneral under Article 73 e of the United Nations
Charter. It reiterated its recommendation to the General
Assembly that in the absence of a decision by the
Assembly itself stating that a Territory had attained a
full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI
of the Charter, the administering Power concerned
should continue to transmit information under Article
73 e with respect to that Territory.
In its consideration of the question of economic
and other activities which affect the interests of the
peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, the
Special Committee affirmed the value of foreign
economic investment undertaken in collaboration with
the peoples of the Territories. It reaffirmed the
responsibility of the administering Powers to promote
political, economic and social advancement in
Territories under their administration. At the same
time, the Special Committee also affirmed the need to
avoid any economic and other activities that would
adversely affect the interests of the peoples of NonSelf-Governing Territories. Therefore, the Special
Committee recommended, among other things, that the
Assembly urge the administering Powers to take
effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the
inalienable right of peoples in Non-Self-Governing
Territories to their natural resources, and requested the
administering Powers to take all necessary steps to
protect the property rights of the peoples of those
Territories.
The Special Committee has continued to pay
special attention to the needs of the small island
Territories. Their unique problems, arising from their

10

small size and population, limited natural resources and
vulnerability to natural disasters and environmental
hazards, require the sustained cooperation and
assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system.
Reaffirming that the exercise of the right of selfdetermination by Non-Self-Governing Territories
entails the extension, as a corollary, of all appropriate
assistance to their inhabitants, the Special Committee
paid particular attention to the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations. It welcomed the assistance
provided so far but noted that only some specialized
agencies and organizations of the United Nations
system have been involved in providing such assistance
to Non-Self-Governing Territories. It urged those
agencies and organizations that had not yet provided
assistance to do so as soon as possible. The Special
Committee will continue to consult with the Economic
and Social Council in its efforts to implement the
Declaration.
In particular, the Special Committee requested the
specialized agencies and other organizations to provide
information on the special needs and vulnerabilities of
small island Territories, including ways and means to
assist them in fighting drug trafficking and other
criminal activities. In this regard, the Special
Committee recommended to the General Assembly that
it request the relevant agencies, organizations and
institutions of the United Nations system to strengthen
existing measures of support and to formulate
appropriate programmes of assistance to the remaining
Non-Self-Governing Territories, within the framework
of their respective mandates, in order to accelerate
progress in the economic and social sectors of those
Territories.
In addition, the Special Committee also
recommended that the General Assembly welcome the
adoption by the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean of resolution 574 (XXVII).
This resolution called for the provision of necessary
mechanisms to permit its associate members, including
the small island Non-Self-Governing Territories, to
participate, subject to the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, in special sessions of the Assembly
to review and appraise the implementation of the
programmes of action of those United Nations

A/55/PV.83

conferences in which the Territories originally
participated as observers, and in the work of the
Economic and Social Council.
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the
development of some Territories by some specialized
agencies and programmes and United Nations and
regional
institutions,
the
Special
Committee
recommended that these and other international
organizations take measures to accelerate progress in
the social and economic life in the Territories. The
Committee paid special attention to the problems
related to the impact of the international financial
regulations on the relevant sectors of the economy of
the Territories and to seeking mutually acceptable ways
of cooperation in this field.
In 2000, the Special Committee continued to
examine the question of military activities in Non-SelfGoverning Territories. It reaffirmed its strong
conviction that the existence of military activities and
installations in Non-Self-Governing Territories could
constitute an obstacle to the exercise of selfdetermination. It urged administering Powers to take
all necessary measures not to involve those Territories
in any offensive acts or acts of interference against
other States. It reiterated that the Territories or adjacent
areas should not be used for nuclear tests, dumping
nuclear waste or deploying nuclear weapons.
Furthermore, it deplored the continued alienation of
land, particularly in the small island Territories of the
Pacific and the Caribbean, for military installations.
The Committee took note of the decision of some
administering Powers to downsize their military
presence in Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Regarding the dissemination of information on
decolonization, the Special Committee reiterated the
importance of this activity and remained mindful of the
role of public opinion in effectively assisting the
peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories to achieve
self-determination, including the role of nongovernmental organizations. Consequently, it proposed
that the General Assembly request the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Public
Information to continue their efforts in this regard
through all available media, including publications,
radio and television, as well as through the Internet.
During last year, the Special Committee
continued to monitor and examine the situation in each
Territory under its mandate and to hold hearings at

which it considered the views of representatives of the
Territories, non-governmental organizations and other
experts. As noted earlier, part III of the Special
Committee’s
report
contains
its
complete
recommendations to the General Assembly regarding
individual Territories. I refer members to the relevant
section of the report, while highlighting here some
selected recommendations.
With respect to New Caledonia, the Special
Committee welcomed certain progress, including steps
leading towards closer association of the Territory
within the regional and international organizations and
urged all parties involved to maintain their dialogue in
a spirit of harmony and in the framework of the
Matignon and Nouméa Accords, moving towards an act
of self-determination which would safeguard the rights
of all New Caledonians.
The Special Committee also considered eleven
small island Territories: American Samoa, Anguilla,
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman
Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the
Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands. In general, it continued to reaffirm the
responsibilities of the administering Powers under the
Charter to promote the economic and social
development
of
the
Territories
under
their
administration. The Special Committee took note of the
conditions prevailing in the Territories and called upon
the administering Powers to undertake specific
measures with regard to each Territory. It also called
upon the administering Powers to continue to take all
measures to counter problems related to drug
trafficking, money laundering and other criminal
offences.
With regard to Tokelau, the Special Committee
noted the firm commitment of the Territory to the
development of self-government and to an act of selfdetermination. It commended Tokelau for its ongoing
work in charting a distinctive, constitutional course
which reflects its unique traditions and environment. It
acknowledged the participation of the Tokelau
representative in the Pacific regional seminar and the
progress made by this Territory. It also acknowledged
the effective and positive role of New Zealand as the
administering Power and its commitment to meet its
obligations to the United Nations.
Before concluding, I would like to emphasize that
the Special Committee has continued to benefit greatly

11

A/55/PV.83

from the active participation of representatives of
territorial Governments, regional inter-governmental
bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as
experts and representatives of some administering
Powers in the work of the Special Committee. Their
contributions have provided invaluable information and
insights; their observations and many of their proposals
have inevitably and properly been reflected in many of
the recommendations of the Special Committee to the
General Assembly.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the Chairman of the Special Committee,
Ambassador Peter Donigi, Permanent Representative
of Papua New Guinea, for his vision and leadership,
and to the Vice-Chairmen of the Committee,
Ambassador Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Permanent
Representative of Cuba and Mr. Bernard TanohBoutchoué, of Côte d’Ivoire, with whom I have had the
pleasure of working during the past year. I should also
like to express gratitude to the staff of the Department
of Political Affairs and of the Department of General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, mainly to
Mr. Mohammad Sattar and Ms. Maria Maldonado,
whose assistance and support have enabled the
Committee to carry out its work smoothly and
successfully.
This year marks the end of the International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. In this
regard, the Special Committee has proposed to the
General Assembly that it declare the decade 2001 to
2010 as the Second International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism. The draft resolution in this
connection is also contained in Part III of the Report of
the Special Committee.
The Special Committee is determined to work
closely with all administering Powers and the peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to ascertain the
aspirations of the people, on the basis of resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea to introduce draft
resolution A/55/L.58.
Mr. Donigi (Papua New Guinea): I am pleased to
address the General Assembly as it begins its
consideration of the question of the implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

12

For the second year, I have had the distinct
privilege of chairing the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples. On this occasion, I
wish to express gratitude for the confidence held in me
to carry out such an important endeavour, which I
consider an honour bestowed upon my country, a
recognized advocate for decolonization.
The report of the Special Committee on its work
during the current year, document A/55/23, has just
been introduced by the Rapporteur. It has been an
eventful year, during which the Special Committee
carried out its responsibilities in compliance with the
resolutions of the General Assembly, including the
resolution that declared the Decade ending this year as
the International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism.
The Special Committee has continued its efforts
to strengthen dialogue and cooperation with the
administering Powers. In order to assist such dialogue,
during the year 2000 the Special Committee concluded
preparation of a paper of an informal character
containing a general work programme which would
serve as a starting point for developing specific work
programmes for each Territory. These specific work
programmes would, in turn, be the bases of discussion
with the administering Powers. Although progress in
this area has been incipient, the Special Committee
expects that the administering Powers will submit their
replies and proposals regarding American Samoa and
Pitcairn as soon as possible, including proposals on the
modalities of the participation of representatives of the
people in the Territories.
The International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism, which comes to an end this year, has
provided a political framework for concerted activities
to speed up the decolonization process. In this
connection, I should like to commend to the attention
of the membership the overview of the activities taken
during the Decade, which may be found in the
thoughtful report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Decade.
Despite the efforts made to bring about the
eradication of colonialism, the decolonization process
is not over, nor can it be over as long as there are NonSelf-Governing Territories to which the Declaration
applies. The persistence of colonialism has to be met

A/55/PV.83

with determined action to eliminate it. The Special
Committee is thus recommending to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution declaring a
second Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. By
the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly would
call upon Member States to redouble their efforts to
implement the plan of action prepared by the
Secretary-General and set out in his report of
13 December 1991, in document A/46/634/Rev.1. The
draft resolution is contained in Part III of the report of
the Special Committee.
I should also like to introduce for consideration
and support a draft resolution on the “Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples”, contained in
document A/55/L.58. It is my honour to announce that,
since the publication of this draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors: Cuba,
Syrian Arab Republic, Nauru and Solomon Islands. It
is generally similar to the resolution adopted by the
Assembly at its previous session. However, it varies in
some respects. I shall endeavour to give the members a
detailed overview of its contents.
By the terms of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly — while reaffirming its resolution 1514
(XV) containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
other resolutions and decisions on decolonization —
would refer to the end of the first International Decade
for the Eradication of Colonialism and to a
proclamation of a second International Decade,
beginning in the year 2001 and ending in 2010.
The draft resolution reaffirms that the existence
of colonialism is incompatible with the Charter of the
United Nations, the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and in it
the Assembly would reaffirm its determination to bring
about the complete and speedy eradication of
colonialism. The draft resolution affirms once again the
General Assembly’s support for the aspirations of the
peoples under colonial rule to exercise their right to
self-determination,
including
independence,
in
accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions on
decolonization.
Regarding the ongoing efforts by the Special
Committee to engage the administering Powers in
continuing dialogue, the draft resolution contains a

provision by which the Assembly would call upon the
administering Powers to cooperate fully with the
Special Committee to finalize, before the end of the
year 2001, a constructive programme of work on an
case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing
Territories to facilitate the implementation of the
mandate of the Special Committee and the relevant
resolutions on decolonization, including in this respect
the resolutions on specific territories.
Operative paragraph 8 of this draft resolution
contains special provisions relating to the programme
of work of the Special Committee. The Assembly
would request the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full
implementation of the Declaration; to formulate
specific proposals to bring about an end to colonialism;
to examine the implementation of resolution 1514
(XV) and other relevant resolutions on decolonization;
to pay special attention to the small Territories,
including through the dispatch of visiting missions; and
to finalize before the end of 2001 a constructive
programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the
Territories.
The Assembly would also request the Special
Committee to take all necessary steps to enlist
worldwide support among Governments and national
and international organizations for the achievement of
the objectives of the Declaration and the
implementation of relevant United Nations resolutions;
to conduct seminars for the purpose of receiving and
disseminating
information
and
to
facilitate
participation by the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories in those seminars; and to observe annually
the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-SelfGoverning Territories.
The draft resolution also contains a call for all
States, particularly the administering Powers, as well
as the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system, to give effect within their
spheres of competence to the recommendations of the
Special Committee for the implementation of the
Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the
United Nations.
In the draft resolution the Assembly would also
call upon the administering Powers to ensure that all
economic activities in the Territories under their
administration do not adversely affect the interests of
the peoples but instead promote development, and it

13

A/55/PV.83

would urge the administering Powers to safeguard and
guarantee the inalienable rights of the peoples of the
Territories to their natural resources.
By the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly
would reiterate that military activities and
arrangements by administering Powers in the
Territories should not run counter to the rights and
interests of the peoples of the Territories, especially
their right to self-determination. It would call upon the
administering Powers concerned to terminate such
activities and to eliminate the remaining military bases
in compliance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, and would further call upon the
administering Powers to promote alternative sources of
livelihood for the people of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories. This later addition to this paragraph
addresses the economic vacuum which may be created
as a result of the downsizing and subsequent closure of
military bases in those Territories.
The Assembly would urge all States, directly and
through their action in the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system, to
provide moral and material assistance to the peoples of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories. Also in this
connection, it would request the Secretary-General, the
specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system to provide economic, social and
other assistance to the Territories.
The draft resolution also contains a provision
reaffirming that United Nations visiting missions to the
Territories are an effective means of ascertaining the
situation in the Territories, as well as the wishes and
aspirations of their inhabitants. In this regard, the
Assembly would call on the administering Powers to
cooperate with the Special Committee and to facilitate
visiting missions.
In this connection, I must add that, in my
personal capacity as representative of Papua New
Guinea, I have been privileged to visit two Non-SelfGoverning Territories. My visit to New Caledonia, as
head of a visiting mission comprising countries of the
Pacific region, at the invitation of the administering
Power, proved to be invaluable in every respect, since
it gave the members of the mission an opportunity to
learn first-hand about the Territory, its peoples and its
political and socio-economic realities and gave the
members insight into the challenges the Territory
confronts in its quest for self-determination. The report

14

of this particular mission is contained in document
A/54/921, dated 16 June 2000.
My other visit, to Guam, was of an informal
nature, on a stopover to the Marshall Islands, where the
Special Committee held its regional seminar. I
respectfully submit that, although the reports prepared
by the Secretariat about the Territories are informative
and useful, a visiting mission offers opportunities for
interaction that are unique and can only help the
decolonization process.
The draft resolution I have just introduced is the
product of consultations that have been carried out in
an open and transparent manner with interested
delegations, including the European Union and the
administering Powers. Efforts were made to take into
account the views of the Member States participating
in the consultations and to address their concerns.
Though such efforts may not have succeeded in
accommodating all the views, the spirit of cooperation
that has characterized these consultations must be
noted.
Before concluding, I should like to express to the
Secretary-General, on behalf of the Special Committee,
our appreciation for his having provided the necessary
substantive and technical support required for the
Committee’s work and our satisfaction with the quality
of the assistance rendered by the Secretariat. The
capacity of the Special Committee to carry out its work
is strengthened by the timeliness and reliability of the
information and advice provided by the Secretariat on
the various issues on the Committee’s agenda. I
commend especially the Secretary of the Committee,
Mr. Sattar, and his staff in the Department of General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, and
Ms. Maria Maldonado of the Decolonization Unit of
the Department of Political Affairs and her staff.
I wish also to thank the members of my Bureau
for how they cooperated and contributed to the
effectiveness of the Special Committee by attending to
some issues when I was not personally available to
address them. I make special mention of Ambassador
Bruno Parrilla, the Permanent Representative of Cuba,
and his Deputy, Ambassador Rafael Dausá;
Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoué of the Mission of Côte
d’Ivoire; and the Rapporteur of the Special Committee,
Mr. Fayssal Mekdad of the Mission of the Syrian Arab
Republic.

A/55/PV.83

As this may be the last time I will address the
Assembly in my current capacity as the Chairman of
the Special Committee, I wish also to thank the
members of the Special Committee who have
persevered with my leadership over the last two years
and who have committed their time and energy to
explore new ways of dealing with our specific
mandate. This of course does not mean that in the
future Papua New Guinea will vacate its
responsibilities as a member of the Committee. We will
continue to participate in the work of the Committee
and pledge ourselves to work closely with the new
Chairman to try to complete the work begun under our
leadership for the development of the work
programmes for each Non-Self-Governing Territory on
a case-by-case basis.
I commend to the Assembly draft resolution
A/55/L.58, on the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, as a steadfast expression of the
commitment of the international community to the
unconditional eradication of colonialism from the face
of the Earth.
Mr. Lewis (Antigua and Barbuda): I speak on
behalf of the 14 members of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), and as such I have the honour to address
the Assembly on issues of decolonization under agenda
item 18 and items related to this question. CARICOM
continues to have a special interest in the interrelated
issues of self-determination and decolonization,
especially as it relates to the seven remaining small
island Non-Self-Governing Territories in the Atlantic/
Caribbean region: namely Bermuda, Turks and Caicos
Islands, Cayman Islands, the British Virgin Islands, the
United States Virgin Islands, Anguilla and Montserrat.
CARICOM intensified its role in examining the
future socio-economic, political and constitutional
development of these Territories throughout the first
International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism. This role is pursuant to the United
Nations Charter and is consistent with relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly. Our heightened
interest is in clear recognition of the obvious fact that
the Caribbean territories and their people are integral
components of the Caribbean region. Their political
and socio-economic development has a direct bearing
on Caribbean regional integration.

Accordingly, CARICOM member States welcome
the continued participation of the elected Governments
of most of these Non-Self-Governing Territories as
associate members or observers in CARICOM itself,
and take note of the expressed interest of others in
joining our regional grouping. Many of these territories
are active members of associated CARICOM
institutions as well, including the Organization of
Eastern Caribbean States, the Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Response Agency, the Caribbean
Development Bank, the University of the West Indies
and others, along with other regional bodies such as the
Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee
and the Caribbean Council for Science and Technology.
Several of the small Territories share a common
currency with fraternal eastern Caribbean independent
States.
CARICOM member States are intricately
involved in the continuing recovery efforts in the
Territory of Montserrat, whose people have been
suffering the effects of the social and economic crisis
brought on that beleaguered island by the volcanic
eruption there. We continue to provide sustained
humanitarian assistance and temporary refuge for those
escaping that natural disaster. CARICOM member
States continue to participate in regional and
international coordination efforts to assist those
Montserratians who are returning to their homeland by
facilitating the construction of housing in the areas of
the country designated as safe zones.
Within the framework of the wider United
Nations system, CARICOM States in 1992 devised the
mechanism for the inclusion of those Caribbean NonSelf-Governing Territories which enjoy associate
membership in the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean as official observers to the
various United Nations world conferences in the social
and economic sphere. As a result of these efforts,
Caribbean Non-Self-Governing Territories have
participated in the United Nations world conferences
on environment and development, the sustainable
development of small island developing States,
population, social development, human settlements,
natural disaster reduction, and women and
development.
CARICOM continues to support United Nations
resolutions and other initiatives in this regard in
recognition of the importance of these activities to the
development process of the Territories and in

15

A/55/PV.83

implementation of the longstanding mandates
contained in resolutions of the General Assembly and
of the Economic and Social Council, confirming that
the participation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
in the wider United Nations system facilitates the
process of decolonization. Just as important, this
participation serves to provide these Territories with
important points of reference in addressing
international issues of direct relevance and impact to
their socio-economic development process, consistent
with the need for these Territories to develop their
capacity to compete in an increasingly globalized
world, which threatens to marginalize small island
developing countries.
CARICOM takes this opportunity to express our
gratitude to the States members of the General
Assembly for continuing to facilitate the participation
of the small island Territories in the international
process through these observer status and associate
membership mechanisms, and to call for the
accelerated use of these features in the future.
As we come to the close of the first International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, declared by
the General Assembly in its resolution 43/47 of 22
November 1988 and in its companion resolution 46/181
of 19 December 1991, which approved a Plan of
Action for that period, it is clear that the level of
implementation of that Plan is less than we originally
expected. The most meaningful provisions of that Plan
were not carried out and priority actions, such as the
creation of political education to heighten the
awareness of the people of the Territories and the visits
to each of the Territories by the Secretary-General or
his Special Representative, were never undertaken.
Further, the two critical analyses of the constitutional,
political and economic development of the Territories,
vital to a systematic and complete assessment by the
international community of the prevailing conditions in
these Territories, were not carried out.
The failure to implement these and other
important actions in furtherance of the decolonization
process continues to puzzle CARICOM member States,
given the amount of political energy and resources
historically devoted to self-determination and
decolonization, resulting in some of the major
successful initiatives of the United Nations.
Between the concerted action leading to the
attainment of full self-determination by Namibia at the

16

beginning of the 1990s and the steadfast commitment
to the nation-building exercise initiated at the end of
the 1990s in East Timor, there has been an insufficient
effort to address the self-determination needs of the
small island Territories. It is therefore necessary to
reinvigorate the decolonization process for the small
island Territories through a comprehensive plan of
action for the second International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism to complete the work left
undone in the Plan of Action of the first Decade.
Certainly, this is an achievable goal if the requisite
human and financial resources of the United Nations
system are utilized to address this unfinished business.
In this context, member States can build upon the
foundation created by the recommendations of the
regional seminars convened annually since 1990,
alternately in the Caribbean and Pacific. Such
recommendations include the importance of a fair and
unbiased political education programme for the people
of the Territories regarding their legitimate political
options of equality; increased cooperation between the
United Nations and regional institutions in furtherance
of the self-determination process, as has been seen with
the South Pacific Forum as relates to New Caledonia;
the establishment of an expert group comprised of
representatives of the Territories to articulate their
concerns and interests; the annual preparation of a
status report on the implementation of decolonization
resolutions; and the implementation of the studies and
analyses called for in the first Plan of Action.
These recommendations of the peoples of the
Territories themselves should be integrated into the
plan of action of the second International Decade. Had
they been included in the first Plan of Action — and
implemented — the process of self-determination
would have been much further along at this late stage,
when many continue to ponder the question of why this
issue is still with us as we approach the new
millennium.
In this connection, CARICOM wishes to reiterate
its long-held position that the decolonization process
has not been completed, but rather requires unique
remedies for protecting the inalienable rights of the
people of the Territories, and in particular those small
island Territories which require special consideration
as a result of the vulnerabilities that they share with
other small island developing countries in their
respective regions. It is these unique remedies,
consistent with adherence to international principles of

A/55/PV.83

political equality and with the maximum possible
participation of the representatives of the Territories
themselves, that the international community must
focus upon if the work of the United Nations in
decolonization in the twenty-first century is to be
successful.
We take some encouragement from the
developments over the last year within the framework
of the Committee of 24, resulting in a process of
informal consultation between the Committee and
representatives of the Territories themselves, and from
the fact that the administering Powers contributed to
important clarifications on the often intricate dynamics
of the remaining dependency arrangements. We urge
the relevant administering Powers to resume their
formal cooperation with the Committee of 24, which
has gone the extra mile, and beyond, since the thaw of
the cold war by streamlining its work; by reducing
what some considered to be contentious language in its
resolutions; by focusing more attention on socioeconomic development issues in the Territories; by
reducing its budgetary requests. almost to a fault; by
acquiescing to substantial reorganizations of the
secretarial services provided to it; and by eliminating
its only two subcommittees, among other measures
taken, all for the purpose of addressing the concerns
articulated a decade and a half ago that precipitated the
withdrawal of several administering Powers from
cooperation with the Committee in the first instance.
It is now time for a reciprocal show of goodwill
so that the Committee can resume its work in earnest,
with all the stakeholders at the table — the Member
States,
the
administering
Powers
and
the
representatives of the people of the Territories
themselves. The existing informal and closed dialogue
between the Committee of 24 and the administering
Powers should now quickly evolve into the resumption
of formal, open and transparent discussions in formal
meetings of the Committee. That is the best chance for
this process to move forward.
Within this context, CARICOM wishes to
reaffirm its unwavering support for the long-standing
principles of complete and absolute equality as the
operational guide in achieving innovative and flexible
solutions to the decolonization of the remaining small
island Territories, through the three legitimate options
for political status: independence, free association or
integration with full political rights, as defined in
General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV). Small island

Territories have no less right to political equality than
other Territories that have been decolonized before
them. Until the existing unequal dependency
arrangements that remain inconsistent with full
political equality are addressed, there will be a need for
continuing oversight by the United Nations.
CARICOM intends to play its rightful role in that
oversight, especially as it relates to the small island
Territories of our beloved Caribbean region.
Mr. Dausá Céspedes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Significant achievements have been made by the
United Nations in the area of decolonization since the
adoption, in 1960, of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
The current world map does not look anything like the
one the founders of the Organization had before them.
There is no doubt that the decolonization process has
been one of the greatest victories of the United
Nations. However, when 10 years ago we set the goal
of being free from colonialism by the twenty-first
century, we could not have imagined that, at the end of
the first International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism, we were going to be faced with the bitter
reality of still having 17 Territories under colonial
domination; or that, in all that time, real progress in the
decolonization process was going to be minimal. It is
truly unjustifiable, in a world that has supposedly
moved from confrontation to cooperation, that there are
still peoples that suffer the horrors of colonialism and
that there continue to be administering Powers that
refuse to cooperate with the decolonizing work begun
by the United Nations and the bodies established to
that end.
We are once again faced with discriminatory
theories that try to justify the unjustifiable colonial
status of some Territories by putting forward fatalistic
arguments that would doom those Territories to live
forever under the colonial yoke. We once again
reiterate our strong conviction that the inalienable right
to self-determination and independence of peoples
under colonial domination must be respected by all,
regardless of the size of a given Territory, its
geographical location, the number of its citizens or the
amount of natural resources it has. It is also
unacceptable that some Powers are trying to deprive
Territories under colonization of their right to
independence while insisting on speaking solely of the
right to self-determination, as if the right to selfdetermination could be divorced from the exercise of

17

A/55/PV.83

independence. Likewise, it is unacceptable that some
are even trying to distort the right to self-determination
by using new formulas or simply by changing the name
of the Territories under their domination.
The Special Committee on Decolonization has
periodically reviewed its working methods over the
years with the basic aim of making its work
increasingly effective and efficient. Regrettably, the
effectiveness and results of the Special Committee’s
work do not depend solely on the will and efforts of its
members. The cooperation of the administering Powers
is a vitally important element for any progress we wish
to make in the decolonizing effort.
While it is encouraging that in recent months
administering Powers have maintained an informal
dialogue with the Special Committee — especially
some Powers that had not previously done so — we
continue to be concerned by the continuing reluctance
to consolidate and make that dialogue official. Despite
the constructive spirit and the willingness to engage in
dialogue with which the Special Committee has
approached its work in an effort to involve the
administering Powers, the facts make it impossible for
us to deny reality. Some administering Powers continue
to refuse to establish an official and serious
relationship with the Special Committee and are
attempting to create as many hurdles as possible for
our work.
Despite the fact that visiting missions are an ideal
mechanism for obtaining first-hand information about
the economic, political and social situation in a
Territory, it is now difficult to recall the last time that
such a mission actually went to a Non-Self-Governing
Territory. Some administering Powers even continue to
fail to convey in a timely manner requisite information
about the Territories under their domination, as is
clearly called for in Article 73 of the Charter of the
United Nations. Some administering Powers also
continue to carry out military activities in the
Territories under their domination, to the detriment of
the rights and interests of the peoples affected; and
some administering Powers continue to irrationally
exploit the natural resources of Non-Self-Governing
Territories, in flagrant violation of General Assembly
resolution 2621 (XXV).
Cuba once again reaffirms its commitment to the
independence and self-determination of its sister nation
of Puerto Rico. Although it has been under the colonial

18

yoke for over 100 years, Puerto Rico has not lost one
iota of its identity as a nation of Latin American and
the Caribbean. The colonial Power employs every sort
of manoeuvre to confuse international public opinion
and distort the economic, political and social reality of
Puerto Rico. However, there is only one reality: Puerto
Rico continues to be deprived of its legitimate right to
self-determination and to exist as a sovereign and
independent nation.
Cuba strongly supports the proclamation of a
second International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism as a way of showing the international
community the high priority accorded by the United
Nations to decolonization activities, and as a
mechanism to provide the necessary continuity to the
work carried out over all these years.
At the threshold of the twenty-first century, the
goal of a world without colonialism will have to wait a
little longer to be fulfilled. Though we cannot say that
there has not been any progress in recent times; yet the
results are regrettably very far short of our expectations
and, above all, of the expectations of the Territories
living under colonial domination, which desire to be
able to exercise their right to freedom, sovereignty and
independence.
The draft resolution before us, which our
delegation will support, attempts to reflect that desire,
and the hope that, sooner rather than later, the scourge
of colonialism, with all of its accompanying blights,
will disappear from the face of the earth.
Mr. Carlot (Vanuatu): As a Melanesian and
Pacific country, the Republic of Vanuatu is deeply
concerned about the continuing and escalating
violation of human rights against the indigenous people
of West Papua.
We are further concerned that the international
community — which is increasingly putting a lot of
pressure on our countries, which have small and
vulnerable economies, to observe the principles of
transparency and human rights standards — seems
oblivious of the sufferings of our Melanesian brothers
and sisters in West Papua. The illegal crossing of the
border between West Papua and Papua New Guinea is a
concern that we fully appreciate and share. We also
well appreciate that the illegal movement across this
long border, and the resulting refugee population, will
only increase with escalating tension and violence.

A/55/PV.83

In October 2000 the Pacific Islands Forum
leaders expressed deep concern about past and present
violence and loss of life in West Papua. They called on
the Government of Indonesia, as the sovereign
authority, and on the secessionist groups to resolve
their differences peacefully through dialogue and
consultation. The Pacific Islands Forum leaders urged
all parties to protect and uphold the human rights of all
residents of West Papua. Vanuatu is committed to this
collective plea for peace and respect for human rights.
With respect to decolonization and the granting of
independence to colonies and Non-Self-Governing
Territories, the Republic of Vanuatu takes the firm view
that the United Nations played a direct role in the
conclusion of the 1962 New York Agreement and in the
resulting so-called referendum in 1969. This process
led to the volatile and difficult situation the world is
watching today. On that basis, the United Nations has a
moral and legal duty to facilitate a review of those
earlier undertakings in the interests of all the people of
the region, in particular the people of West Papua.
The President returned to the Chair.
For its part, Vanuatu implores Indonesia, as the
sovereign authority pursuant to the relevant United
Nations mandate, to exercise its goodwill and
diplomatic acumen and give due consideration to the
ultimate placing of West Papua on the decolonization
list for future appropriate action by the Committee of
24. My Government stands ready to cooperate and
assist in this process of negotiation and diplomacy with
Indonesia and other interested Member States.
Secondly, the information received on West
Papua comes predominantly from media organizations
and pro-independence groups. Official reports are
therefore very scarce, and they provide to the world a
very sketchy picture of the atrocities, the refugee
situation and other critical factors in this crisis.
On that basis, Vanuatu calls on this Assembly,
with the concurrence of Indonesia, to recommend to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to initiate a visiting human rights
mission or send an envoy to West Papua. A report by
such a mission would illuminate further dialogue or
negotiation within the United Nations on the critical
situation, or otherwise, in West Papua.
Recent history teaches us that over two decades
of atrocities in East Timor have been wanton and

wasteful, and they continue to absorb the scarce
resources of the United Nations and its Member States.
Hopefully, global consciousness today will awaken us
to the need to avoid another East Timor in West Papua.
Vanuatu is confident that the values and
principles of the United Nations Charter can be upheld
meaningfully against today’s difficult challenges. The
new millennium offers a unique opportunity that we,
the United Nations, cannot afford to miss, and must not
miss, to find a lasting solution that will safeguard
global peace and security and the identity of the people
of West Papua.
Today, as we celebrate the fortieth anniversary of
the granting of independence to colonies and
territories, we must remain forward-looking and aspire
to a world of true decolonization in the not-too-distant
future.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
I should like to inform members that the General
Assembly will take action on the three draft resolutions
under agenda item 18 after all of the reports of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee have
been considered.
Reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee)
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) on
agenda items 82 to 88, 89 and 18, 90 and 12, 91 as well
as 18.
I request the Rapporteur of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee, Mr. Shingo Miyamoto
of Japan, to introduce in one intervention the reports of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee.
Mr. Miyamoto (Japan), Rapporteur of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee): I have the honour to introduce the
reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) to the General
Assembly for its consideration and approval. These
reports refer to each of the 12 items allocated to the
Fourth Committee by the General Assembly. They
indicate the documents that were made available for its
consideration and contain the texts of the resolutions
and decisions on which it took action.

19

A/55/PV.83

The Fourth Committee considered the items on its
agenda separately, with the exception of matters
pertaining to the Non-Self-Governing Territories and
related issues, on which it held one single general
debate.
Throughout its session during the first part of the
fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly, the
Committee held a total of 28 meetings. It should be
noted that the Committee made every effort to
conclude its business within the allocated time frame,
while utilizing the resources made available to it as
efficiently as possible. However, it was necessary to
extend the session of the Committee and to frequently
reschedule meetings, due chiefly to the unavailability
of a document, as well as to the special need arising
this year from the consideration of the report of the
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, otherwise
referred to as the Brahimi report, by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
The Fourth Committee adopted 26 draft
resolutions and three draft decisions, of which 14 draft
resolutions and two draft decisions were adopted by
consensus.
The first report, submitted under agenda item 82,
“Effects of atomic radiation”, is contained in document
A/55/568. The Fourth Committee this year considered
an extensive report of the United Nations Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation
(UNSCEAR), which covers its work during the fortyfourth through forty-ninth sessions. It should be noted
that two delegations voiced substantial concern about
the content of the UNSCEAR report and proposed
amendments to the draft resolution that the Fourth
Committee had before it. After extensive consultations
among interested delegations, it was possible to arrive
at the text of the draft resolution contained in
paragraph 11 of the report, which was adopted by
consensus by the Fourth Committee. In this draft
resolution, the General Assembly, among other things,
notes with appreciation the work of UNSCEAR and the
release of its extensive report; endorses its intentions
and plans for future scientific review and assessment
activities; and invites it to continue its consultations
with scientists and experts from interested Member
States in preparing future scientific reports. On behalf
of the Fourth Committee, I commend this draft
resolution for adoption by the General Assembly.

20

The second report, relating to agenda item 83,
“International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer
space”, is contained in document A/55/569. During the
debate on this agenda item, the Fourth Committee took
note of the interest of several countries in becoming
full members of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space. Another important aspect of the
discussions in the Fourth Committee was how to ensure
the implementation of the recommendations contained
in the resolution entitled “The Space Millennium:
Vienna
Declaration
on
Space
and
Human
Development,” adopted by the Third United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space (UNISPACE III).
As part of its work, the Committee established an
open-ended working group which, under the
chairmanship of the delegation of Chile, formulated the
draft resolution contained in paragraph 12 of the report.
After several meetings and extensive informal
consultations among interested parties, this draft
resolution was adopted by the Fourth Committee by
consensus. Among other things, it requests the
Secretary-General to begin implementing those
measures and activities that are contained in the plan of
action for implementing the recommendations of
UNISPACE III and that are currently within the
programme of work of the Office for Outer Space
Affairs, and also to ensure the full implementation of
the plan with the necessary resources in 2002. On
behalf of the Fourth Committee, I recommend this draft
resolution to the General Assembly for adoption.
The third report, issued as document A/55/570,
refers to agenda item 84, “United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East”. The Fourth Committee took note of the fact that
it had been more than 50 years since the establishment
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). In that
context, it recognized the important function the
Agency has been performing since its establishment to
improve the living conditions of Palestine refugees,
and it reiterated its concern at the persistent critical
financial situation of the Agency. The Committee
adopted seven draft resolutions on various aspects of
the mandate of UNRWA. These draft resolutions
appear in paragraph 22 of the report. The Fourth
Committee recommends to the General Assembly that
it adopt these draft resolutions.

A/55/PV.83

The fourth report, referring to agenda item 85,
“Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories”, is contained in document A/55/571. The
Committee considered the report of the Special
Committee concerning the protection and promotion of
the human rights of the Palestinian people and other
Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories. The vast
majority of delegations speaking under this agenda
item expressed support and appreciation for the
activities of the Special Committee. However, it should
also be noted that several delegations, including one
that spoke on behalf of a group of countries, expressed
concern about the nature of the activities of the Special
Committee. On this subject, the Committee adopted
five draft resolutions, to be found in paragraph 20 of
the report. The Fourth Committee recommends these
draft resolutions to the General Assembly for adoption.
The fifth report, relating to agenda item 86,
entitled “Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”,
appears in document A/55/572. The Fourth Committee
received and considered a mid-term report by UnderSecretary-General Guéhenno of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the implementation by the
Secretariat of the recommendations of the report of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. In
parallel with and following the debate on this agenda
item in the Fourth Committee, at the extraordinary
session of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations its working group considered extensively
the Brahimi report and its associated documents. The
outcome of this consideration was reported to the
Fourth Committee, as reflected in this report. The
Fourth Committee recommends the draft resolution that
appears in paragraph 11 of this report for adoption by
the General Assembly.
The sixth report, submitted under item 87,
entitled “Questions relating to information”, is
contained in document A/55/573. After hearing a
comprehensive introductory statement by UnderSecretary-General Hogen of the Department of Public
Information, the Committee stressed the central role of
public information in projecting a strong image of the
United Nations and promoting a proper understanding
of its work. Furthermore, in the light of the rapid
developments in the area of information technology, it
underscored the need to explore possibilities for

cooperation in the spheres of information and
communications so that their benefits can be shared by
all the peoples of the world.
After considering the report submitted to it by the
Committee on Information, the Fourth Committee
adopted two draft resolutions and one draft decision.
The latter, when adopted by the General Assembly, will
increase the membership of the Committee on
Information by two countries and appoint Armenia and
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya as new members. The draft
resolutions are contained in paragraph 10 of the report
and the draft decision in paragraph 11. The Special
Political and Decolonization Committee recommends
that the General Assembly adopt both draft resolutions
and the draft decision.
With regard to the items on Non-Self-Governing
Territories and the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples —
agenda items 18, 88, 89, 90 and 12, and 91, which were
considered together — the Fourth Committee
considered the degree of implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, bearing in mind that
this year marks the end of the International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism. It recognized the
important contribution of the United Nations to
decolonization and reaffirmed its commitment to
continue to take the necessary measures for the advent
of a world free from colonialism in the twenty-first
century. In this context, many delegations voiced
support for the need for a second International Decade
for the Eradication of Colonialism, bearing in mind
that the objectives of the first decade were not fully
achieved, as reflected in the draft resolution on which
the General Assembly will be taking action shortly.
On these items, the General Assembly has before
it a number of reports. The report on agenda item 88,
entitled “Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations”, is contained in document
A/55/574. The draft resolution on this item appears in
paragraph 8 of the report, and the Fourth Committee
recommends it to the General Assembly for adoption.
The report relating to agenda items 89 and 18,
entitled, respectively, “Economic and other activities
which affect the interests of the peoples of the NonSelf-Governing Territories” and “Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to

21

A/55/PV.83

Colonial Countries and Peoples”, is contained in
document A/55/575. Under these two items, the
Committee adopted one draft resolution and one draft
decision. The Fourth Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution
and the draft decision, which are contained in
paragraphs 11 and 12 of the report, respectively.
With regard to agenda items 90 and 12, entitled,
respectively, “Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples by the specialized agencies and the
international institutions associated with the United
Nations” and “Report of the Economic and Social
Council”, the report of the Fourth Committee is
contained in document A/55/576.
On these issues, the Committee adopted one draft
resolution, which is contained in paragraph 9 of the
report, and recommends it to the General Assembly for
adoption.
The report relating to agenda item 91, entitled
“Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories”, has been issued as document A/55/577.
Paragraph 6 of that document contains the text of
a draft resolution adopted by the Fourth Committee,
which it recommends to the General Assembly for
adoption.
The report issued under item 18, entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”,
appears in document A/55/578, which contains the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples relating to specific Territories not covered by
other agenda items. In this context, the Committee
adopted five draft resolutions, including a draft
omnibus resolution covering 11 Territories, and one
draft decision. The draft resolutions are contained in
paragraph 24 of the report and the draft decision in
paragraph 25. The Fourth Committee recommends the
draft resolutions and the draft decision to the General
Assembly for adoption.
Before I conclude, I should like to stress the high
level of cooperation prevailing in the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee, which enabled it to
achieve satisfactory results and complete its work

22

effectively and constructively. In this context, I should
like to express, on behalf of the Bureau of the Fourth
Committee, our profound appreciation to those
delegations which coordinated the draft resolutions
adopted by the Committee. I should also like to thank
all delegations that participated in the efforts to reach
consensus and, when this was not possible, to narrow
the differences among interested parties. All such
contributions were made with a prevailing spirit of
cooperation.
I would be remiss if I failed to pay tribute to the
work carried out by the Chairman of the Committee,
Ambassador Matia Mulumba Semakula Kiwanuka of
Uganda, which made it possible for the Committee to
consider in depth all the agenda items allocated to it by
the General Assembly, despite the wide-ranging and
often difficult issues it had to address. The ViceChairpersons — Ambassador Lewis of Antigua and
Barbuda, Ms. Polić of Croatia and Mr. Vassallo of
Malta, with whom I had the pleasure of working, also
contributed to our success.
I should also like to express my appreciation for
the able cooperation of Mr. Mohammad Sattar, the
Secretary of the Committee, and the competent team
from the Secretariat that assisted him. All of them
helped organize and ensure that the work of the
Committee was carried out in an atmosphere of
genuine cordiality.
I have the honour to submit to the General
Assembly for its consideration and adoption the
recommendations of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee contained in the reports to
which I have referred.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records. May I remind members that under paragraph 7
of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that

A/55/PV.83

“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee, I
should like to advise representatives that we are going
to proceed to take decisions in the same manner as was
done in the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee, unless the Secretariat is notified to the
contrary in advance. This means that where recorded
votes were taken, we will do the same. I should also
hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee.
Agenda item 82
Effects of atomic radiation
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/568)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 11 of its report.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/121).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 82?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 83
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/569)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 12 of its report.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/122).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 83?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 84
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/570)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the seven draft resolutions recommended
by the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
in paragraph 22 of its report.
After all the votes have been taken,
representatives will again have an opportunity to
explain their votes.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Assistance to Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,

23

A/55/PV.83

Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel.
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), United States of America.
Draft resolution I was adopted by 156 votes to 1,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 55/123).
[Subsequently the delegation of the Republic of
Korea informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to vote in favour.]

24

The President: We now turn to draft resolution
II, entitled “Working Group on the Financing of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East”. The Special Political and
Decolonization Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
55/124).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and
subsequent hostilities”.
A recorded voted has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian

A/55/PV.83

Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of).
Draft resolution III was adopted by 156 votes to
2, with 2 abstentions (resolution 55/125).
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
IV, entitled “Offers by Member States of grants and
scholarships for higher education, including vocational
training, for Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,

Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Israel.
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 160 to none,
with 1 abstention (resolution 55/126).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,

25

A/55/PV.83

Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of).
Draft resolution V was adopted by 157 votes to 2,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 55/127).
The President: We come now to draft resolution
VI entitled “Palestine refugees’ properties and their
revenues”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,

26

Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of).
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 156 votes to
2, with 2 abstentions (resolution 55/128).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
VII entitled “University of Jerusalem ‘Al-Quds’ for
Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,

A/55/PV.83

Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru.
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 156 votes to
2, with 2 abstentions (resolution 55/129).
The President: The General Assembly has
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
84.

Agenda item 85
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/571)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the five draft resolutions recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 20 of its report. After all the votes have been
taken, representatives will again have the opportunity
to explain their votes.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Work
of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian people and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.

27

A/55/PV.83

Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany,
Greece,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia.
Draft resolution I was adopted by 91 votes to 2,
with 61 abstentions (resolution 55/130).
The President: We turn now to draft resolution
II, entitled “Applicability of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, to the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem, and the other occupied
Arab territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic

28

of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of).
Draft resolution II was adopted by 152 votes to 2,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 55/131).
The President: Now we turn to draft resolution
III entitled “Israeli settlements in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and the
occupied Syrian Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,

A/55/PV.83

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America.
Draft resolution III was adopted by 152 votes to 4
(resolution 55/132).
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
IV entitled “Israeli practices affecting the human rights
of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including Jerusalem”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,

Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Marshall
America.

Islands,

United

States

of

Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of).
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 150 votes to
3, with 1 abstention (resolution 55/133).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution V
entitled “The occupied Syrian Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

29

A/55/PV.83

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 85?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 86
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/572)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 11 of its report. The Committee adopted the
draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/135).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
86.
Agenda item 87
Questions relating to information
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/573)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolutions A and B, recommended
by the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report, and on the draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 11 of the
same report.

Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Nauru, United States of America.

We turn first to draft resolution A, entitled
“Information in the service of humanity”. The Special
Political and Decolonization Committee adopted draft
resolution A without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to the same?

Draft resolution V was adopted by 150 votes to 1,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 55/134).

Draft resolution A was adopted (resolution
55/136 A).

30

A/55/PV.83

The President: We now turn to draft resolution
B, entitled “United Nations public information and
policies and activities”. The Committee adopted draft
resolution B without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution B was adopted (resolution
55/136 B).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision entitled “Increase in the
membership of the Committee on Information”. The
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted the draft decision without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
87?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 88
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/574)
The President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) in paragraph 8 of its report.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,

Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
France, Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of),
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 153 votes to
none, with 5 abstentions (resolution 55/137).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 88?
It was so decided.

31

A/55/PV.83

Agenda item 89 and agenda item 18 (continued)
Economic and other activities which affect the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/575)
The President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) in paragraph 11 of its report and
on the draft decision recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 12 of that report.
We turn first to the draft resolution, which is
entitled “Economic and other activities which affect the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories”. I have been informed that no separate vote
has been requested on paragraph 7 of the draft
resolution.
I now put the draft resolution to the vote. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,

32

Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Croatia, France, Georgia, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The draft resolution was adopted by 151 votes
to 2, with 5 abstentions (resolution 55/138).
[Subsequently the delegation of Croatia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: We turn now to the draft decision
recommended in paragraph 12 of the report, which is
entitled “Military activities and arrangements by
colonial
Powers
in
Territories
under
their
administration”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,

A/55/PV.83

Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela,
Viet
Nam,
Yemen,
Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Cyprus, Georgia, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Samoa, Tonga.
The draft decision was adopted by 100 votes to 47,
with 5 abstentions.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 89?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
18.

Agenda item 90 and agenda item 12 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
by the specialized agencies and the international
institutions associated with the United Nations
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/576)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) in paragraph 9 of its report. The
draft resolution is entitled “Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia,

33

A/55/PV.83

Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Yugoslavia.
The draft resolution was adopted by 109 votes to
none, with 50 abstentions (resolution 55/139).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 90?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
12.
Agenda item 91
Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/577)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) in paragraph 6 of its report. The
draft resolution was adopted by the Committee without
a vote. May I consider that the Assembly too wishes to
adopt the draft resolution?

34

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/140).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 91?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/578)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the four draft resolutions recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 24 of its report and on the draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 25 of the
same report.
We turn first to the four draft resolutions
contained in paragraph 24 of the report.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Question of Western
Sahara”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
55/141).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Question of New Caledonia”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
55/142).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Question of Tokelau”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution III without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

A/55/PV.83

Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
55/143).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda,
the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam,
Montserrat, Pitcairn, St. Helena, the Turks and Caicos
Islands and the United States Virgin Islands”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution IV without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
55/144).
The President: We now turn to the draft decision
contained in paragraph 25 of the report.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft decision, entitled
“Question of Gibraltar”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 18.
The Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
before it.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Draft resolutions (A/55/23 (Part III), Chapter
XIII, section G, para. 7 and section H, para. 8,
A/55/L.58)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
the two draft resolutions contained in part III, chapter
XIII, section G, paragraph 7 and section H, paragraph
8, respectively, of document A/55/23, and draft
resolution A/55/L.58.
The Assembly will first take a decision on the
draft resolution entitled, “Dissemination of information
on decolonization”, contained in part III, chapter XIII,
section G, paragraph 7 of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of

Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
(A/55/23).
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

35

A/55/PV.83

Abstaining:
France, Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of).
The draft resolution was adopted by 153 votes
to 2, with 3 abstentions (resolution 55/145).
The President: The Assembly will next take a
decision on the draft resolution entitled “Second
International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism”, contained in part III, chapter XIII,
section H, paragraph 8 of the report of the Special
Committee.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.

36

Against:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Turkey.
The draft resolution was adopted by 125 votes to
2, with 30 abstentions (resolution 55/146).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/55/L.58, entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San

A/55/PV.83

Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Belgium, Croatia, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands,
Republic of Korea, Turkey.
Draft resolution A/55/L.58 was adopted by 138
votes to 2, with 18 abstentions (resolution
55/147).
The President: I call on the representative of the
United Kingdom, who wishes to speak in explanation
of vote on the resolutions just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I am taking the
floor to explain the United Kingdom’s votes on
resolution 55/147, on the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, resolution 55/145, on
the dissemination of information on decolonization,
and resolution 55/146, on the Second International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism.

With regard to resolution 55/145, the United
Kingdom remains of the view that the obligation which
this text places on the Secretariat to publicize
decolonization issues represents an unwarranted drain
on the scarce resources of the United Nations. The
resolution is therefore unacceptable.
Finally, my delegation has a few comments on the
resolution on the Second International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism. We have read carefully the
Secretary-General’s report on the first Decade and take
the view that there is scant evidence in it that the
activities of the Decade were of any great benefit to the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories. In contrast, we are firmly of the opinion
that the interests of those peoples are more likely to be
furthered through the informal dialogue of
administering Powers with the Committee of 24, which
falls outside the activities mandated by this resolution.
We are thus concerned that the activities of the
first Decade have not been an efficient use of United
Nations resources. Moreover, no plan of action for the
second Decade has yet been submitted, and we are
therefore unaware of what implications it may have for
the handling of decolonization issues in general or for
particular United Kingdom territories.
We cannot support a request to provide resources
for as yet unspecified activities; nor would we support
a request to renew activities which have failed to
achieve their objectives in the past.

As members of the Assembly will have seen, we
voted against all of these resolutions.

Despite our negative votes on these resolutions,
the United Kingdom delegation remains sincerely
committed to furthering the process of informal
dialogue with the Committee of 24 over the coming
year. We look forward to working in a constructive and
cooperative spirit in order to take forward the
development of programmes of work on individual
United Kingdom territories, with a view to their
eventual de-listing from the Committee’s agenda.

On the resolution on the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, the United Kingdom
continues to find some elements of this text
unacceptable. These include, but are not limited to,
operative paragraph 12, which calls on the
administering Powers to eliminate the remaining
military bases in the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
This language is drawn from the decision on military
activities, which we also voted against this year.

Finally, with your permission Mr. President, and
to save some time, I should like to say a few words in
right of reply to the remarks on the sovereignty of the
Falkland Islands made this morning by the
representative of Chile, on behalf of the Latin
American and Caribbean Group of States, under this
agenda item during the observance of the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.

37

A/55/PV.83

The United Kingdom’s position on this issue is
well known. It was most recently set out in full in my
right of reply to the statement by the Vice-Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Argentina to the General Assembly
on 21 September.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of vote after the voting.

38

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
18?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.
