G,nwal Ass,mbly-Twnty-second SesM

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Dt11•of

atffftilM

Till•

21.62 (XXII) Question of Southern Rhodesia (A/6884)
2270 (XXII)
2288 (XXII)

2302 (XXII)
2311 (XXII)

2347 (XXII)
2348 (XXII)
2349 (XXII)

2350 (XXII)
2351 (XXII)
2352 (XXII)
2353 (XXII)
2354 (XXII)
2355 (XXII)
2356 (XXII)
2357 (XXII)

Question of Territories under Portuguese administration (A/6908)
Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding
the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia,
South West Africa and Territories under Portuguese domination
and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts
to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in
southern Africa (A/6939) . . . . ....................... .
24
Question of Oman (A/6966) ................................... .
70
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and
the international institutions associated with the United Nations
(A/6954) . . . . . ............................................. .
97
Question of the Trust Territory of Nauru (A/7009)
........ .
13
Question of Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea (A/70<:IJ)
13
Question of the consolidation and integration of the special educational and training programmes for South West Africa, the special
training programme for Territories under Portuguese administra- 65, 67
tion and the educat:onal and training programme for South Africans
and
(A/7010) .................................................... .
68
Question of Fiji (A/7011) ..................................... .
69
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations (A/7012) ....
63
Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories (A/7012)
71
Question of Gibraltar (A/7013)
.... .... ..
23
Question of Ifni and Spanish Sahara (A/7013)
23
Question of Equatorial Guinea (A/7013) . .
23
Question of French Somaliland (A/7013) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Question of American Samoa, Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Dominica,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Mauritius, Montserrat,
New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St. Kitts-Nevis-AniUill&,
St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Swaziland,
Tokelau Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States
Virgin Islands (A/7013) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23

3 November 1967
17 November 1967

7 December 1967
12 December 1967

48
49

14 December 1967
19 December 1967

so

19 December 1967

50
51

19 December 1967
19 December 1967

51
52

19 December 1967

52

19 December 1967
19 December 1967
19 December 1967
19 December 1967
19 December 1967

53
53
53
54
55

19 December 1967

55

13

19 December 1967

56

23

3 November 1967
5 December 1967

56
57

Orlaer cleci,lona

Report of the Trusteeship Council ........................................... .
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples . . . .
. ................................ .
Question of South West Africa (hearing of petitioners) ......... .

2262 (XXD). Question· of Southern Rhodella

64

Recalling further all the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia,

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,

"

46

General Auembly-Twenty-aeeond S-ion

Recalling further that the situation in Southern Rhodesia has been declared by the Security Council in
resolution 232 (1966) of 16 December 1966 as constituting a threat to international peace and security,
Recalling further that the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has
declared on several occasions that the racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia is illegal, that it will
not negotiate with that regime on the future of Southern Rhodesia and that it will not grant independence
until majority rule is established in the Territory,
N otinq that the economic sanctions applied so far
have failed to bring down the illegal racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia,
Noting with profound regret that the Government
of the United Kingdom has not found it possible to take
the measures necessary to bring down the minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia,
I. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the
people of Zimbabwe for the restoration of their inalienable right to freedom and independence;
2. Condemns the policies of oppression, racial discrimination and segregation practised in Southern Rhodesia, which constitute a crime against humanity;
3. Reaffirms the obligation of the administering
Power to transfer power without further delay to the
people of Zimbabwe on the basis of elections conducted
according to the principle of "one man, one vote";
4. Condemns the failure and the refusal of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, in its capacity as the administering
Power, to take effective measures to bring down the
illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia
and to transfer power to the people of Zimbabwe;
5. Affirms its conviction that the sanctions adopted
so far will not put an end to the illegal racist minority
regime and that sanctions, in order to achieve their
objective, will have to be comprehensive and mandatory and hacked by force :
6. Further reaffirms that the only effective and
speedy way for the administering Power to put down
the rebelJion in the Territory is through the use of
force:
7. Calls once again upon the Government of the
United Kingdom to take immediately all the necessary
measures, including the use of force, to put an end
to the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia and to ensure the immecliate application of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions;
8. Considers that any future consultations undertaken by the administering Power to determine the future of Southern Rhodesia must he with the representatives of all the political parties and not with
the illegal regime, and calls upon the administering
Power to enter immediately into consultations with
the representatives of the political parties favouring
majority rule;
9. Condemns the activities of all those States which,
contrary to the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council, are still trading with the illegal
racist minority regime in the Territory, and calls upon
such States to sever immediately all economic and other
relations with that regime, in accordance with those
resolutions;
10. Condemns the activities of those foreign financial and other interests which, by supporting :tnd as~

sisting the illegal racist minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia, and by their exploitation of the human
and material re§ources of the Territory, are undermining the effective implementation of the sanctions
imposed so far and are impeding the African people
of Zimbabwe from attaining freedom and independence
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and calls upon the Governments of the States
concerned to take all the necessary measures to bring
such activities to an end;
11. Condemns in the strongest terms the policies of
the Governments of South Africa and Portugal of continued support for the illegal racist minority regime
in blatant defiance of General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions ;
12. Further condemns the presence of South African armed forces in Southern Rhodesia and the arms
aid extended by the authorities of South Africa to the
illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia
for the purpose of suppressing the legitimate struggle
of the people of Zimbabwe to achieve their freedom and
independence ;
13. Expresses grave concern at the serious threat
constituted by the forces referred to in paragraph 12
above to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
independent African States in the area;
14. Calls u.pon the administering Power to ensure
the immediate expulsion of all South African armed
forces from the colony of Southern Rhodesia and to
prevent all armed assistance to the rebel regime ;
15. Strongly condemns the detention and imprisonment of African nationalists in Southern Rhodesia
and invites the administering Power to secure their
immediate and unconditional release;
16. Urges all States, as a matter of urgency, to
render all moral and material assistance to the national
liberation movements of Zimbabwe, either directly or
through the Organization of African Unity;
17. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the need for applying the necessary measures envisaged
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, in view of the deterioration of the grave situation in Southern Rhodesia;
18. Appeals to the specialized agencies concerned
and to other international assistance organizations to
aid and assist the refugees from Zimbabwe and those
who are suffering from oppression by the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity and, through
it, with the national liberation movements in the colonial Territory of Southern Rhodesia;
19. Rl'quests the Secretary-General to promote
through the various organs and agencies of the United
Nations the continuous and large-scale publicizing of
the work of the United Nations concerning this question, in order that world public opinion may be sufficiently aware of the grave situation in the colonial
Territory of Southern Rhodesia and of the continuing struggle for liberation waged by the people of
Zimbabwe;
20. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue to keep the situation in the Territory under review and invites the
Secretary-General to report to the Special Committee
on the extent of the implementation by Member States

Reaolutiom adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

of the resolutions of the United Nations relevant to the
Territory;
21. Calls upon the administering Power to report
to the Special Committee on its actions in the implementation of the present resolution ;
22. Decides to keep the question of Southern Rhodesia on its agenda.
1594th plenary meeting,
3 November 1967.

2270 (XXD). QueBtion of Territories under
Portuguese admini8tration

The General Assembly,
Having examined the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination,
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also all the relevant resolutions concerning
the Territories under Portuguese domination adopted
by the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Taking note of the report of the International Seminar on Apartheid, Racial Discrimination and Colonialism in Southern Africa, held at Kitwe, Zambia, from
25 July to 4 August 1967,1
Deeply disturbed by the negative attitude of the Government of Portugal and its persistent refusal to implement the relevant United Nations resolutions,
Gravely concerned about the critical and explosive
situation which is threatening international peace and
security owing to the methods of oppression and the
military operations which continue to be used against
the African peoples of the Territories under Portuguese domination,
Noting once more with deep concern that the activities of the foreign economic and financial interests in
those Territories are heing pursued as intensively as
ever and continue to impede the realization of the legitimate aspirations of the Afr:can peoples,
Noting further with profound concern that Portugal
continues to receive aid and weapons from certain
States, and in particular from its military allies, which
it uses against the population of those Territories,
Noting with satisfaction the progress tcw::irds national independence and freedom made b:,· the liberation movements hoth through their stru<;gle and through
a reconstruction programme,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
relating to his consultations with the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development in pursuance
of General Assembly resolutions 2184 (XXI) of 12 December 1966 and 2202 (XXI) of 16 December 1966, 2
1. Reaffirms the inalienable r:i::-ht of the peoples of
the Territories under Portugue~ ~ clo:nination to achieve
freedom and independence, ir 1c\'.r;r<lance with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (A ✓), ;ind !he iegitimacy
of their struggle to achieve this right ;
l A/6818 and Corr.I.
2 Official Records of

the Gm,,-al Asmnbly, Twenty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 66, document A/6825.

47

2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories under Portuguese domination8
and endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
3. Strongly condemns the persistent refusal of the
Government of Portugal to implement the relevant
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special Committee, as well as that
Government's actions which are designed to perpetuate
its oppressive foreign rule ;
4. Strongly condemns the colonial war being waged
by the Government of Portugal against the peaceful peoples of the Territories under its domination, which
constitutes a crime against humanity and a grave threat
to international peace and security;
5. Condemns the policy of the Government of Portugal, which violates the economic and political rights of
the indigenous population by the settlement of foreign
immigrants in the Territories and by the forcible exporting of African workers to South Africa, and calls upon
that Government to stop immediately the systematic
influx of foreign immigrants into these Territories
and the forcible exporting of African workers to South
Africa;
6. Strongly condemns the activities of the financial
interests operating in the Territories under Portuguese
domination, which exploit the human and material resources of the Territories and impede the progress of
their peoples towards freedom and independence ;
7. Urges the Government of Portugal to apply without delay to the peoples of the Territories under its
domination the principle of self-determination in ac
cordance with General Assemhly resolution 1514 (XV)
and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, and, in particular, to
take the following action :
(a) To recognize solemnly the right of the peoples
under its domination to self-determination and independence;
( b) To desist forthwith from all acts of repression
and to withdraw all military and other forces which it
is using for that purpose ;
( c) To proclaim an unconditional political amnesty
and create the conditions which will enable authority
to be transferred to freely elected institutions representative of the populations, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
8. Once again requests all States, particularly the
military allies of Portugal in the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, to take the following measures :
(a) To desist forthwith from giving the Government
of Portugal any assistance, including the training of
Portuguese military personnel within or outside the
framework of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
which encourages that Government to continue its repression of the African people in the Territories under
its domination ;
( b) To prevent any sale or supply of weapons and
military equipment to the Government of Portugal ;
( c) To stop the sale or shipment to the Government
of Portugal of equipment and materials for the manufacture or maintenance of weapons and ammunition :
1 Ibid.,

chapter V.

addendum to

agenda

item

23

( A/6700/Rev.1),
