S/PV.7897

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7897th meeting

Friday, 10 March 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-06387 (E)
*1706387*

S/PV.7897

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and all the Security Council members,
for inviting me to brief the Council on my visit in recent
days to countries facing, or at risk of, famine — Yemen,
South Sudan and Somalia. I will also briefly discuss
the outcome of the Oslo Humanitarian Conference on
Nigeria and the Lake Chad Region. I have also been to the
Somali region of Ethiopia and visited northern Kenya,
where pastoralists are the worst affected by the terrible
drought in that part of the African continent. More than
2.7 million Kenyans are now food-insecure, a number
likely to reach 4 million by April. In collaboration with
the Government of Kenya, the United Nations will soon
launch an appeal for $200 million to provide urgent
lifesaving assistance and protection. However, in the
following remarks I will focus on my other visits over
the past 16 days.
I turn first to Yemen. The humanitarian crisis there
is already the largest in the world, and the Yemeni
people now face the spectre of famine. Today, two
thirds of the population — 18.8 million people — need
assistance, while more than 7 million are hungry and do
not know where their next meal will come from. That
is 3 million more than in January. As the fighting in
Yemen continues and escalates, displacement increases.
With health facilities destroyed or damaged, diseases
are sweeping through the country.
I spoke with people in Aden, Ibb, Sana’a and from
Taiz. They told me horrific stories of displacement,
of escaping unspeakable violence and destruction
in Mokha and Taiz city in Taiz governorate. I
2/17

10/03/2017

saw first-hand the effects of losing home and
livelihood — malnourishment, hunger and squalid
living conditions in destroyed schools, unfinished
apartments and wet concrete basements. In the past
two months alone, more than 48,000 people have fled
fighting, mines and improvised explosive devices in
Mokha town and the surrounding fields alone. I met
countless malnourished and sick children. My small
team met a girl who had been displaced to Ibb who still
had shrapnel wounds in her leg, while her brother was
deeply traumatized. I was introduced to a 13-year-old
girl who had fled Taiz city, left in charge of her seven
siblings. I spoke with families living in a ruined school
who had been displaced to Aden when their homes
were destroyed by air strikes. All of them told me three
things — they are hungry, they are sick and they need
peace so that they can return home.
I travelled to Aden on the first United Nations
humanitarian flight and met the President, Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of the Republic of Yemen.
I also met with the senior leadership of the Houthi and
General People’s Congress authorities in Sana’a. I
discussed the humanitarian situation and the importance
of preventing a famine, better respecting international
humanitarian law and protecting civilians. I demanded
full, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access. All my
counterparts promised to facilitate sustained access
and to respect international humanitarian law. Yet all
parties to the conflict are arbitrarily denying sustained
humanitarian access and are politicizing aid. Already,
the humanitarian suffering that we are seeing in Yemen
today is caused by the parties and proxies, and if they
do not change their behaviour immediately, they will
have to be held accountable for the inevitable famine,
unnecessary deaths and associated increase in suffering
that will follow.
Despite the almost impossible and terrifying
conditions, the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners are not deterred and are stepping up to meet
the humanitarian needs across the country. In February
alone, 4.9 million people received food assistance. We
continue to negotiate access and make modest gains.
For instance, despite assurances from all the parties of
safe passage to Taiz city, I and my team were denied
access and had to retreat a short distance to safety when
we came under gunfire. But we managed to use that
experience to enable us to clear the way to reach people
inside Taiz city with the first humanitarian truck
delivery, bringing eight tons of essential medicines on
17-06387

10/03/2017

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

the city road from Ibb to Taiz, since August 2016. We
will leave no stone unturned in order to find alternative
routes. We must prevail, because so many lives depend
on us, the full range of the humanitarian family.
For 2017, the humanitarian community requires
$2.1 billion in order to reach 12 million people in
Yemen with lifesaving assistance and protection.
Only 6 per cent of that funding has been received so
far. An international ministeria-level pledging event
is scheduled for 25 April, but the situation is so dire
that I ask donors to give urgently now. All contributions
and pledges made starting 1 January will be counted at
that event.
I continue to reiterate the same message to all:
it is only a political solution that will ultimately end
human suffering and bring stability to the region. And
at this stage, only a combined response with the private
sector can avert a famine. Commercial imports must be
allowed to resume through all entry points in Yemen,
including, and especially, Hudaydah port, which must
be kept open and expanded. With access and funding,
humanitarian workers will do more, but they are not the
long-term solution to the growing crisis.
As I just mentioned, a ministerial-level pledging
event for the humanitarian response in Yemen for 2017
will take place in Geneva on 25 April. The SecretaryGeneral will chair the event, co-hosted by the Foreign
Ministers of Sweden and Switzerland, to advocate
for more resources and access. For 2017, the Yemen
humanitarian response plan asks for $2.1 billion to assist
12 million people in need across all 22 governorates.
Turning to South Sudan, which I visited on 4 and
5 March, the situation is worse than it has ever been.
The famine in South Sudan is man-made. Parties to the
conflict are parties to the famine — as are those not
intervening to make the violence stop.
More than 7.5 million people need assistance, up
by 1.4 million from last year. About 3.4 million people
are displaced, of which almost 200,000 have fled South
Sudan since January alone. A localized famine was
declared for Leer and Mayendit on 20 February, an
area where violence and insecurity have compromised
humanitarian access for years. More than 1 million
children are estimated to be acutely malnourished
across the country, including 270,000 children who face
the imminent risk of death should they not be reached in
time with assistance. Meanwhile, the cholera outbreak
that began in June 2016 has spread to more locations.

S/PV.7897

I travelled to Ganyiel, in Unity state, where people
have fled from the horrors of famine and conflict. I
saw the impact humanitarians can have in alleviating
suffering. I met an elderly woman with her malnourished
grandson receiving treatment. I listened to women who
fled fighting, wading through waist-high swamps with
their children, to receive food and medicine. Some of
those women have experienced the most appalling acts
of sexual violence — which continues to be used as
a weapon of war. Their harrowing stories are only a
few among thousands who have suffered a similar fate
across the country.
Humanitarians are delivering. Last year, partners
reached more than 5.1 million people with assistance.
However, active hostilities, access denials and
bureaucratic impediments continue to curtail their
efforts to reach people who desperately need help. Aid
workers have been killed. Humanitarian compounds
and supplies have been attacked, looted and occupied
by armed actors. Recently, humanitarians had to
leave one of the famine-affected counties because of
fighting. Assurances by senior Government officials of
unconditional access and no bureaucratic impediments
now need to be turned into action on the ground.
In Somalia, more than half the population — 6.2 million
people — need humanitarian and protection assistance,
including 2.9 million who are at risk of famine and
require immediate assistance to save or sustain their
lives. Close to 1 million children under the age of 5
will be acutely malnourished this year. In the past
two months alone, nearly 160,000 people have been
displaced due to severe drought conditions, adding to
the already 1.1 million people who live in appalling
conditions around the country.
What I saw and heard during my visit to Somalia was
distressing — women and children walk for weeks in
search of food and water. They have lost their livestock,
water sources have dried up and they have nothing left
to survive on. With everything lost, women, boys, girls
and men now move to urban centres.
We visited Baidoa with the Secretary-General,
on his first field mission since he took office. We met
with displaced people going through ordeals none of us
could imagine. We visited the regional hospital where
children and adults are desperately fighting to survive
diarrhoea, cholera and malnutrition. Again, as if proof
were needed, it was clear that between malnutrition and
death there is always disease.

17-063873/17

S/PV.7897

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

Large parts of southern and central Somalia remain
under the control or influence of Al-Shabaab, and
the security situation is volatile. Last year, some 165
violent incidents — an 18 per cent increase compared
to 2015 — directly impacted humanitarian work and
resulted in the deaths of 14 aid workers. Al-Shabaab,
Government forces and other militia also continue
to block major supply routes to towns in 29 of the
42 districts in southern and central Somalia. That
has restricted access to markets, basic commodities
and services, and is severely disrupting livelihoods.
Blockades and double taxation bar farmers from
transporting their grains. It is critical that Somali forces
and those of the African Union Mission in Somalia
secure vital road access to enable both lifesaving aid
and longer term recovery. A lot of hope is placed in the
new Government.
The current indicators mirror the tragic picture of
2011, when Somalia last suffered a famine. It should
be noted that by the time the famine was recognized
in 2011, half of the 260,000 people who died in the
famine had already died. That is important for points
I will make shortly. However, humanitarian partners
now have a larger footprint, mature cash programming,
better data through assessments, better controls on
resources and vetting of partners, as well as stronger
partnership with Government authorities. The
Government recently declared the drought a national
disaster and is taking steps to work with humanitarian
partners to ensure a coordinated response. To be clear,
we can avert a famine in Somalia. We have a committed
new President who has been clear, a humanitarian and
resilience track record and a detailed plan. We are
ready despite the incredible risks and dangers. We have
local and international leadership. We have a lot of
access. And now we need the international community,
gathered here, as well as donor agencies and nations, to
invest in Somalia. It is lifesaving but we do need those
huge funds now.
For all three of those situations, as well as for
north-east Nigeria, an immediate injection of funds,
plus safe and unimpeded access, are required to enable
partners to avert a catastrophe; otherwise, many people
will predictably die from hunger, livelihoods will be
lost and political gains, which have been hard-won over
the last few years, will be reversed. To be precise, we
need $4.4 billion by July — and that is a detailed cost,
not a negotiating number.
4/17

10/03/2017

Before I visited all those countries, I was in
Oslo, where the Governments of Norway, Germany
and Nigeria, in partnership with the United Nations,
organized a humanitarian conference on Nigeria and
the Lake Chad region. Ten million seven hundred
thousand million people need humanitarian assistance
and protection, including 7.1 million people who are
severely food insecure. Humanitarian partners scaled
up their response to reach the most vulnerable groups
threatened by violence, food insecurity and famine,
particularly in north-east Nigeria — many Council
members saw that for themselves on their recent
mission to the region. Fourteen donors have pledged
a total of $672 million, of which $458 million is for
humanitarian action in 2017. That is very good news; I
commend those who made such generous pledges, and
I urge others to follow suit. More is needed, however, to
secure the $1.5 billion required to provide the assistance
needed across the Lake Chad region.
We stand at a critical point in our history. Already,
at the beginning of the year, we are facing the largest
humanitarian crisis since the establishment of the
United Nations. More than 20 million people across
four countries now face starvation and famine.
Without collective and coordinated global efforts,
people will simply starve to death. Many more will
suffer and die from disease. Children will be stunted
and out of school. Livelihoods, futures and hope will
be lost. Communities’ resilience will rapidly wilt
away. Development gains will be reversed. Many will
be displaced and will continue to move in search for
survival, creating ever more instability across entire
regions. The warning call and appeal for action by the
Secretary-General can thus not be understated. It was
right to take the risk and sound the alarm early, not
wait for the pictures of emaciated, dying children on
the world’s television screens to mobilize a reaction and
the funds.
The United Nations and humanitarian partners
are responding. We have strategic, coordinated and
prioritized plans in every country. We have the right
leadership and heroic, dedicated teams on the ground.
We are working hand-in-hand with development
partners to marry the immediate life-saving with
longer-term sustainable development. We are ready to
scale up. This is, frankly, not the time to ask for more
detail or use that postponing phrase, “What would you
prioritize?” Every life on the edge of famine and death
is equally worth saving.
17-06387

10/03/2017

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

Now we need the international community and the
Council to act.
First and foremost, it must act quickly to tackle
the precipitating factors of famine. Preserving and
restoring normal access to food and ensuring all
parties’ compliance with international humanitarian
law are key.
Secondly, with sufficient and timely financial
support, humanitarians can still help to prevent the
worst-case scenario. To do this, humanitarians require
safe, full and unimpeded access to people in need.
Parties to the conflict must respect this fundamental
tenet of international humanitarian law, and those with
influence over the parties must exert that influence now.
Thirdly, the fighting must stop. To continue on the
path of war and military conquest is, I think we all know,
to guarantee failure, humiliation and moral turpitude,
and we will bear the responsibility for the millions who
face hunger and deprivation on an incalculable scale
because of it.
Allow me very briefly to sum up. The situation
for people in each country is dire, and without a
major international response, the situation will get
worse. All four countries have one thing in common:
conflict. This means that we — the Council — have
the possibility to prevent and end further misery and
suffering. The United Nations and its partners are ready
to scale up, but we need the access and the funds to do
more. It is all preventable. It is possible to avert this
crisis, to avert these famines, to avert these looming
human catastrophes.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien very much
indeed for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Before doing so, I thank Council members in the
main for their timekeeping this morning. Again this
afternoon the light will start flashing if representatives
do not finish their statements within the five minutes,
and, if necessary, I will use the gavel to encourage them.
I give the floor to the representative of the Russian
Federation, who called this meeting.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like at the outset to thank UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien for his very
comprehensive and objective briefing on the results

S/PV.7897

of his recent visit to a number of countries that find
themselves in a very difficult humanitarian situation.
In calling for this meeting, we were motivated first
and foremost by the need to obtain first-hand evidence
about what is taking place in the countries affected by
the humanitarian disaster, including as concerns the
situation in the Republic of Yemen.
A major part of the population of this country,
which is historically friendly to Russia, requires
humanitarian assistance. The country is on the verge of
famine. Civilian infrastructure lies in ruins, and many
businesses and facilities have been destroyed. First and
foremost I wish to commend the selfless, brave work
of United Nations humanitarian personnel in Yemen,
including Humanitarian Coordinator McGoldrick.
They continue to deal with the most practical tasks in
helping the population of the country.
Our country, through its embassy in Sana’a, has
contributed to establishing a secretariat to contribute to
cooperation among the humanitarian structures of the
United Nations and the local authorities of the Republic
of Yemen in the capital. The secretariat will be tasked
with solving problems related to the distribution of
assistance among those in need . We call on all parties
to refrain from any efforts to find a military solution
to the situation. Such an approach will not bring about
effective and long-term results. This would lead only to
increasing misunderstanding and mistrust between the
Yemeni parties and undermine prospects for a return
to peace. We are convinced that resolving the conflict
in Yemen can be done only through political means,
through negotiations based on a balanced road map
leading to a solution.
Although past efforts of the international
community to bring Yemenis to agreement have not
been successful, this does not mean that we should
simply abandon this undertaking. We are continuing
to work through our embassy in the country with all
parties to the conflict, urging them to refrain from
unilateral decisions that only block the launching of
a negotiating process. As Mr. O’Brien rightly said,
solutions to all problems in this connection should be
sought only through political means.
Obviously, the winners of the Yemeni conflict are
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida
in the Arabian Peninsula. With respect to Somalia, only
Al-Shabaab is a winner there. Also winning are other
the terrorist and extremist groups that control entire

17-063875/17

S/PV.7897

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

regions in the south and east of Yemen. We know from
the experience that we should not put off starting to
fight terrorists. Postponing this will only complicate
the situation.
We cannot but be concerned by the humanitarian
situation in African countries visited by Mr. O’Brien.
Many challenges remain in Somalia, where the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab has been sowing terror. South Sudan
faces equally urgent problems. We also need to unite
our efforts at the regional and international levels.
It is only through collective efforts that we will find
appropriate solutions.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking Mr. Stephen O’Brien for
his very illuminating briefing and his exemplary
commitment, and for his pressing appeal to all actors
involved in the face of a situation in which millions of
people are threatened with famine in Yemen, Somalia
and Nigeria and are already experiencing famine,
unfortunately, in South Sudan. I should like also to pay
tribute to the admirable work done by humanitarian
workers in the field, who are very often working in the
most difficult of circumstances.
I should like to convey three main messages today.
The first is that the action of the United
Nations, is essential as it is, cannot substitute for the
responsibilities that the Governments of these four
countries have vis-à-vis their populations. It is these
Governments that have the primary responsibility to
protect their populations.
In South Sudan, the recent declaration of famine
in certain parts of the country is an illustration of the
tragic situation that has prevailed in the country for
more than three years now due to the political conflict.
Because of the fighting and the violence of which they
are the deliberate targets, entire populations have had
to leave their land and their villages and can no longer
provide for themselves. The fear of violence has also
meant that some of that land, despite being fertile, has
not been planted. Let us not be mistaken here: this
famine is largely man-made.
We call upon the Government of South Sudan to take
into account the needs of its population. In South Sudan
and in Yemen, only a political solution to the conflicts
there will make it possible to address the root causes
of those conflicts and to put an end to the suffering
of the people. In this regard, we support the mediation
6/17

10/03/2017

efforts led by the United Nations, in particular the work
of the Special Envoy on Yemen, Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, in enabling the resumption and continuation
of negotiations, and an early and lasting cessation
of hostilities.
In South Sudan, we call for the rapid implementation
of the peace agreement; the national dialogue should not
be an obstacle in this respect. The rule of law and good
governance are also essential to prevent such scourges.
We hope that the commitments undertaken by the new
Somali President, Mr. Farmajo, will be followed up by
concrete action, particularly with regard to the reform
of the security sector.
In South Sudan, constraints on public freedoms is of
concern. The second message that I would like to send
today is that the United Nations and humanitarian actors
must be able to access all people who need their help,
without bureaucratic red tape or threats to their security.
Mounting tensions — even hostility — with regard to
humanitarian actors hamper the delivery of supplies
and the provision of basic needs. That is often
compounded by the refusal of access by armed groups
on the ground, as well as administrative blockages and
lengthy bureaucratic procedures. As Mr. O’Brien has
just mentioned, there is an ever-growing number of
obstacles to humanitarian assistance.
The Governments of the States concerned have
a special responsibility. They must ensure safe
and unhindered access to the United Nations and
humanitarian actors, wherever populations need
emergency assistance. The various bureaucratic
obstacles imposed by the authorities, in particular
the South Sudanese authorities, are helping to slow
down the provision of the necessary aid to the most
vulnerable populations.
We are particularly concerned about the situation
in South Sudan, where humanitarian actors and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan are all too
often the target of attacks, harassment or access
restrictions. These hindrances are committed by all
the parties to the conflict, be it the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA), the SPLA in Opposition,
or the various armed groups that are multiplying in
the country. These access restrictions must cease
immediately. We must collectively and unambiguously
express our condemnation of such barriers, which are
contrary to international humanitarian law. I recall
that all parties to conflicts are obligated to facilitate
17-06387

10/03/2017

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

S/PV.7897

the delivery of food supplies. Without that, the
mobilization of the international community would be
absolutely ineffective.

operational. Given that the essence of what I wanted
to say has already been covered, I will not take up any
more time.

These problems are also quite acute in Yemen, where
the ongoing fighting threatens to further exacerbate
the humanitarian situation. The parties to the conflict
must immediately cease indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Such actions could
be classified as war crimes. It is also imperative that
humanitarian actors have unhindered access in order to
bring the basic necessities to the population.

Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General O’Brien, whose briefing
was clearly not just a set of business-as-usual remarks.
Mr. O’Brien just described what could soon become the
most serious food-security emergency in the modern
era, unless States members of the United Nations act
now to stop it.

The third message I want to deliver today is that in
order to cope with the magnitude of the financial need,
it is important to foster a comprehensive approach in
order to create synergies and to improve coordination
with other donors, and to mobilize goodwill,
including — as Stephen O’Brien said — private donors
and businesses, as well as “non-traditional” donors, in
particular emerging economies. It is through general
mobilization and the use of all means at our disposal
that we can help people in need and respond to the call
of Stephen O’Brien. In that context, we welcome the
holding of the Yemen donors’ conference, to be held
25 April in Geneva.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): This is
not the first time that I do not know whether to thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefings, which generally strike at
the very core of our being. Of course, we thank him for
moving us so profoundly, for doing this in-depth work
and for sharing it with us so frequently.
I would have wished to speak before the Ambassador
of France, who basically, delivered my entire statement.
There is very little left of what I wanted to say that has
not already been said by him. Our intention was to speak
of the common denominator linking humanitarian
crises, which is that they take place within the context
of conflicts. It is therefore essential to find a solution to
those conflicts. To that end, it is necessary for all who
can exert their influence to do so. At the same time,
allowing access for humanitarian assistance to the
civilian population is fundamental.
Although the French Ambassador completely
shattered my statement, allow me to stress one
issue that has long been of particular concern to my
delegation — indiscriminate attacks against hospitals,
schools and civilian infrastructure. Scores of hospitals
have been attacked, with great loss of life. In Yemen,
for example, half of the existing hospitals are not

The United Nations is warning us that more than
20 million people are starving in Yemen, South Sudan,
Somalia and the Lake Chad Basin. As Mr. O’Brien
pointed out in his briefing, famine has already been
declared in some areas of South Sudan. The same
could soon follow in Yemen, Somalia and the Lake
Chad basin if the international community does not
intervene immediately.
Every member of the Security Council and of
the United Nations should be outraged that we are
confronting famine in the year 2017. Famine is a manmade crisis with man-made solutions. No country
should be destined to face famine in a world that has
more than enough food to feed every single person. It is
not too late to prevent famine from spreading. It is not
inevitable. However, preventing famine means that the
parties fighting on the ground have to prioritize access
to food, health care and other life-saving aid. They must
also take measures to reduce the impact of hostilities
on the civilian population. We therefore call on the
members of the Council to use their influence over
the parties in these four situations to allow unfettered
access and not obstruct aid.
Additionally, it is vital that the United Nations and
its partners have the resources they need in order to
respond. Right now, only 1.6 per cent of the four appeals
for Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and Nigeria are
funded. Collectively, we must contribute more to this
relief effort. By numbers of people at risk, the stakes in
Yemen are the highest, as Mr. O’Brien has impressed
upon us. The United Nations has assessed that 65 per
cent of all households in Yemen are food insecure.
Some 7.3 million people need food and emergency
aid, and 460,000 children under five years old are
suffering from severe, acute malnutrition — which
is up 200 per cent since 2014. Moreover, we hear that
the United Nations Children’s Fund now estimates
that one child dies every 10 minutes in Yemen from

17-063877/17

S/PV.7897

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

malnutrition-related causes. We know that Yemen
is overwhelmingly dependent on imports for its food
and that humanitarian aid is insufficient to meet the
enormity of the need. Commercial food imports are
critical to averting famine. And, just like the other
three cases, in Yemen, an end to the conflict would do
the most to help alleviate the humanitarian crisis.
That is why the United States supports the efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, to renew the cessation
of hostilities and bring the parties back to the table
for negotiations. There is no military solution to the
conflict in Yemen. A comprehensive peace would
require compromise from all sides for the sake of the
Yemeni people. While the conflict continues, the parties
must allow sustained access, both for humanitarian aid
and for the commercial import of food, medicine, fuel
and other basic supplies. These essential goods must
be able to arrive through all of the ports of Yemen, and
they must be able to move within Yemen. The United
Nations verification and inspection mechanism plays
a key role in facilitating food deliveries. However,
constraints on access, particularly at Hudaydah — as
Mr. O’Brien noted — contribute to the risk of famine.
The closure of Sana’a airport, along with checkpoints
on the ground, complicate relief efforts even more. The
obstructions to aid in Yemen must be lifted.
The United States also urges international and
regional partners to help Yemenis afford to buy food
again. Contributing to the cash transfer programmes
that provide payments to Yemen’s neediest families
would help prevent families from going hungry.
The United Nations has already declared a famine
in certain areas of South Sudan. Responsibility for this
famine lies squarely with the country’s leaders, who
are fighting a senseless conflict as their people starve.
This conflict has caused almost 3.5 million people to
flee their homes, forcing many to abandon their farms.
People are hiding from the violence in swamps. They
are surviving by eating waterlillies and grasses or
taking enormous risks by trying to flee to neighbouring
countries. But even as 100,000 people face starvation
now and 5.5 million people face severe hunger this
coming summer, South Sudan’s leaders are making
it even more difficult to deliver aid. Of couse, South
Sudan’s leaders have tried to say that they will solve
these challenges, but look at what they are actually
doing. There are reports that Government officials
8/17

10/03/2017

are expelling humanitarian staff from famine-stricken
areas. This is an outrage.
The United States calls on the Government of
South Sudan to uphold one of its most fundamental
obligations to its citizens, that is, to keep them from
starving to death and to allow humanitarian aid
organizations to do their jobs in helping people. As
Mr. O’Brien noted, with the Secretary-General’s recent
visit to Somalia, he brought much-needed attention
to Somalia’s worsening hunger crisis. The Somali
people, however, continue to grapple with the impact
of decades of conflict. We know that in 2011, nearly
260,000 Somalis died in a famine and now after several
poor rainy seasons, Somalia yet again faces a looming
famine with 50 per cent of the population in need of
assistance. But the difference between then and now is
that the international community is mobilized and in
place to provide aid and that a new Federal Government
of Somalia is ready to coordinate a drought response.
But again, funding, as Mr. O’Brien noted, is the primary
obstacle to saving lives. Of the $825 million required
for famine prevention and response in Somalia, only
16.2 per cent of what is required has been received.
Finally, members of the Council just saw first hand
the suffering in north-eastern Nigeria and the Lake Chad
Basin, where more than 10 million civilians — two out
of every three people in the region — are in need of
humanitarian assistance. Some organizations already
believe that famine occurred in parts of Nigeria last
year and experts warn that up to 120,000 people could
face famine by this summer.
It is a daunting challenge, as we saw, to get aid to
this area, as the region’s militaries continue to combat
Boko Haram’s brutality. In the midst of this fight,
humanitarians and civilians are threatened by ambushes,
suicide attacks and improvised explosive devices. But
to save people from starving to death, humanitarians
need safe ways to reach them — again echoing UnderSecretary-General O’Brien. We saw during our trip
that there is scope for greater collaboration between
military officials and humanitarian organizations,
which could allow greater access. These groups are
able to deliver aid to 2.1 million people now, which is a
massive improvement from where we were last year, but
5.1 million people still need help. The United Nations
and its partners are still not able reach more than 50 per
cent of the people going hungry. That is why the United
Nations and the Governments around the Lake Chad
17-06387

10/03/2017

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

S/PV.7897

basin have to do more to open up access in the areas
hardest hit by the fight against Boko Haram.

of the Yemeni people and the international community
and seek a ceasefire and sustainable peace.

In closing, the bottom line is that all of us know the
steps required to prevent famine. The members of the
Council and all other countries with influence need to
press the parties on the ground to open up humanitarian
access and minimize the impact of hostilities on the
population. We also need to give the United Nations the
resources it needs to help. Starvation is preventable, but
only if we all have the will to act.

Japan strongly supports the United Nations
approach to the Yemen crisis, which begins with a
credible cessation of hostilities monitored by the
De-escalation and Coordination Committee and
follows with face-to-face consultations by the parties
with United Nations mediation. We see no serious
alternatives. Japan believes there is no disagreement
among P-5 members in this regard. We must also take
very seriously the findings by the panel of experts of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) that terrorist groups are actively exploiting
the changing political environment and governance
vacuums to recruit new members and stage new attacks.

Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank the
Russian Federation for calling a meeting on this very
important issue. I would like to express my gratitude
to Under-Secretary-General Mr. Stephen O’Brien for
his briefing today. We must take his dire message
very seriously.
I join others in thanking all humanitarian workers
in these countries for their courage and dedication
under such difficult conditions.
I would like to begin with Yemen. On 22 February,
the Secretary-General announced that Yemen was one
of four countries that faced a devastating level of food
insecurity. Food insecurity and malnutrition in Yemen
were concerns even before the onset of the current
crisis in the summer of 2014, and Japan has continued
to prioritize funding to the World Food Programme and
the World Health Organization.
Mr. O’Brien has described the seriousness and
complexity of the situation and the circumstances on
the ground. Ongoing fighting decreases the volume of
commercial imports to Yemen, which already struggles
with food production, thereby increasing the price of
food. The fighting deepens the economic crisis, delays
the payment of salaries and makes it difficult for
ordinary people to buy basic necessities. The fighting
also prevents the United Nations and other humanitarian
actors from delivering assistance.
Japan is deeply concerned by reports that Hudaydah
will become the next battlefield after Mocha. Hudaydah
is the backbone of Yemen’s economy. If Hudaydah, and
in particular its port, are severely damaged, economic
and food insecurity will worsen. It is deeply regrettable
that fighting, shelling and airstrikes are continuing.
The Security Council is united in calling for a political
solution, repeatedly underscoring that there is no
military solution. The parties must listen to the voices

Almost one year has passed since Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed announced a nation-wide cessation of
hostilities just before the launch of the Kuwait round
of talks. We are frustrated by slow progress in the
political process and the worsening fighting, but we
must continue to support Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed’s
efforts. Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed and the United
Nations should be increasingly vocal and visible in
drawing the attention of the international community
to this issue. The Council should consider delivering
a strong, unified message to the parties supporting the
United Nations mediation role and urging the parties
to cease hostilities and allow unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access immediately.
In light of the very concerning situation in
South Sudan, Japan announced an approximately
$22.4-million contribution in January to United
Nations agencies for humanitarian and reconstruction
projects. We are considering further assistance in
response to worsening conditidions. Japan remains
deeply concerned by the continued access restrictions
for humanitarian actors. We urge President Kiir to
honour his statement to Parliament on 21 February and
his commitment to ensure unimpeded access. We need
concrete action by the South Sudanese leadership.
Finally, Japan is concerned about the grave
humanitarian situation in Somalia. We must not repeat
the tragedy of 2011. If this situation is not addressed,
progress in the Somali State formation process could
be jeopardized. Japan has therefore pledged more than
$22 million in humanitarian and development assistance
to Somalia, part of which will provide urgent nutritional
assistance. We are also seriously considering further

17-063879/17

S/PV.7897

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

actions in response to the calls by the Somali people, as
well as by the United Nations.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): Like others, I would like
to thank the Russian Federation for requesting this
important meeitng.
Let me start by thanking Emergency Relief
Coordinator O’Brien for undertaking this important
mission and for shining a spotlight on these worsening
humanitarian crises. The present situation in countries
like Yemen and South Sudan, where famine has now
been declared, is utterly appalling and completely
unacceptable. The Council has seen the crisis in the
Lake Chad basin first hand. Immediate action is needed.
We therefore fully support the call of the SecretaryGeneral for increased financial resources and
improved humanitarian access. Emergency funding
must be scaled up so that the United Nations system
and its partners can deliver lifesaving assistance to
those in need. Sweden has significantly increased its
humanitarian assistance to those countries. We call
on others to do the same. The humanitarian response
must also be allowed to reach those in need; that means
humanitarian access in all contexts. We call on all
parties to respect humanitarian principles and to meet
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and human rights law.
Only political solutions can end the humanitarian
suffering and bring sustainable peace and development.
As we heard from the Deputy Secretary-General (see
S/PV.7894), lasting recovery requires investment
in comprehensive approaches that address conflict,
chronic underdevelopment and the effects of climate
change. We need to close the gap between humanitarian
assistance and development interventions, and we need
new ways of working to do so. We can all do better and
we must do better.
Let us now turn to country-specific situations.
I think that all situations discussed today are worth
mentioning but, in the interest of time, I will focus on
Yemen and South Sudan.
The situation in Yemen is both shocking and
utterly intolerable. We cannot look the other way when
we are told that 19 million people lack humanitarian
protection; when we hear that 7 million people do not
know where to find their next meal; that one child dies
every 10 minutes, and perversely, that many of those
who do escape the military conflict or starvation then
10/17

10/03/2017

risk dying for lack of simple medical interventions.
There is an urgent need to supply additional shrinking
reserves of medicine, food and fuel. All parties have
an obligation to allow unimpeded humanitarian access.
Parties must refrain from bureaucratic constraints to the
delivery of aid, across front lines, facilitate commercial
imports through all ports — especially the life-line that
is Hudaydah — and resume commercial flights.
As we have heard, immediate action is needed to
prevent widespread famine. However, the United Nations
lacks the funding needed to scale up its response. The
humanitarian response plan referred to by the UnderSecretary-General is currently only 6 per cent funded.
In response, as we have heard today, Switzerland and
Sweden, together with the Secretary-General and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
have taken the initiative to convene a high-level
pledging event for the humanitarian crisis in Yemen
on 25 April in Geneva. We invite all partners to attend
and urge them to pledge generously and to quickly
disburse increased support for the crisis. Humanitarian
aid will never resolve the crisis in Yemen. There is
an urgent need to renew the cessation of hostilities
and to intensify efforts towards reaching a negotiated
political agreement to provide a durable solution to the
unfolding crisis.
In South Sudan, the deteriorating security
situation is contributing directly to the humanitarian
crisis. Only an end to the conflict can lead to a real
improvement in the lives of the South Sudanese people.
An immediate cessation of hostilities and a revitalized
and truly inclusive political process, supported by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the African Union and the United Nations, is
urgently needed. Let me also stress that it is totally
unacceptable that aid workers in South Sudan are
being attacked and killed. Humanitarians continue to
face multiple obstacles, including the denial of access
and bureaucratic impediments. We urge all parties,
including the Government, to meet their obligations
to provide full and unimpeded humanitarian access
throughout South Sudan.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the international
community needs to take immediate action if widespread
famine and death are to be avoided. The human
catastrophe of failing of failing to do is unimaginable.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We appreciate today’s
update by Under-Secretary-General O’Brien and
17-06387

10/03/2017

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

his committed efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
situation globally and in the Middle East and Africa,
in particular. My delegation would like to make the
following observations.
With regard to Yemen, an escalation of the military
offensive has resulted in a further deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Yemen, leading to food
shortages, rising food and fuel prices, disruption
to agricultural production and other catastrophic
consequences. Nearly 19 million people or more
than two-thirds of the population need humanitarian
assistance and protection. It is obvious that action
must be launched so that lifesaving humanitarian
programmes can alleviate the gravity of the crisis. To
that end, the commercial air service to Sana’a should
be resumed, together with strong control over imported
goods, in accordance with resolution 2216 (2015)
to facilitate the rapid delivery of medicine, food and
other necessities.
The deterioration of the humanitarian situation
can be mitigated only by ending the violence through a
cessation of hostilities and an inclusive political process
as solutions for durable peace. We urge all parties to
ensure the unhindered movement of commercial and
humanitarian supplies, without which millions of human
beings are at risk of famine and death. All parties in
conflict must come to the negotiating table to facilitate
timely, full and unimpeded humanitarian access.
With regard to Somalia, we express great
concern about the humanitarian situation and urge
the international community to respond with urgent
action to help families and individuals recover from the
drought. We must, at all costs, avoid a humanitarian
tragedy right now so that Somalia does not experience
a situation similar to that of 2011. When the famine was
declared at that time, half of those who needed help had
already died. At this stage, it is crucial to strengthen the
security sector through well-planned reform, whereby
the international community could assist the new
Government in fighting terrorist organizations.
On South Sudan, we express deep concern that
famine was declared in February in parts of that
country. Hunger and malnutrition, which have reached
critical levels, could be aggravated further by the
summer months if not addressed urgently with timely
action. In that regard, we commend Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien for being vocal with officials in
Juba about the dire humanitarian situation in the

S/PV.7897

country. It is clear that the present crisis is also a direct
consequence of the conflict and the obstruction of
humanitarian access. Kazakhstan underscores the need
for a cessation of hostilities in South Sudan in order
to end the suffering of the South Sudanese people.
We call on the Government of South Sudan to provide
access for humanitarian agencies to those parts of the
country that were seriously affected by famine, given
the fact that hundreds of thousands of people in South
Sudan will starve unless relief workers gain access to
populations in need.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
the delegation of the Russian Federation for its initiative
to convene today’s debate. I would also like to thank
Mr. O’Brien and his team for their work on one of the
most sensitive issues for the international community,
and it is in that spirit that we meet today. We intend to
make every effort to ease the tragic situation in various
parts of the world.
We, too, are concerned about the alarming
developments in South Sudan and Somalia. We believe
that the solution to such situations must be political
in nature. We reiterate our support for the efforts of
Mr. O’Brien and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs because we believe that their
work is fundamental.
With regard to Yemen, we stated earlier that silence
is eloquent because much can be conveyed through
silence. I believe that with respect to the situation in
Yemen, the Council’s silence could well be interpreted
in another way. We believe that it is imperative for us
to look more closely at the situation in Yemen from
every angle. We reiterate that the Plurinational State of
Bolivia firmly believes that a solution to the conflict in
Yemen will be reached only through a political process
and not through the use of violence.
The statistics that Mr. O’Brien cited for us are quite
shocking. We are talking about 21.2 million people who
are in need of assistance and protection to meet their
basic needs. Some 17 million people are suffering from
food insecurity, which is a very elegant way of saying
that they are on the verge of famine, and 3.3 million
pregnant women are in a state of malnutrition. The
representatives of the United States and Sweden
recalled another figure, which is that a child dies in
Yemen every 10 minutes owing to the lack of food. If
we consider how many children have died since the

17-0638711/17

S/PV.7897

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

beginning of this meeting, we realize just how serious
the situation is.
I will not repeat all of the statistics that
Mr. O’Brien’s briefing covered in such detail, but the
situation in Yemen has resulted in more than 10,000
deaths with the war that began in March 2015. On
behalf of the delegation of Bolivia, I reiterate that the
Security Council has remained silent for too long on
this issue, which, at the same time, is also suspicious.
We are very concerned about the unsustainable
humanitarian situation in Yemen and the famine
threatening the lives of millions of people. We are also
concerned by the limited humanitarian assistance that
can be deployed continues to be attacked along with
civilian installations.
Like other colleagues, we are very concerned in
particular about the province of Hudaydah, which
has been subject to restrictions despite the fact that
thousands of Yemenis are in need of the humanitarian
assistance that arrives through its port and about the
constant attacks affecting its operational capacity. The
United Nations Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian
Coordinator and United Nations Development
Programme Resident Representative for the Republic
of Yemen, Jamie McGoldrick, told the Washington
Post on 24 February that the attacks have destroyed
bridges and roads throughout the entire port province
of Hudaydah, while unexploded rockets landed inside
the port, thereby further reducing the number of
imports and vessels willing to travel to Yemen. A
unilateral blockade has been imposed that restricts
food and medicine imports on which millions of
Yemenis depend and that now have to be transferred
from ports in the south to reach the millions of people
who risk dying of hunger in the north. Of its food and
medicine, Yemen depends on approximately 20 per cent
imports, and to prevent them is really an attack on the
Yemeni population and runs contrary and is an affront
to international humanitarian law.
In that regard, we believe that there is something
concrete that we can do today in the Security Council,
and that is to send out an absolutely clear, unequivocal
and unanimous message that the restrictions on
Hudaydah port have to be lifted to provide access for
humanitarian assistance. Of course, it will take time
and other actions depending on the economic needs to
attend to the situation, but we believe that at the very
least the Council has the obligation to unanimously
reiterate its call to lift restrictions on that port.
12/17

10/03/2017

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing and the tireless efforts of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in providing humanitarian assistance to all areas of
Yemen. We and all countries of the world highly value
their work. My statement will focus on the situations in
Yemen, South Sudan and Somalia.
With regard to the situation in Yemen, my
delegation is concerned about the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation affecting our brotherly Yemeni
people. We stress the need to allow the unconditional
access of humanitarian assistance to all areas of Yemen.
We regret that Houthis continue to stall in providing
access for and entry of assistance in Taiz city. We also
denounce the fact that they did not allow the UnderSecretary-General to enter Taiz city during his visit to
Yemen. We call upon the international community to
increase its contributions at the humanitarian level in
Yemen to ensure sufficient funding for relief agencies.
Moreover, it is important to continue to promote
the efficient delivery of assistance in Yemen once it
reaches the country, including through improving the
delivery networks of relief agencies. We also call for
studying the possibility of deploying United Nations
observers of the stocks controlled by Houthis, especially
at Hudaydah port, so as to end certain practices that
have been recently reported by the coalition, including
stalling the entrance of authorized ships into the port,
which only increases the suffering of our brotherly
Yemeni people.
The humanitarian suffering affecting the people
of South Sudan has increased over the past month and
reached unprecedented levels. The vicious cycle of
fighting that has been waged since 2013 has resulted
in the displacement of millions of civilians. Hundreds
of thousands have become the victims of hunger and
malnutrition. There is therefore an urgent need to
facilitate access to the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan in the affected areas in a rapid, safe and
unhindered manner to allow it to implement the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council. Today more
than ever, the people of South Sudan are in need of the
support of the international community and donors. The
necessary resources required to fight this humanitarian
crisis have risen to an estimated at $1.6 billion, the
greater part of which has yet to be raised.
17-06387

10/03/2017

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

We express our deep concern with regard to
the increasingly serious consequences of the crisis
resulting from the drought and malnutrition affecting
the people of the Somalia. We must urgently address
this crisis, which threatens to impede all political and
security gains achieved thus far in Somalia, while
taking into account the competition to draw on already
scarce natural resources and the conflicts that it could
cause in the affected regions. We also stress the need
to increase regional and international efforts to provide
relief for areas affected by drought and ensure the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to Somali citizens
whose number is estimated at 6 million.
It is also important to support the ongoing
coordination among different parties in the relief
process and ensure the participation the Somali Federal
Government and all concerned regional administrations
in every phase. If we hope to end the suffering of the
Somali people, we must build on the lessons learned
from our experience in dealing with the drug crisis
that has affected Somalia since 2011. We must also
promote the capacity-building of Somali institutions so
that they can mitigate the economic and humanitarian
consequences of future crises.
To conclude, I would like to stress that the common
denominator of the three countries is their ongoing
political crises. Despite their different contexts, the
continuing severe deterioration of the respective
humanitarian situations is a direct result of the absence
of a political settlement in the three countries. We can
sustainably improve the humanitarian situations and
end the suffering of civilians in Yemen, South Sudan
and Somalia only through an inclusive political process
that paves the way for a political solution based on
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Despite its
importance, humanitarian assistance will never be
able to provide a final long-term solution for the crises
affecting the people of those countries.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I wish to thank the Russian
Federation for requesting this meeting and UnderSecretary-General O’Brien for his briefing and the hard
work that they and all the humanitarian actors put into
their daily activities.
During his recent visit to Yemen, SecretaryGeneral Guterres highlighted the interconnection
between today’s crises and the importance of promoting
an integrated approach to peace and security. We fully
support this vision, particularly in the light of the recent

S/PV.7897

Security Council trip to the Lake Chad basin, and we
subscribe to the Secretary-General’s call for immediate
famine-prevention assistance.
Italy, like others, is of course seriously concerned
about the situation in Yemen and the violent destruction
of lives that Under-Secretary-General O’Brien has
so eloquently described today and in his briefing of
26 January (see S/PV.7870), which was an eye-opener
in many ways. Italy is already providing help to the
Yemeni people in the areas of nutrition and aid to women
and girls who are the victims of violence. This year, we
plan to make a further contribution, to be announced at
the next donor conference in Geneva, but we have also
taken note of the urgency of today’s appeal.
But creating a fund, of course, is not enough. The
assistance must reach those in need. We therefore call
on all the parties to the conflict to guarantee full,
speedy and unimpeded humanitarian access at all times.
Needless to say, there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Yemen. A political agreement is the only
way out, so all parties to the conflict must ultimately
show their commitment to negotiating a solution under
the auspices of the United Nations and the Special
Envoy. The Italian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
is currently visiting the region to discuss the political
dimensions of the crisis and how Italy can lend political
and humanitarian assistance.
The crisis in Yemen is closely linked to that in
neighbouring Somalia, and we commend the UnderSecretary-General for the regional perspective
underlining the connections between the two. Somali
refugees in Yemen and returnees from Yemen are also
a matter for concern, since they may be contributing to
the illicit trafficking connections between transnational
organized crime and terrorist groups, whose presence
in the area is growing. Italy will continue to support
Somalia’s newly elected President Farmajo and the
Somalian authorities in their efforts to deal with a
difficult situation, with a particular focus on issues
such as the empowerment of women and young people,
nutrition, social protection and resilience, access to
health services, and demining.
But that must be a collective effort, and in that
regard I would like to commend the generosity that
has been shown by Somalia’s neighbours, particularly
Ethiopia and Kenya, in hosting Somali refugees from
drought, climate change and security threats, as was
also pointed out by the Secretary-General during his

17-0638713/17

S/PV.7897

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

recent visit. We also welcome the round table convened
by President Farmajo in Mogadishu recently and look
forward to further results from the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development conference held on 25 March
on Somali refugees, and to the conference to be held on
Somalia in London in May.
With regard to South Sudan, I would like to comment
briefly on two specific aspects of the crisis that are of
particular concern for us. The first is the limitations
imposed on humanitarian access for the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and for non-governmental
organizations. The second is the potential role of
South Sudanese churches in alleviating the crisis and
strengthening the population’s resilience. Churches are
often the last bastion for humanitarian assistance at the
grassroots level, and yet, as demonstrated in the case of
Kajo Keji two weeks ago, they are increasingly subject
to intimidation, harassment and violence. We firmly
condemn attacks on religious freedom and the safety
of the country’s religious places, and reiterate our
firm support to the Council of South Sudan Churches
in its brave efforts to uphold peace, dialogue and
reconciliation in the region.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would first like to thank
Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for his faithful and
striking account of the scale of the humanitarian crisis
in the three countries he just visited. For the sake of
brevity and the President’s call for concision, I will
focus on the situation in Yemen, while also touching on
some political and security issues, which, as has been
rightly noted by Mr. O’Brien and reinforced by Egypt
and other delegations, directly affect the humanitarian
issues in all three of these countries.
Like other speakers, we are concerned by the
worsening humanitarian situation in Yemen and urge
all the parties to ensure the sustainable delivery of
humanitarian supplies, without which millions of
Yemenis are at risk of famine and death. We welcome
the first humanitarian truck’s delivery of vital medical
equipment to Taiz city. However, we deplore the fact that
Mr. O’Brien was prevented from visiting Taiz, and echo
his call to all the parties to the conflict to accept their
responsibilities under international humanitarian and
human rights law, including guaranteeing sustainable,
full and unimpeded humanitarian access.
Ukraine remains convinced of the urgent need
to put an end to the violence in Yemen and reach a
sustainable political solution to the conflict. In that
14/17

10/03/2017

context, we are increasingly concerned about the surge
in rocket attacks launched by Houthi forces in Yemen
on targets located within Saudi Arabian territory and
on maritime vessels operating near Bab Al-Mandeb.
Keeping that important shipping passage safe and
secure is of paramount importance. The Al-HouthiSaleh forces have also increased their use of ballistic
missiles. We call for such attacks to cease immediately
and urge that the necessary steps to be taken to
de-escalate the situation. In that regard, it is vital that
any further weapon shipments to the Houthi-Saleh
forces be blocked if we are to prevent escalation of the
conflict. Delivering ever more sophisticated weaponry
to the Houthi fighters is not going to help the situation.
Achieving a negotiated political solution to the
conflict in Yemen continues to be complicated. We
reiterate our support to Special Envoy Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed in his pursuit of such a solution, and we
welcome his recent efforts to revive the talks, as well
as Jordan’s contribution to them. Without meaningful
dialogue, the results may be disastrous, and the only
party to benefit from that would be the terrorist groups
that are increasingly active in Yemen. It is disconcerting
to see Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula continue to
demonstrate its ability to expand its operational support
base in Yemen and exploit the deep lines of division in
war-torn Yemeni society. We must work collectively to
prevent that from happening.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank the representative of the Russian
Federation for requesting the convening of today’s
meeting, and Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for
his briefing on his recent visit to Yemen and other
countries. We commend the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for its work to ease the
humanitarian situation in those countries, and call on
the international community to extend a helping hand
in order to alleviate that crisis.
We have frequently discussed the situations in
South Sudan and Somalia, so in order to save time I
will focus on the situation in Yemen.
China is troubled by the escalating conflict there
and concerned about the worsening humanitarian
situation, the recurring attacks on civilians and civilian
facilities, the famine facing the Yemeni people and other
risk factors. The humanitarian situation is crying out
for improvement, and the Yemeni people need external
support. China urges the parties to the conflict in Yemen
17-06387

10/03/2017

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

to abide strictly by international humanitarian law, stop
the attacks on civilians and civilian targets, actively
support the United Nations in its humanitarian relief
efforts and ensure safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access. The international community should also join
the efforts to improve the humanitarian situation. China
has been providing humanitarian relief to the Yemeni
people, including a shipment of medical supplies worth
¥2,000-million that is expected to be in place very
soon, in the first half of the year, and we will continue
to provide such assistance as we can.
Peace and stability in Yemen are essential to efforts
aimed at fundamentally relieving the humanitarian
situation in that country, and political dialogue is
the only way to achieve lasting peace there. China
urges all the parties to demonstrate a sincere desire
for reconciliation, cease hostilities immediately and
prevent the situation from escalating. We support
Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed in the scaling up of
his good offices and in supporting regional countries in
their work to facilitate peace talks and build confidence
in order to help Yemen restore stability at an early date.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank UnderSecretary-General
Stephen
O’Brien
for
the
comprehensive briefing on his recent visit to Yemen and
other countries in our region, including Somalia and
South Sudan, which are facing enormous humanitarian
challenges. Nor can I forget to mention his visit to
the Somali region of Ethiopia, which is facing a
drought situation.
What we heard from Mr. O’Brien is indeed
disturbing, given the scale and magnitude of the
humanitarian challenge. We take this opportunity to
express appreciation to the Secretary-General, who
undertook his first field visit to Somalia to show
solidarity and make a strong appeal to the international
community for support.
Like others, we will restrict ourselves to the
humanitarian situation in Yemen, which is indeed a
source of grave concern. The people of Yemen are at
risk of falling into famine if action is not taken now.
Therefore, the international community must respond
urgently and decisively to avert a humanitarian tragedy.
In this regard, we support the call made by Mr. O’Brien
for an immediate international response. Ensuring
safe and unhindered humanitarian access is indeed
imperative to deliver much-needed assistance to the
millions of Yemenis affected. We express appreciation

S/PV.7897

to all humanitarian workers on the ground, who are
operating under extremely difficult circumstances to
reach people in need.
We agree with Mr. O’Brien that addressing the huge
funding gap is absolutely critical to meet the urgent
humanitarian needs in Yemen. We note with concern
that only 6.3 per cent of the required $2.1 billion has
been received so far. We hope that the high-level
pledging event for the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, to
be hosted by the United Nations and the Governments
of Switzerland and Sweden on 25 April in Geneva,
will contribute to mobilizing the necessary support to
address the existing funding gap.
Finally, we agree with all the other members that
the security, economic and humanitarian challenges
in Yemen cannot be addressed without finding a
resolution to the Yemeni crisis. That is why achieving a
comprehensive political settlement should be an urgent
priority. In this regard, we will continue to support the
efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy, Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, to resume inclusive peace talks
and achieve a cessation of hostilities according to the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the Russian Federation for having requested
this briefing and Mr. Stephen O’Brien for the very
important information that he has provided us on the
humanitarian situation on the ground.
My delegation fully endorses the very relevant
statements made by previous speakers, which is why
I would simply like to touch upon several points, so as
not to repeat what others have said.
We are particularly concerned by the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the four countries:
Yemen, South Sudan, Somalia and Nigeria. Indeed, the
figures and the very sombre predictions are chilling
and canot but prod our collective conscience.
Concerning Yemen, my delegation would like to
remind the parties to the conflict, in particular the
Houthis and their allies, of their obligations pursuant
to international law, among which is the need to ensure
immediate, lasting, secure and unhindered access to all
those who require assistance throughout Yemen. My
delegation wishes also to urge the parties, in particular
the Houthis and their allies, to resume in good faith
negotiations based on a realistic approach and trust so as
to achieve a political solution, which is the only way to

17-0638715/17

S/PV.7897

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

put an end to this crisis and its disastrous humanitarian
and security consequences.
The famine that is afflicting several areas of South
Sudan is obviously a great source of concern to us. More
than ever before, the country requires the assistance
and support of the international community to enable
it not only to overcome this humanitarian crisis but
also to strengthen its own capacity to urgently address
extreme situations such the current famine.
Concerning the situation in the countries of the
Lake Chad basin and in Somalia, we believe, as Stephen
said, that the situation and in particular the famine that
is approaching is not inevitable. We acknowledge the
efforts that have been made by partners and the United
Nations to help these countries, but we believe that the
international community must do better and do more on
an urgent basis given the current context, characterized
by the proliferation in some of those countries of
terrorist groups, which are the primary beneficiaries of
any deterioration in the humanitarian situation.
On this point, we wish to express the hope that the
visit that the Council has just made to the Lake Chad
basin countries, which made it possible to take stock of
the scale of the challenges, is just the first step towards
not only mobilizing the international community
in order to make it possible for all four countries to
overcome the humanitarian ordeal they are facing, but
also allowing them to demonstrate greater resilience in
the face of the many challenges that confront them.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I should like to begin by thanking Stephen for
his briefing as well as for his initiative and stamina
in confronting the toughest humanitarian challenges
that the world presents, and through him may I pay
tribute to all humanitarian workers responding to
these humanitarian challenges, which are of a scale
so unprecedented, so unacceptable that it is almost
unimaginable. More than 20 million men, women and
children risk starving to death in the next six months.
That is equivalent to nearly the entire population of
Australia — absolutely astounding in 2017.
Let me focus briefly on South Sudan, Somalia and
then Yemen.
In South Sudan, we need to see the Government
bring an overdue end to the fighting and improve
humanitarian access. It is completely unacceptable that
16/17

10/03/2017

people in famine-affected areas such Mayardit are not
receiving the food and medical supplies that could save
their lives. These are exactly the messages that we need
to keep sending at the highest levels, including at our
upcoming meeting on South Sudan chaired by the British
Foreign Secretary later this month. We need to match
our messages with our money. The United Kingdom is
the second-largest bilateral donor to South Sudan, but
we cannot do it alone. We are matching our money with
our deeds by strengthening the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan by almost 400 peacekeepers, including
military engineers and a field hospital. We call on
others to follow suit.
In Somalia, we have a crucial window to take
action before the drought takes hold. If we act early and
decisively, we can prevent a repeat of 2011, when more
than a quarter of a million people died through famine.
Again, we must all play our part. The United Kingdom
is providing emergency food and safe drinking water
to 1 million people, but more, much more, is needed.
If we do not step up, others will. Al-Shabaab is poised
to step into the breach left by any lack of national or
international resources. If we abandon the people of
Somalia, we risk reversing the political and security
gains of the past four years by forcing them to turn
towards Al-Shabaab in desperation. I therefore strongly
urge other donors to come forward.
In Yemen, the situation is equally grave. Civilians
are paying the highest price for the continuing conflict,
so we urge all sides to facilitate safe access for the
United Nations and non-governmental organizations
to deliver vital, life-saving assistance. That means
that all parties must uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law and do everything
feasible to prevent civilian casualties and damage to
civilian infrastructure, because the continued flow of
commercial supplies into Yemen will be critical if we
are to prevent famine. Eight-five per cent of Yemen’s
food needs over the past year have been met through
commerical imports. All parties need to ensure the
continued facilitation of commercial and humanitarian
imports and their onward distribution, while we must
continue to support the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism for Yemen in carrying its
out crucial work.
In tandem, we need to find ways to stabilize the
banking sector and solve the liquidity crisis so that
importers have the means and the funds to pay for foods
and basic goods. Again, we need to step up our own
17-06387

10/03/2017

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs

efforts. Last year’s United Nations appeal was funded to
only 60 per cent; this year, it is only 6 per cent funded.
We need to give generously so that that the Resident
Coordinator has the resources he needs to tackle the
crisis. For our part, the United Kingdom has increased
its humanitarian aid to Yemen to $125 million, and
in both 2015 and 2016 we helped more than a million
Yemenis with food, medical supplies and clean water.
Ultimately, however, it will remain difficult to
address Yemen’s humanitarian needs while the conflict

S/PV.7897

is ongoing. We call on parties to engage meaningfully
with the United Nations Special Envoy’s proposals for
peace, and to make progress towards a ceasefire and
an enduring political settlement. The United Kingdom
will continue to play a leading role in supporting his
efforts to achieve that.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

17-0638717/17
