United Nations

S/PV.6205

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6205th meeting
Friday, 23 October 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Luong Minh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2009/504)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-57362 (E)

*0957362*

S/PV.6205

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2009/504)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, New Zealand, the
Philippines, Portugal, South Africa, Sweden, TimorLeste and Thailand, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Guterres
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Atul
Khare, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Khare to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security

2

Council is meeting in accordance with
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

the

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/504, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Atul Khare. I give him the floor.
Mr. Khare: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to introduce the sixth report (S/2009/504) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), covering the period
from 21 January to 23 September 2009. I would also
like to acknowledge the presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. José Luís Guterres.
Let me begin with developments since
23 September. On 7 October, the Council of Ministers
approved the draft law on the 2010 State budget, which
totals approximately $636.9 million. The Government
realizes that it must diversify engines for economic
growth and job creation while retaining a focus on
addressing
extreme
poverty,
unemployment,
infrastructure creation and rural development. The
Government has also invited the United Nations World
Tourism Organization to send a technical assistance
mission, scheduled for 10 to 21 November, to conduct
a detailed review of that sector. President José RamosHorta, endeavouring to increase international interest
and tourism in Timor-Leste, organized the inaugural
Tour de Timor, a hugely successful cross-country
bicycling race in which almost 300 riders from
throughout the world participated from 24 to
28 August. On 12 October, he announced the inaugural
International Sports Fishing Competition, which will
take place in late November.
On 9 October, Timor-Leste successfully held
elections for community authorities in a generally
peaceful atmosphere with the United Nation police and
the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL)
providing security throughout the country. The
provisional results indicate that about 67.75 per cent of
registered voters cast ballots. These elections were
more complicated and challenging than the national
elections of 2007, since each local community required
a unique ballot.
The ability of the electoral bodies of Timor-Leste
to successfully organize the elections demonstrated

09-57362

S/PV.6205

their increasing capacities and the public’s continuing
faith in democratic electoral processes. In comparison
to the 2007 elections, UNMIT helicopter support was
minimal, and it is expected that, by the 2012 national
elections, such support might be needed only for
emergency situations. There were a few minor
incidents of violence, but far fewer than in 2007.
I compliment the Timorese electorate, which
during practically all electoral rallies identified
communal peace, water, electricity, roads and other
infrastructure, as well as education, as its primary
concerns. In at least one local community, the issues of
carbon dioxide emissions, global warming and the
ozone hole were also avidly debated. The integrated
United Nations electoral support team, established by
us and comprised of staff members of UNMIT and the
United Nations Development Programme, enabled the
provision of coordinated advice and support through a
single window as One United Nations, and has
provided important lessons for the future.
On 13 October, the National Parliament debated a
motion of no confidence submitted by FRETILIN, the
single largest party, and its ally, the Klibur Oan Timor
Asuwain party, because of their opposition to the
release of Maternus Bere. The motion was defeated by
a vote of 39 to 25, with only one member of Parliament
absent on the day of the debate. Prime Minister Kay
Rala Xanana Gusmão took part in the day-long debate,
which was aired on national radio and television. This
debate was a positive step towards ensuring that
critical issues of national interest be channelled
through the National Parliament, with meaningful
participation from the opposition. Of course, the legal
issues surrounding the case can be properly dealt with
only in a competent court. I was delighted to note that
Prime Minister Gusmão said in his intervention that the
“parties that make up the Alliance for a Parliamentary
Majority have no special interest in an amnesty law”.
I trust that all necessary steps, as recommended
by the Secretary-General in paragraph 55 of his report,
will soon be initiated. UNMIT stands ready to provide
its assistance and support, including to the National
Parliament. My Human Rights and Transitional Justice
Section, along with the Serious Crimes Investigation
Team, organized a workshop on 7 October on
international criminal law, particularly as it relates to
the situation in Timor-Leste, at the request of
Committee A of the National Parliament. President of
the National Parliament Fernando “Lasama” de Araújo

09-57362

has also indicated to me that the reports of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
and the Commission of Truth and Friendship, as well
as their recommendations, may be discussed by
Parliament following its debate of the draft law on the
2010 State budget in December.
Another important and positive development in
relation to the 2006 cases recommended for
prosecution by the Independent Special Commission of
Inquiry took place on 9 October, when two defendants
found guilty of assault and illegal carriage of firearms
were sentenced to two years and eight months and one
and half year of imprisonment, respectively. However,
they were acquitted on counts of homicide, threatening
violence and unlawful deprivation of liberty. It is my
hope that fair trials will take place in the remaining
cases upon the conclusion of the investigations.
I have consistently made clear in various forums
with Timorese political leaders and civil society the
United Nations firm position that there can be no
amnesty or impunity for serious crimes such as
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
UNMIT continues to conduct investigations into
serious crimes committed in 1999, as mandated by
resolution 1704 (2006), in a highly cost-efficient
manner. I agree with President Ramos-Horta that such
investigations should also lead to the further capacitybuilding of Timorese investigators, in particular in the
area of forensics, and will continue to make further
efforts to closely involve Timorese nationals in the
investigative process.
Strengthening the rule of law will require
sustained efforts by the Timorese, with continued
assistance from international partners.
I would like to commend the work of the fourperson team led by Judge Phillip Rapoza in producing
an independent comprehensive needs assessment of the
justice sector. I have shared their report with the
President, the President of the National Parliament, the
Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister, who is
here with us today. The report was also forwarded by
UNMIT to the Council of Coordination, which is
comprised of the President of the Court of Appeal, the
Minister for Justice and the Prosecutor-General. In
conjunction with the strategic plan for the justice
sector, the recommendations of the independent
comprehensive needs assessment should be utilized as
a contribution to a coordinated and considered

3

S/PV.6205

approach to justice-sector reform. It should also
facilitate the identification and provision of the
assistance that is most needed from the international
community.
The resumption of primary responsibility for the
conduct of police operations by the Polícia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) will continue with Viqueque
district in the later part of November. As part of its
efforts to support security-sector reform, UNMIT is
also continuing to support the Falintil-Forças de Defesa
de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), most recently through a
media mentoring exercise conducted from 6 to
8 October for a select group of F-FDTL soldiers and
civilians from the Secretariat of State for Defence, as
well as through a training-of-trainers course conducted
with national and international human rights bodies
from 12 to 14 October.
I now seek the Council’s indulgence in reflecting
on a few issues from my perspective of the past almost
three years in Timor-Leste that require consideration
and guidance from the Council.
The dictum that there should be no strategy
without an exit is well known. However, the reverse —
namely, that there should be no exit without a
strategy — is equally true. President Ramos-Horta and
other leaders of Timor-Leste do not wish to be
continually dependent on the presence of a SecurityCouncil-mandated operation or on the deployment of
international security forces. I also believe that the
long-term sustainability of Timor-Leste’s efforts
depends on the ability of its own institutions to operate
in a democratic, responsible and effective manner. At
every step of the way, UNMIT and the United Nations
country team have consciously endeavoured to work in
a manner that enhances the capacity and credibility of
the institutions of this young nation.
Nevertheless, our success in supporting the
institutions of Timor-Leste, instead of taking the lead
in any activity, can occasionally give the appearance
that support is non-existent or irrelevant. That
approach also means that progress is not linear, but
depends on the pace at which institutions develop.
Therefore, sudden improvements or deterioration
should not be a cause for elation or undue
despondency, respectively. What is required is a stable
and steady approach.
The touchstone for success in Timor-Leste is not
whether or not crises occur, but how future crises are

4

met and resolved. The goal should be to ensure that
they are handled in a responsible manner that does not
threaten the State and that, instead, provides an
opportunity for enhanced social cohesion and
development.
The upcoming technical assessment mission to
Timor-Leste should engage extensively with the
national authorities, who are conducting their own
review of the presence of the United Nations and
international security forces, as well as with political
parties and civil society members from across the
spectrum. The future presence and role of the
international security forces needs to be carefully taken
into account in planning any modification of the
composition and strength of UNMIT. The United
Nations and the Government of Timor-Leste should
jointly agree on the criteria for each step in the process
of downsizing the UNMIT police and modifying the
composition and strength of the Mission. It should be
clearly agreed with the authorities, in advance of each
stage, what support the United Nations will and will
not be able to provide. No false promises should be
directly or implicitly made to the Timorese authorities
and people.
At the same time, cooperation with long-term
providers of bilateral and multilateral assistance to
Timor-Leste must continue to be consciously
promoted. Unfortunately, I do not have time to present
an exhaustive list of important bilateral and
multilateral assistance, but I would like to refer to a
few recent examples.
The Australian Government overseas aid
programme’s assistance to Timor-Leste has doubled in
the past four years, providing, for example, over
$9.2 million for water and sanitation projects this year
alone. During the reporting period, the United States
dispatched a unit of naval engineers to support the
development of the F-FDTL’s engineering capabilities
and to execute humanitarian projects, in particular
school rehabilitation and construction. The Millennium
Development
Goal
Achievement
Fund
Joint
Programme (S/2009/504, para. 43) is fully funded by
Spain. The European Commission remains one of the
most important partners, providing, for example, funds
totalling more than $5.5 million to United Nations
agencies to support projects that promote social peace
and stability. Portugal’s largest project anywhere in the
world is in Timor-Leste. It entails the deployment of
120 trainers in all 13 districts, who have trained more

09-57362

S/PV.6205

than 3,000 primary school teachers and 2,000
secondary and pre-secondary teachers in the
Portuguese language.
I must also acknowledge the critical importance
of Cuba’s medical assistance and adult literacy
programmes, as well as the bilateral assistance of many
Asian countries, in particular the member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Japan, a major
provider of assistance on infrastructure and rural
development, recently supported the suco or subdistrict
entity elections with financial grants. Just two days
ago, Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão announced
China’s additional contribution of 30 million yuan for
the refurbishment of various elements of the
infrastructure. Coordination by the United Nations with
bilateral and multilateral donors, based on a strategic
and measured approach, will be imperative in ensuring
a common understanding of respective roles and
responsibilities.
Timor-Leste, as a small and young island State,
also has to grapple with the challenges of
environmental protection. The environmental footprint
of international assistance should, therefore, be as light
as possible. UNMIT has been making continuous
efforts to reduce energy consumption and to protect the
environment. Those efforts have resulted in a reduction
of 7.8 per cent in the use of generator fuel, which
represents a savings of approximately $285,000, as
well as a 15 per cent reduction in photocopier paper
use over the one-year period ending in August 2009, as
compared to the previous one-year period.

Nielsen and Takahisa Kawakami, as well as all the
women and men of UNMIT and the United Nations
country team, who, every single day, demonstrate their
commitment to the high ideals of the United Nations
and to supporting the people of Timor-Leste. Similarly,
the support of men and women of the international
security forces has been critical to our work.
Finally, I wish to thank the Security Council for
its constant support and guidance. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General for having given me the
opportunity to be a partner of the Timorese in their
historic nation- and State-building endeavours.
The President: I thank Mr. Khare for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste.
Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): Allow me to first
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your country on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. It is a great honour for me to be back in
this Chamber and to share with Council members our
opinion on the current developments in Timor-Leste, as
well as some of our ideas and actions for the near
future.
The Security Council has been following the
question of Timor-Leste since December 1975. Many
decades have passed, and together we have overcome
many difficulties and challenges. Today, we live in an
independent, peaceful and democratic country.

As I prepare to complete my tenure as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste, allow me to thank the people and leaders of
Timor-Leste for the gracious manner in which they
have welcomed me amidst them. I have been touched
by the kindnesses of President José Ramos-Horta,
President of the National Parliament Fernando
“Lasama” de Araújo, Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão,
former Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri, leaders of all
political parties and ordinary Timorese from all walks
of life in Dili and in the far-outlying and inaccessible
villages. I owe them a debt of gratitude for reinforcing
my faith in the words of our Charter — better
standards of life in larger freedom — that they
constantly seek.

On 12 October, democracy and accountability
were put to the test in our national Parliament. Speaker
Fernando “Lasama” de Araújo, the leader of the
Democratic Party and a member of the current majority
coalition, convened a session of Parliament to debate a
motion of no confidence in the Government, tabled by
the opposition party FRETILIN. Their stated reason for
the motion was the unconstitutionality and illegality of
the Government's decision to grant freedom to a former
militia leader accused of taking part in the massacre at
the church in Suai district in 1999. It was a lively
debate that lasted almost an entire day, and it was
broadcast live on national television and followed by
thousands of Timorese.

I would also like to thank Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General Finn Reske-

Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão successfully
defended the Government's actions. The motion was
rejected by the national Parliament by an absolute and

09-57362

5

S/PV.6205

solid majority. The decisions taken were based on the
Constitution of our country and our national interests.
The former militia leader was not released but was
transferred to the Indonesian embassy, since he is an
Indonesian citizen. As of now, he remains at the
Indonesian embassy, waiting for legal procedures to
take their course.
Before I came on 20 October, Minister of Justice
Lúcia Lobato and I had a meeting with defence lawyer
Sergio Ornay. He informed us of the two petitions he
had delivered to the Tribunal requesting the release of
his client for health reasons. No decision has been
taken by the Tribunal to date. We commend the
Government and the embassy of Indonesia in Dili for
their understanding of the legal complexity of the case.
On 13 October, an independent comprehensive
needs assessment team comprised of four judicial and
legal experts from the international community, led by
Judge Rapoza of the United States, published their
report. Many recommendations were made; some will
take many years to be implemented. Some are already
included in the Government’s plans. I would like to
quote the conclusions of the report:
“As noted throughout this report, a
significant amount of progress has been made in
developing the overall justice system of TimorLeste. Although a number of challenges and
needs continue to exist, the Timorese with whom
the team interacted demonstrated a high degree of
dedication and commitment. Although there is no
question that they foresee the need for continued
advice and assistance from the international
community, they are motivated by a vision of a
justice system run by the Timorese. This is a goal
worth striving for and is a cause that deserves the
continued
support
of
the
international
community.”
One of the major challenges we as the people of
Timor-Leste have encountered was the crisis of 2006.
Some 150,000 Timorese fled their homes and
65 internally displaced person tent camps were
established in Dili and other districts. With the
assistance of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), United Nations agencies,
non-governmental
organizations,
the
European
Commission, many countries and other partners, the
Ministry of Social Solidarity was able to reintegrate all

6

the internally displaced persons (IDPs) and close all
the IDP camps this year.
The Government has invested its best efforts and
allocated $35.8 million to provide support for their
reintegration. Today, many of their houses have been
rebuilt. We are now preparing to deliver the second
phase of assistance to the 16,500 registered internally
displaced families. By the end of 2009, we will provide
recovery assistance for the possessions and assets
destroyed.
We have also developed a social housing
programme to support the elderly, the disabled, widows
and chronically ill. A total of 450 improved traditional
houses will be built this year. Next year, we will
continue to expand this programme so that better
housing will be available to our most vulnerable
people.
We are also providing assistance to poor
households to prevent malnutrition during the lean
season. We have provided food assistance this year to
almost 90,000 households. A special programme has
been created for widows and single mothers,
particularly those who are ill and whose circumstances
prevent them from earning an income to support their
children. Assistance is provided for them to purchase
food, clothing and school materials for their children.
As of today, 7,050 families have received assistance
under this programme.
A social security programme this year will benefit
almost 65,000 elderly persons and a total of 5,355
disabled citizens. The Government has allocated
$16.25 million for this programme. From January to
August of this year, 3,267 veterans and the families of
the martyrs have received their pensions. The total
potential number of beneficiaries is 12,540. The
Government, under the leadership of Prime Minister
Gusmão, believes that by implementing these social
policies, we are also investing in the stability and
social harmony of our country.
Social harmony and stability, the values of
democracy and respect for the rule of law were
recently demonstrated by our people in every village in
Timor-Leste during the successful and peaceful Suku
elections that were held this month. We thank the
United Nations system, United Nations volunteers and
the international community for their support. The
Timorese National Electoral Commission did a great
job in supervising the elections, and the Technical

09-57362

S/PV.6205

Secretariat for Electoral Administration did a great job
in organizing these elections.
Security sector reform has been a priority since
the inauguration of the current Government. Progress
has been made in the defence area. The draft national
security law and national defence law are now before
the national Parliament. The new Ministry of Defence
and Security structure, the military police law, a
military service law and amendments to the military
service law were approved. There is ongoing
discussion on the drafts of the new Falintil-Forças de
Defesa de Timor-Leste structure, the concept and
system of training and the new concept of employment.
A draft national security law is before the
Parliament, laying out the roles and responsibilities of
the respective forces. The process will lead to civilian
oversight and professional defence and security forces.
The United Nations and the Government have agreed
on a mechanism to progressively hand over
responsibilities to the National Police Force of TimorLeste (PNTL). So far, three districts and one unit of the
police academy have been handed over to PNTL
control.
By investing in human resources and providing
better infrastructure, equipment and salaries to our
defence and security forces, we will help them fulfil
their obligations under our Constitution. This reform is
a long-term process. Some scholars and experts say
that it may take a generation, but we are confident that
we are going in the right direction and at the right
speed.
In order to achieve lasting and sustainable peace
and stability, we also need to invest in the development
of the country. As a nation blessed with natural
resources, we have allocated our own resources to the
financing of the national budget. Petroleum and gas
revenues have been our main source of income. The
petroleum fund reached $5 billion in July this year; the
fund’s annual return was 4.17 per cent.
Just a few days ago in Buenos Aires, Argentina,
Timor-Leste became a member of the International Gas
Union to better protect our interests. Next year, we will
establish a national oil company and invest in the
creation of the basic infrastructure needed to develop
our petroleum and gas industry.
Economic data of the World Bank indicate that
Timor-Leste’s economic growth rate was 12.8 per cent

09-57362

in 2008. This year, we hope to achieve growth of 8 to
9 per cent. The national budget for 2010 will be
debated in the national parliament next month. A total
of seven national priority areas have been identified:
roads and water; food security, focused on
productivity; human resources and development;
access to justice; social services and decentralized
service delivery; good governance; and public safety.
We expect to maintain our economic growth. We will
invest in infrastructure needed for development. We
will create more jobs for our people. We will continue
to invest in education, health and gender equality.
In order to improve budget execution, efficiency
and professionalism in public service, parliament has
approved a proposal by the Government to create a
civil service commission, which is an independent
body. Parliament has also approved a proposal by the
Government to create a national anti-corruption
commission to combat and prevent corruption in State
institutions and in our society.
With all those systems and institutions in place
and operational, we might say to the world that we as a
people are saying a final goodbye to conflict and
welcoming development with an open-hearted smile.
In August this year, Mr. Ramos-Horta, President
of the Republic, took the initiative to organize the
Timor-Leste Tour. That international cycling event took
participants to the villages, mountains and valleys of
our country. Thousands of Timorese came to our roads
with warm smiles, welcoming and applauding
participants
from
many
nations.
President
Ramos-Horta has already announced that next year,
Timor-Leste will organize an international fishing
competition. Through such initiatives, we hope to
achieve a new and better image for our country: that of
a peaceful and caring people. We are ready to share
with the world the beauty of our people and our
landscape.
I would like to thank Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his great
and invaluable contributions to peace, stability,
democracy and harmony in our country. His weekly
meetings with President Ramos-Horta, Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmão, Speaker Fernando “Lasama” and
opposition leader Mr. Mari Alkatiri are deeply
appreciated.
I thank Deputy Special Representatives
Finn Reske-Nielsen and Takahisa Kawakami and all

7

S/PV.6205

members of UNMIT for their continuous support. I
have had the honour of participating with the Special
Representative and his colleagues in the Trilateral
Coordination Forum to discuss the security challenges
and threats in Timor-Leste. We have learned much
from him. We — and I personally — believe that the
international community will continue to rely on his
expertise, experience and intelligence. We wish
Mr. Khare and his family a successful journey,
whatever the missions or challenges they may embrace
or encounter in the future.
Finally, as President Ramos-Horta has stated
many times, Timor-Leste will continue to need the
presence and support of the United Nations until 2012.
We would like to take this opportunity to praise the
countries and Governments of Council members for
their support for peace, stability, democracy,
transparency, the rule of law, gender equality, human
rights, justice and development in Timor-Leste.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. Atul Kharе, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his very important briefing on
the progress of nation-building efforts in Timor-Leste.
I also warmly welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, and thank him for his valuable statement
this morning.
First of all, our sincere congratulations go to the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste on the
ceremony commemorating the tenth anniversary of the
popular consultation, held on 30 August this year. Over
the past 10 years, there have been periods that have not
been the best of times for the newly independent
country; several huge challenges culminated in the
crisis of spring 2006. However, the strong
determination and efforts of the people of Timor-Leste,
with the support of the United Nations and the
international community, have enabled the nation to
make progress towards being a peaceful and stable
country.
We are encouraged by the steady building of
democratic governance in Тimor-Leste. That progress
was well demonstrated in the recently held suco —
community leaders — a elections organized throughout
the country. According to our report, Japanese electoral
observers were so impressed by voters patiently
waiting to exercise their right to cast their ballots to
choose their own local leaders. That is democracy in

8

action. We hope that the democratic culture will
continue to take root, not only at the national level, but
also at the municipal and local levels. The valuable
support provided by the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for these successful
elections is greatly appreciated.
It is a sound democracy in which political leaders
can have an exchange of views and set forth their
arguments openly in parliament. We appreciate and
support the efforts of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative and Deputy Special Representatives,
while respecting the sovereignty of Timor-Leste, to
maintain daily contact with political leaders and
encourage them to resolve issues through the
democratic process.
The security situation is moving in the direction
of greater stability, with the assistance of UNMIT and
its tireless efforts. We are particularly pleased at
several positive developments, such as the closure of
all camps for internally displaced persons without
major incident, the judicial proceedings for the
suspects in the 2008 assaults on the President and the
Prime Minister, and the reintegration of the so-called
petitioners. We agree with the cautiously optimistic
assessment made by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2009/504).
The stable security situation has been made
possible by the presence of UNMIТ since its
establishment in August 2006. UNMIТ has been
conducting law enforcement on an interim basis and
helping to rebuild the National Police Force of TimorLeste (PNТL). We are pleased at the recent
reassumption of responsibility by the PNТL in three
districts and at the Police Academy as the fruit of those
efforts. Japan supports the approach taken: that the
reassumption of responsibility by the National Police
should be based not on an artificial timeline, but on
whether it meets the stipulated criteria. We wish to see
further progress in other districts based on that
approach. It is important to emphasize a clear
delineation between the role of the national police and
the defence force, the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), as underscored in resolution
1867 (2009).
We certainly acknowledge the essential role that
the F-FDТL played in the process of achieving
independence. However, as part of achieving a stable
and prosperous democratic nation, Timor-Leste must

09-57362

S/PV.6205

deal with the challenge of defining the new role that
the country’s armed forces should play in peacetime
and of maintaining effective civilian oversight. From
our experience after World War II, we in Japan are
convinced of the importance of civilian control of the
defence forces as a fundamental pillar of the stability
and prosperity of nations. We acknowledge the positive
contribution made by the Secretary-General’s Deputy
Special Representative for Security Support and Rule
of Law to the discussion in Parliament of the drafts of
three security-related laws.
It is our view that United Nations support for
Timor-Leste is beginning to bear fruit. Timor-Leste is
moving out of the emergency phase and entering a
period of transition on the way to achieving
self-sustainable stability, the rule of law, a working
justice system and socio-economic development. The
country is enjoying sound economic growth. It may
very soon be possible to review the structure of
UNMIТ, so that it can correspond more closely to the
current needs of the country.
Naturally, some elements still require careful
monitoring, and we must be prudent in order to avoid
hasty action that might undermine the success we have
achieved so far. We therefore look forward to the
technical assessment mission that will formulate
recommendations to be included in the SecretaryGeneral’s next report. It would be helpful if that report
included a review of the role of the Mission from the
mid-to-long-term peace- and nation-building perspective.
Lastly, I would like to pay tribute to the personal
contributions of Mr. Khare for what he and his able
team have achieved in UNMIТ since 2006. We greatly
regret that Mr. Khare is soon to leave the Mission and
wish him well in his future endeavours. We are
convinced that UNMIТ will continue to do its best to
support Timor-Leste in its nation-building efforts,
building on the path paved by Mr. Khare. As a staunch
supporter and a good neighbour, Japan will spare no
effort to aid in a successful nation-building process for
Timor-Leste.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking Mr. Khare, the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative for Timor-Leste, for his
briefing. I understand that this will be his last
appearance before his departure in December, so I
would very much like to thank him for all his efforts
during his time as Special Representative and indeed

09-57362

before. I would also like to welcome Deputy Prime
Minister Guterres to the Council Chamber and to
commend his and his Government’s efforts to deliver
sustainable security and development to Timor-Leste.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/504)
notes, there have been welcome signs of continued
progress during the reporting period. In particular, the
successful holding of local elections on 9 October was
evidence of the relative stability and security that
Timor-Leste now enjoys, and of the capacity of the
body politic to engage in the democratic process in a
committed but peaceful manner. We also welcome the
progress noted in the Secretary-General’s report with
regard to the medium-term benchmarks for TimorLeste. We are particularly pleased to see the successful
resumption of policing responsibilities by local police
in three separate districts. It is especially encouraging
to note that no increase in crime or disorder has
followed this transfer of responsibility. We look
forward to the continued transfer of policing
responsibilities to the Timor-Leste authorities in the
remaining districts.
The progress in this area is a tribute to the efforts
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) police component to help strengthen
national policing capacity. I would like to express our
gratitude to them and to the Governments of Australia
and New Zealand for their valuable and ongoing work
in this field. On security sector reform more broadly,
we concur with the conclusion in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that greater clarity is required on the
role and responsibilities of the national defence forces.
The absence of such clarity has the potential to hamper
the overall security sector reform effort. We are also
encouraged by progress in the other three benchmark
areas: justice and the rule of law, democratic
governance and the concerted efforts being made in the
field of economic and social development. This is all
evidence of Timor-Leste’s increasing capacity in these
fields.
Notwithstanding the progress reported in a
number of areas, I would like to take this opportunity
to stress the importance of doing more, and more
quickly, to address the issue of impunity for those
found to have been involved in war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. We note the valuable
work being carried out by UNMIT’s Serious Crimes
Investigation Team, but the focus must now be on
pursuing this work even more vigorously and

9

S/PV.6205

processing outstanding cases more rapidly. We also
continue to be concerned by the reports of human
rights violations by Timor-Leste’s national security
forces. We urge that all possible steps be taken to
investigate these allegations and hold those responsible
to account. The protection of human rights and
establishment of robust accountability mechanisms is
of central importance to the development of sustainable
democracy in Timor-Leste.
The Secretary-General’s report confirms that a
technical assessment mission will visit Timor-Leste to
look at medium-term options for reconfiguring
UNMIT. This will be an important opportunity to
reflect on how best UNMIT can match resources to
outstanding tasks, and we look forward to hearing the
Secretary-General’s proposals based on those
recommendations. We recognize that any adjustments
to UNMIT’s police component should occur on a
gradual, step-by-step basis, but it is also important that
UNMIT’s structure and size evolve to reflect progress
on the ground, including the welcome improvements in
the overall security situation.
Our goal should remain to enable Timor-Leste to
stand on its own feet in facing the challenges ahead.
Achieving that objective will require the continued
engagement and support of the international
community, including UNMIT. But given our overall
objective, it is also right that the focus of our efforts is
increasingly on the gradual transfer of responsibilities
to the Timor-Leste authorities.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, for his
presentation, and to pay tribute to him for his valuable
efforts in support of the people of Timor-Leste. I would
also like to express my gratitude to Deputy Prime
Minister Guterres for joining us in this morning’s
debate.
An examination of the last decade in Timor-Leste
shows us that there have been strong achievements
with regard to nation-building and the establishment of
peace. The country’s security institutions are being
strengthened, as demonstrated by the fact that the
national police force has taken over security functions.
The democratic process is progressing, as the
presidential elections in 2007 have been followed by
the recent local elections. In particular, we
acknowledge the country’s endeavours to promote

10

socio-economic development and achieve the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) regarding
primary education and health. Little by little,
sustainability is being achieved in Timor-Leste.
Although progress has been made, two major
concerns remain: the slow pace of strengthening the
rule of law, and, as we stated in a previous debate, the
development of an army for which we see no clear
purpose. In regard to the rule of law, there are two
specific events that we find disturbing: the continuing
criticism of the judicial system, which undermines the
legitimacy of democratic institutions, and the incident
in which a fugitive was handed over to the Indonesian
authorities, flouting the established legal procedures.
In the view of my delegation, the decisions that the
political bodies adopted after this incident do not
validate actions that undermine the integrity of the law.
In addition to developing institutions, a culture of
democracy and the rule of law must be fostered.
We also believe it is important to consider the
role of the army in the context of security sector
reform. President Ramos-Horta was kind enough to
explain to us the circumstances justifying the creation
of a military apparatus, and he also outlined his
personal ideas on that respect. In this context, we urge
the Timorese authorities to assign clear tasks to an
army that clearly has little defensive utility. Its
functions must therefore go beyond merely military
activities. It must become an agent for change and play
a structural role in the process of nation-building.
Border
patrols;
monitoring
increased
human
trafficking, in which Timor-Leste is becoming a transit
hub; support for local communities; the construction of
social infrastructure and natural disaster response are
some of the tasks whereby that small army could pay
society back for the sacrifices it is making with what
are very meagre resources.
The successful experience of Timor-Leste holds
important lessons for the United Nations regarding the
role that the Organization can and should play in
matters of peace and State-building. First, United
Nations actions in Timor-Leste demonstrate the
importance of making an early start in peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding tasks, and of
strengthening the links between those two activities in
an integrated fashion.
It is also important to stress the importance of
United Nations post-conflict cooperation in building

09-57362

S/PV.6205

and strengthening local capacities. That is what the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste has
done with regard to security, justice and governance
institutions in Timor-Leste, helping to guarantee a
sustainable peace and the eventual successful exit of a
United Nations mission through the consolidation of
local institutions.

national interest above narrow partisan considerations.
We hope that the momentum thus created will continue
in favour of the further consolidation of national
reconciliation. It behooves the people to become
involved in this process, for it is ultimately they who
will bear the responsibility for building the nation of
their choice.

I cannot fail to point out that the case of TimorLeste demonstrates the importance of forging a strong,
dynamic and symbiotic relation between the
international community and the leadership of local
actors. The process of peacebuilding in Timor-Leste
has been characterized by close association between
the United Nations and countries in the region. The
ownership and leadership of the people of Timor-Leste
have made it possible to take strategic advantage of the
assistance of the international community and to
assume in a responsible and determined way the
challenge of building their country. The Security
Council and the Organization should assimilate and
profit from the important lessons learned in TimorLeste.

We welcome the strict policy that resulted in the
screening and certification of national police officers,
which is a guarantee for the credibility of the
institution and will, of course, improve the climate of
trust between the Government and its people. We also
welcome the fact that responsibility for the
maintenance of law and order has now been taken on
by the National Police; in that regard, we agree with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
regarding the need to abide by the four criteria
identified in paragraph 9 of the report and to clearly
define the authority devolving to each of the forces
operating in the security sector.

Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We are grateful to the delegation of Viet Nam for
having organized this debate on the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2009/504) on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). We also
wish to thank Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his presentation. We also
appreciate the contribution made by Mr. José Luís
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste.
It is comforting to note that the Government and
people of Timor-Leste, with the support of UNMIT and
the United Nations system, continue tenaciously to
build a stable, democratic and prosperous nation. The
climate of calm that prevailed during the celebration of
the tenth anniversary of the popular consultation amply
demonstrated that. It must be noted that the progress
made in strengthening democratic mechanisms and the
legislative and institutional framework of democratic
governance have contributed greatly to that.
Indeed, the spirit of dialogue and the patriotic
momentum resulting from the initiatives of President
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Gusmão in managing
issues of national interest — initiatives endorsed by the
political opposition during the consideration of draft
laws in Parliament — are praiseworthy and
demonstrates the resolve of political actors to put

09-57362

From that point of view, we welcome the
strengthening of the legislative and regulatory
framework governing the police, including the
enactment of the new organic law. However, the
definition of modalities for the implementation of the
new legislation by the National Police and the United
Nations police is essential if the desired results are to
be achieved. Concurrently, all initiatives to strengthen
the security sector must be implemented. However,
those objectives will be achieved only if the various
initiatives are approached in a realistic and consistent
way and enjoy adequate financial backing.
Despite the many activities of UNMIT in many
sectors, the promotion and protection of human rights
deserve greater support, including in the fight against
impunity, the enforcement of sentences, and the
compensation of victims and their families. Regarding
pending investigations, it is important that every effort
be made to remove the obstacles that continue to
hamper them. At the judicial level, the adoption of
relevant legal texts, including the new penal code and
domestic violence legislation, have led to significant
progress. They now need to be fully implemented. We
hope that the consultations undertaken by the United
Nations Development Programme and UNMIT on the
needs assessment of the judicial system will lead to the
elaboration of a strategic plan and the development of a
draft law on mechanisms for traditional justice.

11

S/PV.6205

The quest for peace and stability also involves
sustainable socio-economic development benefiting the
people, especially the most vulnerable. That is why it is
essential to ensure that, aside from the relevant policies
it has launched, the Government incorporate the
Millennium Development Goals into its development
programs in order to reduce poverty and improve
standards of living. The momentum towards including
gender- and age-specific needs among the basic needs
of the population is praiseworthy and should be
continued. Socio-economic development also requires
job creation for young people, including those living in
rural areas. We urge the partners and the private sector
to continue to help the Government achieve its
infrastructure and rural and human resources
development programmes. The improvement of
agricultural
production,
especially
through
modernization of agriculture, could in the long run
serve as one of the most solid foundations of the
economy
and
provide
genuine
investment
opportunities.
Among the issues that remain to be addressed is
the situation of internally displaced persons and
families living in transitional shelters, who need to be
reintegrated and rehabilitated. Finally, we are
concerned by the recurrence of natural disasters, which
are genuine obstacles to sustainable development. That
is why we urge Timor-Leste’s partners and the
international community as a whole to maintain their
involvement alongside the Timorese Government.
There is no doubt that considerable progress has
been made in Timor-Leste. However, further efforts are
needed in order to consolidate those achievements and
to support the ongoing process in the country.
In conclusion, we must pay tribute to
Mr. Atul Khare. As he prepares to leave his
responsibilities as Head of UNMIT, my delegation
would like to pay him tribute and wish him every
success in the future. We would also like to pay tribute
to all the personnel of UNMIT and, more generally, to
the United Nations agencies for their determination to
help the Timorese people in their search for peace,
stability and development. We also welcome the
valuable contributions made by neighbouring countries
in the framework of regional cooperation.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of
Deputy Prime Minister Guterres of Timor-Leste at this

12

meeting, and we thank him for his statement. We also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Khare, for his comprehensive
presentation.
We have noted with pleasure that the situation in
Timor-Leste has generally remained calm and stable
since the beginning of this year under the leadership of
President Ramos-Horta and his Government. The
political dialogue among the various factions has
further deepened, and ensuring social stability has
become an important area of consensus among the
leaders of the factions. There has been a reduction in
various types of crime, and positive results have been
achieved in addressing the issue of internally displaced
persons. The National Police of Timor-Leste, with the
assistance of United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), have been gradually taking
over responsibility for maintaining law and order.
The key to an effective response to the various
problems facing the country lies in actions being taken
by all factions — in particular, the Government and
FRETILIN — who must put aside their previous
differences and work in full cooperation. We appreciate
the efforts by Prime Minister Gusmão and Special
Representative Khare to promote dialogue among the
factions. We appeal to the factions to put the interests
of the country and its people first and to seize the
present favourable opportunity to restore peace and
achieve development in order to lead the people in
focusing their efforts on nation-building.
Attaining lasting peace and security in the
country will require vigorous efforts to develop the
economy and improve people’s livelihoods. We have
noted that despite the momentum of favourable
economic growth, the situation still remains fragile.
Problems such as poverty and high unemployment may
adversely affect the stability and development of the
country.
Against the current backdrop, we support the
efforts of the Government of Timor-Leste, which,
while continuing to strengthen social stability, is
prioritizing building infrastructure and the human
resources capacity by focusing on improving the
economy and raising employment so as effectively to
remove those factors that contribute to destabilizing
the society. The international community should also
continue to provide all kinds of assistance to speed up
the nation-building process in Timor-Leste.

09-57362

S/PV.6205

With regard to the mandate and composition of
UNMIT, we have noted that both the Secretary-General
and Special Representative Khare believe that at
present we should maintain its current composition and
that the reconfiguration of staffing and composition
should proceed in a gradual manner. We support that
proposal. At the same time, we also believe that in
order to ensure public security in Timor-Leste, and in
light of the reality in the country and the views of all
actors, the United Nations should focus on building the
capacity of the police sector for independent law
enforcement and should make police training and the
handover of policing responsibilities a priority. We
hope that UNMIT, out of respect for the views of the
Government of Timor-Leste, will eventually be able to
pull out of the country smoothly. That will serve as a
good example for the formulation of other
peacekeeping operations and the implementation of
exit strategies.
Both China and Timor-Leste are members of the
large family of the Asia and Pacific region. We have
therefore been closely following developments in the
country and supporting peace, stability and
development there. At a recent meeting with Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmão, Premier Wen Jiabao of the
State Council of China declared that China would
provide Timor-Leste with 30 million yuan of gratis
assistance. We are ready to continue to help the country
to the best of our ability.
Finally, I will also take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Khare for his outstanding contribution to
maintaining peace and stability in the country during
his tenure. We wish him every future success.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): At the outset, I should
like to welcome the Deputy Prime Minister of TimorLeste, His Excellency Mr. José Luís Guterres, and to
thank him for his presentation. We are honoured by his
presence today.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2009/504) and the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General,
Mr. Atul Khare, not only for his presentation today, but
also for his tireless efforts in assisting Timor-Leste. I
should like to seize this opportunity to praise
Mr. Khare for the outstanding contribution he has made
at the head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and to wish him every success
in his future endeavours.

09-57362

It is thanks not only to UNMIT but also,
obviously, to the resilience and determination of the
people and Government of Timor-Leste that on
30 August the country celebrated the tenth anniversary
of the popular consultation that led to its independence.
We praise the Government for having made such a
peaceful celebration possible only three years after the
2006 crisis and a year and a half on from the dreadful
attacks on the President and Prime Minister. That
considerable stabilization has enabled the Timorese to
address such key issues as the further strengthening of
State institutions and democratic governance, as well
as the adoption of important legislation to fight
corruption.
We welcome the fact that local elections were
held successfully and without major incidents on
9 October 2009, proving that the Timorese people are
committed to democracy and that the political parties
are demonstrating respect for democratic principles and
processes.
We are also glad to see that the security situation
in Timor-Leste has been steadily improving since
February of last year, with substantial progress in
addressing the situation of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). We are quite pleased that all 65 IDP camps in
Dili and Baucau had been officially closed by the end
of August. We hope that the process of handing over
policing responsibilities from UNMIT to the Timorese
national police will continue to be as smooth as it has
been so far. In that respect, we are pleased to note that
the resumption of primary police responsibilities by the
National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) in three
districts and at the police training centre has not led to
an increase in criminal activities.
We continue to support the Secretary-General’s
gradual approach in this matter and welcome further
progress achieved in the registration, screening and
certification programme for the PNTL in accordance
with the policing arrangements. Further progress to
enhance security sector reform, internal security and
national defence, as well as the adoption of a national
security strategy, are of utmost importance. Improving
the justice sector and its institutions is of equal
importance.
Despite these considerable achievements, the
main issues that contributed to the 2006 crisis, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report — such as
poverty, unemployment, the lack of an effective land

13

S/PV.6205

and property regime and a weak judicial system —
continue to pose significant challenges, and they need
to be thoroughly addressed in order to anchor stability
in Timor-Leste.
Given the progress that has been achieved so far,
we are confident that Timor-Leste will eventually
overcome all these challenges. However, this requires
continued national dialogue and unity. Therefore, we
join the Secretary-General in encouraging the
parliament and the Government to continue efforts at
broad consultations. We also believe that Timor-Leste
requires continued support from the international
community in its quest for peace, stability and
prosperity. We thus agree with the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the present strength and
composition of UNMIT should be maintained. The
recommendations of the technical assessment mission
expected to visit Timor-Leste in January of next year
will be crucial for evaluating possible adjustments in
UNMIT’s mandate and strength.
Let me conclude by saluting once more the
owners of the normalization process, namely the
Timorese people and Government, and by wishing
them continued success.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We join other Council
members in welcoming the Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, His Excellency Mr. José Luís Guterres.
We thank him for his statement. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Atul Khare, for his briefing.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/504)
and the statement we just heard from the Deputy Prime
Minister show that positive progress is being made in
Timor-Leste. However, it is clear that, despite the
progress, there is a need to continue to focus on key
strategic areas.
We are pleased to note that the process of security
sector reform in Timor-Leste is progressing well,
especially with the commencement of the gradual
transfer of policing responsibilities to Timorese police.
We remain hopeful that further progress will be made
to facilitate completion of the transfer, as per the
agreed criteria. Every effort should be made to support
the Timorese police in achieving the key criteria,
especially in terms of operational and logistical
requirements.

14

We also note that, while efforts to enhance the
development of the Timorese military continue, not
much progress has been made. We therefore share the
observation of the Secretary-General that finding a
meaningful role for the Timorese military in a
peacetime setting and clarifying its relationship with
the Timorese police and establishing accountability
mechanisms remain key challenges for the
Government.
These are issues that will have to be resolved in
order to ensure that the long-term stability of the
country is achieved.
Internal displacement is a matter of concern and
interest to Uganda. We are happy to note that the
improved security situation has contributed to the
progress that has been made in addressing the situation
of internally displaced persons, especially in Dili and
Baucau. However, there is need to address potentially
destabilizing recovery issues, such as those relating to
housing conditions and land and property.
On the administration of justice, we note the
potential repercussions of the release of Martenus
Bere. The fact that a vote of no confidence motion was
submitted against the Government points to how
politically sensitive this matter is considered to be by
sectors of the Timorese people. It is critical that
deliberate efforts be made to ensure that impunity is
not condoned.
It is important that the Government of TimorLeste take primary responsibility for the economic
recovery, security and development of the country,
with the support of the international community. The
international community should support and facilitate
national institutional development, with a view to
ensuring that there is local capacity to play a leadership
role on all aspects of national development. That is key
to the sustainable national development of the country.
We welcome, therefore, the Timorese people’s
increased leadership in and ownership of the national
development process.
Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Khare, and the entire
staff of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for the efforts they have made
in delivering on UNMIT’s mandate.
This being Mr. Atul Khare’s last appearance
before the Council in his capacity as head of UNMIT,

09-57362

S/PV.6205

Uganda pays special tribute to him for his dedication
and commitment in support of the people of TimorLeste. Mr. Khare has made an important contribution,
and we wish him all the very best in his future
endeavours.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too are grateful to Mr. Atul Khare,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, for his presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) (S/2009/504) and for
his analysis of the situation in the country. We also
thank, Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister
of Timor-Leste, for his comprehensive statement.
This year, the people of Timor-Leste
commemorated the tenth anniversary of the popular
referendum in a situation of stability and security. We
congratulate the people and the leaders of Timor-Leste
on that noteworthy event. During the process of
building a State, Dili was faced with serious challenges
and crises, but, with the effective support of the United
Nations and the international community, the young
State overcame these and many other difficulties.
We note with satisfaction the substantial progress
that has been achieved in overcoming the consequences
of the 2006 crisis. This has provided an opportunity to
advance national dialogue and reconciliation. This
month saw the successful holding of elections for
community authorities, with the assistance of UNMIT.
The time has come to tackle other priority tasks to
strengthen this young independent State: strengthening
State and security institutions; establishing the rule of
law and public order; enhancing the judicial system;
ensuring social and economic development; eradicating
poverty; creating jobs for the population; and
improving the human rights situation. Those objectives
will be achieved only if efforts are pooled and if there
is cooperation among all the country’s political forces
and civil society.
Strengthening the national security forces is of
priority importance for restoring stability in TimorLeste and constitutes an important indicator of the
independence of that State. We welcome the start of the
process of transferring law and order responsibilities
from UNMIT to the Timorese police. It is significant
that the transfer timetable is being implemented on the
basis of mutually agreed criteria with respect to

09-57362

readiness rather than on the basis of artificial
deadlines.
Despite the progress that has been achieved in a
number of areas, including with respect to security and
stability — thanks in large part to the United Nations
presence — this is fragile. A potential threat is posed
by social and economic difficulties, impunity, human
rights problems, the weakness of the judicial system
and other emerging risks. Taking that into account, we
share the assessment of the Secretary-General
regarding the utility of maintaining United Nations
Mission levels until the end of the Mission’s current
mandate. We await further recommendations on the
reconfiguration of the Mission in the SecretaryGeneral’s next report.
We wish to convey to the head of UNMIT,
Mr. Atul Khare, and to the Mission staff our gratitude
for their professionalism and selfless efforts in
fulfilling their mandate. As we understand it,
Mr. Khare’s work in this position is coming to an end,
and we wish to wish him every possible success and
fruitful activities in his future endeavours. We are
convinced that his contributions will again be required
within the United Nations system.
UNMIT’s police component includes Russian
police officers. My country will continue to support the
activities of this Mission and its cooperation with the
authorities and people of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Croatia deeply appreciates
the personal participation of Deputy Prime Minister
José Guterres in our deliberations and would like to
thank both him and Special Representative Atul Khare
for their contributions in today’s debate on TimorLeste.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later.
Croatia welcomes the Secretary-General’s latest
progress report on Timor-Leste (S/2009/504),
presented by Special Representative Khare. It is a very
timely report, which comes on the tail of a very
important juncture in that country’s history. The tenth
anniversary of Timor-Leste's historic vote for
independence on 30 August represented a significant
benchmark indicating how far the Timorese people
have come in such a short time. We also remember
those who lost their lives during the violence in the

15

S/PV.6205

aftermath of the 2006 crisis, including those serving in
the United Nations Mission there.

continue steadily to ensure continuing public
confidence in the current stable security situation.

We also recognize the crucial contributions that
United Nations missions have made since the country’s
independence, as well as the tireless efforts of the
respective special representatives and their teams in
supporting Timorese-led nation-building efforts. We
reaffirm our fu11 support for the people of Timor-Leste
and urge them not waiver from their important
endeavours in the face of the current political,
institutional and socio-economic challenges.

As the situation evolves on the ground, Croatia
fully
supports
regular
reviews
of
possible
configurations of the size of UNMIT’s police
component, to ensure appropriate alignment of its
capabilities. In that connection we look forward to the
technical assessment mission visit to Timor-Leste in
the coming months and its findings thereafter.
However, at this crucial juncture, we believe that the
current engagement of UNMIT’s police component
needs to be retained for the time being. It continues to
serve an important role in interim law enforcement
until the PNTL has been fully reconstituted. In
assuming an effective oversight role in districts already
transferred to the national police, UNMIT could ensure
that resumption of policing responsibilities by the
national police continues smoothly and without
incident.

We meet today, at a time when the security
situation in Timor-Leste has remained calm, to review
progress in critical areas of focus under the renewed
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) since February this year. We
note the Secretary-General’s assessment of continued
incremental progress in the four mandated priority
areas.
Ensuring the long-term security and stability of
Timor-Leste is contingent on national security
institutions functioning in a professional and
accountable manner. Croatia is therefore encouraged to
learn that during the reporting period that has been at
the forefront of the minds of the Timorese leadership.
We welcome their efforts for the institutional
strengthening of security institutions, enhancing
security-sector legal frameworks and stepping up
efforts to establish a national security policy.
The Timorese authorities should continue to take
full advantage of UNMIT’s expertise while
undertaking that process. If designed and implemented
correctly, those reforms will allow for a comprehensive
overhaul of the security sector, shored up by requisite
civil oversight, the rule of law, transparency and
enhanced mechanisms of internal accountability for
both security institutions. It will further pave the way
for an integrated approach to security and defence
functions, while clearly defining meaningful roles for
both the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL)
and Falintil-Forças de Defensa de Timor-Leste
(F-FDTL).
Croatia has listened with great interest to
Mr. Khare on the progress in the transfer of primary
policing responsibilities to the PNTL. While progress
has been made in the resumption of primary policing
responsibilities, it is important that that process

16

We are encouraged by reports of progress
achieved in human rights areas, including systematic
strengthening o£ the judicial system and enactment of
important legislation. We commend the decision by the
High-level Coordination Committee chaired by
President Ramos-Horta to conduct an independent
comprehensive needs assessment. That should open the
way for a coordinated and carefully considered
approach to justice sector reform and help prioritize
those areas requiring international assistance. We look
forward to those recommendations in the near future.
However, the long-term consolidation of peace in
Timor-Leste cannot take hold in the absence of a viable
environment in which there is a credible and
functioning judiciary and penal system and in which
the rule of law prevails.
The successful holding of local elections on
9 October represented another important benchmark in
the country's progress towards a culture of political
dialogue and democratic governance. We hope that the
people of Timor-Leste will use it as positive
momentum to further drive forward its democratic
process in which national dialogue is a central tenet.
Furthermore, Croatia commends the Timorese
leadership for their accomplishments to date towards
resolving an important residual challenge from the
2006 crisis, namely that of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). We particularly welcome the news that the
Government has closed the camps in Dili and Baucau.

09-57362

S/PV.6205

Bearing in mind the serious socio-economic
challenges Timor-Leste faces today, it is essential for
the long-term consolidation of the country’s peace and
stability that more concerted efforts are made by the
Government towards improving the quality of life for
all Timorese people. Such efforts must also include
durable solutions to alleviate potential destabilizing
situations after the IDP challenge has been resolved. In
that respect, perhaps there could be more focus on
integrating more peacebuilding efforts aimed at social
inclusion and cohesion for all Timorese people,
through long-term sustainable development.
The Secretary-General, in his latest progress
report, has highlighted the continued strength of the
resolve of the people of Timor-Leste to build a more
peaceful and stable future for themselves, especially
since the crisis of 2006 and the attacks in 2008. To that
end UNMIT has played a vital role in restoring and
maintaining stability and in the crucial areas of
security sector reform, democratic governance, rule of
law and socio-economic development.
However, given that significant residual
challenges from 2006 could pose serious risks to the
long-term stability and development of the country,
Croatia, like others, deems continued international
presence and assistance necessary for the immediate
period ahead. In that respect, the United Nations
presence, under UNMIT’s capable stewardship, can
continue to play a critical role in providing assistance
to Timorese-led State-building efforts in the four
mandated priority areas.
Finally, as this was Special Representative
Khare’s final briefing to the Council in his official
function, Croatia would like to take this opportunity to
thank him for all his tireless efforts and capable
leadership of the Mission. We wish him the very best in
his future endeavours.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is pleased to welcome Deputy Prime
Minister José Luís Guterres, to whom we express our
gratitude for the progress achieved in his country and
the good relations that he has maintained with the
United Nations presence over the last decade.
We also are especially grateful for the report
(S/2009/504) presented by Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste. I take this opportunity to once again express our
thanks to him and commend the excellent job he and

09-57362

his Office have done in supporting the Government of
Timor-Leste. They have provided a comprehensive
model worthy for use in United Nations efforts in other
areas of the world. We express our deep gratitude for
that and wish him every success for the future.
Just a few months after celebrating the tenth
anniversary of the referendum in Timor-Leste, which
laid the foundations of the country’s independence, we
are pleased to see a climate of stability and
strengthened governance in that country. There is no
doubt that United Nations support to the Government
of Timor-Leste has provided the country with the
opportunity to shape its own future. In this context, we
believe that Timor-Leste should continue to enjoy the
benefits of the presence and support of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
in order to continue to make progress on matters such
as security, justice, human rights, development and
democratic governance.
When the Security Council met to discuss TimorLeste on 19 February (see S/PV.6085), Mexico stated
that it was important to strengthen the machinery for
transparency and accountability in the government
sector. Today we welcome the fact that the parliament
has adopted a law establishing an anti-corruption
commission and that ratification instruments of the
United Nations Convention against Corruption have
been deposited. That will contribute to further
strengthening democratic governance in that country.
We also commend the continued support of
UNMIT in the process of transferring command to
enable the National Police to assume the policing
responsibilities thus far carried out by the Mission. We
consider that complete transfer must occur once the
criteria laid down in the agreement signed between
Special Representative Khare and Prime Minister
Gusmão have been met, with particular emphasis on
United Nations certification of national officers and on
ensuring that the National Police is accepted by its own
community and is strengthened as an institution so that
it can exercise real control.
We are aware that the road to strengthening the
rule of law and guaranteeing human rights still holds
many challenges. We support UNMIT’s endeavours to
support the Government in its institution-building and
in implementing the recommendations of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
and the Commission of Truth and Friendship.

17

S/PV.6205

Mexico agrees with the report of the SecretaryGeneral and believes that, in line with the United
Nations position, there should be no amnesty or
impunity for war crimes, crimes against humanity or
genocide. We urge the Government to cooperate
closely with the independent Special Commission of
Inquiry to address unresolved cases of crimes
committed during the crises of 1999 and 2006,
pursuant to resolutions 1704 (2006) and 1802 (2008).
We also recommend that the Timor-Leste authorities
intensify their cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
On the issue of internally displaced persons
(IDPs), it is important to highlight the achievement of
closing the country’s 65 IDP camps. We support the
Government’s efforts to promptly meet the needs of the
nearly 3,000 IDPs still in temporary shelters and to
facilitate their return to their places of origin in an
atmosphere of calm and reconciliation.
We also welcome the progress achieved less than
a year ago through the signing of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework 2009-2013 by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Prime Minister. We trust that the Framework will
continue to promote democratization and social
cohesion and make it possible to meet the major
challenges of unemployment, the fight against poverty
and providing access to basic social services in the
country.
I wish to conclude by welcoming the widespread
atmosphere of peace in which the recent municipal and
village elections took place on 9 October. This reflects
the commitment of the people of Timor-Leste to
strengthening democracy and its institutions. Mexico
reaffirms its readiness to continue its cooperation with
the Timorese authorities in this sphere, as demonstrated
by our support in the preparations for and holding of
the recent elections through Mexico’s Federal Electoral
Institute.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like to join
my colleagues in welcoming Deputy Prime Minister
Guterres and thanking him for his important statement.
I further wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his extremely useful briefing.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union later today. Let me nevertheless
make the following specific points.

18

We were encouraged by the climate of calm that
prevailed during the celebrations on the occasion of the
tenth anniversary of the 1999 referendum. At the same
time, we would like to take this opportunity to
remember those, including members of the United
Nations Mission, who lost their lives at the time.
We salute the fact that the process of the return
and resettlement of internally displaced persons has
nearly been completed. We also wish to congratulate,
as others have done, the Government of Timor-Leste
on the successful conduct of the recent elections at the
community level.
We welcome the efforts to promote inclusive
dialogue and national reconciliation. For these
endeavours to be successful, some of the root causes of
the 2006 crisis still need to be fully tackled. TimorLeste continues to face important challenges in
reducing poverty and creating new employment
opportunities. The Government of Timor-Leste
therefore rightly stresses that there is an increasing
need to move from conflict prevention to a
comprehensive development agenda. The United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
can play a key role in that evolution. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has already
drawn the attention of the Council to the important
contribution provided by the European Union and its
member States in this regard.
We support the authorities of Timor-Leste in their
endeavours to build strong institutions that can fight
impunity for grave violations of human rights. As the
Secretary-General has reminded us, further — albeit as
yet incomplete — progress has been made in holding
accountable those responsible for criminal acts and
human rights violations during the 2006 crisis. In that
regard, we welcome the recommendations made by
UNMIT, in cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to
strengthen accountability for human rights violations,
and we hope for their rapid implementation.
It is important that the National Police of TimorLeste is making and continues to make progress in
resuming its primary policing responsibilities,
including through the police training academy. We also
welcome the swearing in, last week, of international
prosecutors and clerks who can support the judiciary of
Timor-Leste.

09-57362

S/PV.6205

The successful re-establishment of a functioning
rule of law system is crucial for achieving long-term
stability. That requires the continued review and reform
of the security sector at all levels. It also calls for the
strengthening of the police and the judiciary, the
adoption of relevant legislation, such as the new penal
code, and a clear division of responsibilities and
competencies between the police, on the one side, and
the military, on the other. In our view, the military
could, for instance, place greater emphasis on areas
such as disaster relief and international peacekeeping.
Those are also fields in which my own country has
some experience and are areas of action where the
armed forces of smaller and medium-sized countries
might be able to provide appropriate training and
advice.
Since this is the last time for Mr. Khare to brief
the Council in his capacity as Special Representative,
in closing, I would like to join others in thanking him
for his important contribution to the peace process over
the past three years. We have seen significant changes
in Timor-Leste since 2006, also thanks to the work of
UNMIT under Mr. Khare’s leadership. The benchmarks
that UNMIT has established will continue to provide us
with an excellent strategic framework to assess
progress in the four priority areas, and that in turn will
facilitate the review, as well as possible future
adjustments to UNMIT’s mandate.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome the
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Guterres,
and to thank him for his valuable participation in this
meeting. I would also like to express my gratitude to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Khare, for his briefing and for his very valuable
contribution to peace in Timor-Leste. I would like to
pay tribute to the efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) under his
leadership, which have contributed to stability and
progress in Timor-Leste.
We have followed the developments in TimorLeste with great interest, and we again welcome the
continuing stability and calm in that country and the
progress made towards peace, as reflected in the State
authorities’ response to the recent crisis and the
measures taken to restore stability and security in order
to continue working towards steady socio-economic
development. We note with satisfaction the closure of
most of the camps for refugees and internally displaced

09-57362

persons without any incidents, as well as the ongoing
reintegration of the petitioners of the Falintil-Forças de
Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) into civilian life. We
note as well the adoption of administrative reform
measures and anti-corruption laws.
We believe that it is important to devote greater
attention to the post-reintegration phase in order to
enable all citizens to earn a living and to enjoy access
to basic necessities, such as water and other services,
because that is one of the prerequisites for lasting
stability in the country. It is evident that Timor-Leste
has achieved substantial progress. However, there are
still many challenges, such as poverty, unemployment,
the lack of an effective land and property management.
In addition, the State institutions remain fragile,
including shortcomings in the justice and lawenforcement sectors. In that regard, primary
responsibility for the adoption of a comprehensive
approach to the four priority areas lies with the
Timorese authorities. Those are security sector reform,
State building and the rule of law, the promotion of a
culture of democratic governance and governance, and
socio-economic development, so that greater progress
within the context of the medium-term strategy, in
cooperation and coordination with UNMIT and the
United Nations country team, can be achieved.
We note with satisfaction the efforts of President
Ramos-Horta to strengthen the ongoing dialogue
among the various political parties, as well as all
segments of society. It is evident that the statements
made recently by the various influential political
parties and the measures that they have taken clearly
demonstrate their respect for the rule of law and all
State institutions. We hope that that constructive spirit
will prevail so as to ensure that a democratic society
enjoying peace and stability continues to be built.
During this period, it is important that we
continue to strengthen and advance the State
institutions, especially their capacities, in order to
enable them to fully meet their responsibilities, in
particular in the fields of security and socio-economic
development and respect for the rule of law and human
rights, and to ensure that understanding and tolerance
prevail.
We
welcome
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations and agree with him when he states
that much remains to be done in Timor-Leste (see
S/2009/504, para. 53). That is why we support his

19

S/PV.6205

comment with regard to maintaining the strength and
composition of the Mission at the current levels, and
we look forward to the recommendations of the
technical assessment team.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): The
Permanent Representative of Sweden will shortly
deliver a statement on behalf of the European Union,
with which France associates itself.
Allow me to make a few additional remarks.
First, I wish to welcome presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. José Luís Guterres,
among us and to convey to him France’s
congratulations on the successful celebration of the
tenth anniversary of the 1999 self-determination
referendum. That anniversary is an opportunity to take
stock of the impressive path taken by the country on
the way towards independence, peace and prosperity.
That success is primarily owed to the Timorese people
and political officials. However, it would not have been
possible without the commitment of the international
community.
In that regard, I would like to pay tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the
occasion of his last appearance before our Council. In
the many years that he has spent in East Timor,
Mr. Atul Khare has worked tirelessly beside and for the
people. Through his discreet but effective action to
support the authorities, he played a part in the
emergence of a new State on the international scene.
Allow me to underscore the very positive role also
played by neighbouring countries, in particular
Indonesia, Australia and New Zealand, whose support
has contributed to maintaining stability in the country.
Consolidating the progress achieved will take
time. The events of 2006 demonstrated the
consequences of a hasty withdrawal of the United
Nations. The reassuring presence of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the
international security forces will therefore continue to
be essential to stability in the near future. We are
pleased that, as Mr. Khare has just explained,
UNMIT’s activity is part of a medium-term strategy
aimed at having the Timorese progressively take over
the tasks currently undertaken by the United Nations.
With respect in particular to the transfer of
responsibility for law and order in the districts, it will
be possible in six months to assess the situation and

20

draw the appropriate lessons in adapting the Mission’s
mandate, format and composition.
In that connection, we welcome the forthcoming
technical assessment mission to Timor-Leste, pursuant
to the demand made by the Security Council and the
Secretary-General for improved follow-up to
peacekeeping operations, particularly with regard to
police activities. The technical assessment mission will
also allow us to update the Mission’s planning
documents, pursuant to resolution 1867 (2009).
The Secretary-General quite rightly emphasizes
in his report (S/2009/504) the importance to lasting
reconciliation of combating impunity for past crimes.
We share the concerns expressed by the Special
Representative and reiterate our support for UNMIT’s
activities in support of the Prosecutor-General of
Timor-Leste, including with respect to the Serious
Crimes Investigation Team.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. José Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of TimorLeste, to the Council today, and to congratulate him on
the achievements of the Timorese people. I would also
like to welcome Special Representative Khare and
thank him for his comprehensive briefing.
Timor-Leste has made significant progress since
the political crisis and violence of 2006. Although the
situation remains fragile, the Timorese commitment to
peace is clear. It was on full display on 30 August,
when Timor-Leste celebrated the tenth anniversary of
the popular consultation. My Government welcomes
the progress which the Timorese have made in the area
of security, in particular in the development of a
national security policy and draft security legislation,
and we recognize the increased professionalization of
the Timorese police and military, as witnessed by their
efforts to ensure a secure and stable environment
following the February 2008 assassination attempts on
the President and Prime Minister.
The recent transfer of policing responsibilities
from the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) to the National Police of Timor-Leste
in three districts was a step forward, and we hope to
see further such transfers to the Timorese police in the
near future. We also encourage the Timorese, as they
continue to develop their national security policy, to
clearly delineate the roles of the police and the

09-57362

S/PV.6205

military — an essential element of effective rule of law
and administration of justice.

programmes, including in health, rural economic
development and judicial reform.

The United States is committed to assisting
Timor-Leste to develop its security sector. We have
increased our military cooperation and are currently
conducting training exercises in Timor-Leste and
neighbouring Indonesia. We are pleased that key
Timorese decision-makers have accepted our invitation
to participate in programmes at the Asia-Pacific Center
on Security Studies in Hawaii for the second
consecutive year.

Let me conclude by paying tribute to Special
Representative Khare and thanking him for his
dedicated efforts to advance stability and prosperity in
Timor-Leste. We would like to wish him every success
in his future endeavours.

Timor-Leste has also made progress in
democratic governance and rule of law. We
congratulate the Timorese on carrying out peaceful
local elections and commend UNMIT for its support to
this process. We also applaud President Ramos-Horta’s
initiative to open a broad dialogue with the Timorese
people on priority issues. But a critical element of
democratic governance is an independent judiciary. We
therefore encourage the Government of Timor-Leste to
continue its administrative reforms, including the
development of legislative frameworks and a justice
sector that establishes accountability for criminal
offences and puts an end to impunity for grave
violations of human rights. We
believe
that
the
recommendations of the independent comprehensive
needs assessment of the justice sector could provide
critical tools for reforming the sector and improving
accountability.
Social cohesion and economic development are
key to long-term stability. The recent closing of camps
for internally displaced persons and the safe return and
resettlement of those individuals are important steps
towards reconciliation. Further, we acknowledge the
progress that Timorese officials have made in
addressing the national priorities outlined in the
international compact for Timor-Leste (see S/2008/501,
para. 36) and the measures the Government is taking to
improve access to primary education, decrease
malnutrition, lower unemployment levels and increase
child protection. It is critical that the Timorese
leadership continue these efforts to reduce poverty and
create additional employment — a priority benchmark
identified
in
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2009/504).
For our part, the United States will continue to
support the Timorese people in these efforts. We have
provided $24 million this year to support an array of

09-57362

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
I welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, in the Council’s meeting today and thank
him for his statement. I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Atul Khare for his briefing and
commend him for his contributions, over the three
years since he assumed his position as head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), to the process of peacebuilding and
development in the country. As this may be the last
time Mr. Khare is attending a Council meeting in his
present capacity, I wish him still greater successes in
his future endeavours.
We align ourselves with the joint statement of the
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
to be delivered by the Ambassador of Thailand.
We are encouraged by the efforts of the
Government and people of Timor-Leste, especially in
maintaining an overall calm public security situation
conducive to the realization of the country’s political,
social and economic objectives. The period under
review has seen, inter alia, the achievement of over
60 per cent of the socio-economic development targets
set for the first and second quarters of this year, the
successful commemoration of the tenth anniversary of
the popular consultation, visibly improved legislative
processes, continued dialogue and reconciliation, and
the holding of elections at the local level.
These results have been made possible thanks,
first of all, to the strong determination of the
Government and people of Timor-Leste to move the
national peace and development process forward. We
commend the Government of Timor-Leste and
President José Ramos-Horta personally for their
commitment to strengthening national unity by
building consensus; enhancing political dialogue,
consultation, reconciliation and mediation; and
promoting progress in addressing the situation of

21

S/PV.6205

internally displaced persons, a major issue resulting
from the 2006 crisis. These measures, together with the
endorsed
parliamentary
plans
to
intensify
administrative and legislative reforms, combat
corruption and enhance capacity, will enable State
institutions to better discharge their challenging tasks
ahead with broader public support. The active and
constructive participation of people from all walks of
life in Timor-Leste in the country’s political process is
more than ever of colossal significance in
implementing these measures.
We highly appreciate the efforts of UNMIT in
carrying out its mandate of providing assistance to
Timor-Leste, including in maintaining public security,
organizing local elections, and implementing legal and
police capacity-building projects with a view to
helping the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL)
assume its responsibilities through a gradual and
phased process. In this connection, we welcome the
smooth handover of primary policing responsibilities
in three districts and at the Police Training Center from
UNMIT to the Government of Timor-Leste. We are
convinced that reviews of this initial step by relevant
agencies will produce useful lessons on how to proceed
more effectively in the next stages of the transfer of
police responsibility to the PNTL, ultimately leading to
full ownership by Timor-Leste of its peace process.
However, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2009/504), the imminent challenges to the
stability and development of Timor-Leste, particularly
poverty, unemployment and the immaturity of security
institutions, leave no room for complacency. Apart
from the intensified efforts required of the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste, the international
community needs to continue to be committed to the
cause of peace and development in the country, with
priority given to strengthening the security sector and
improving basic education, health care and nutrition,
child protection and rural development aimed at
meeting internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals. In
implementing UNMIT’s mandate, especially in priority
areas, its coordination with the Government of TimorLeste and with other United Nations partners such as
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
should be further strengthened.
As a country in the region and a close neighbour
of Timor-Leste, Viet Nam has always and will continue

22

to support and assist the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste in their cause of peace, revival and
development to the very best of its ability.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of the 10 States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and
Thailand.
ASEAN would like to congratulate Viet Nam, a
fellow ASEAN member State, on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October, and on convening the debate on this issue,
which is of vital importance to our region.
ASEAN warmly welcomes back to New York His
Excellency Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, himself a close friend of
ASEAN. ASEAN appreciates his personal participation
in the recent ASEAN Regional Forum held in Phuket,
Thailand, in July 2009, and his message of
commitment to strengthening relations with ASEAN.
ASEAN also thanks and pays tribute to
Mr. Atul Khare, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and to the men and
women of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), for their dedication in
supporting the Government and the people of TimorLeste in the nation-building process. We join in
wishing Mr. Khare well in his future endeavours.
From the beginning, several ASEAN Member
States have contributed troops and police units to
successive United Nations missions in Timor-Leste,
including the current mission, UNMIT. That, in itself,
is a testament of ASEAN’s support for the United
Nations on this issue.
I would like to take this opportunity to share
ASEAN’s views on a few points as follows. First,
ASEAN welcomes the continued progress achieved in
Timor-Leste in all four mandated areas of UNMIT,
namely review and reform of the security sector,
strengthening of the rule of law, promoting a culture of
democratic governance and dialogue, and economic

09-57362

S/PV.6205

and social development. We congratulate the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste on having
successfully held, on 30 August, the celebration of the
tenth anniversary of the popular consultation as well as
on having successfully held local elections in early
October; we believe that these were important
milestones for the country.
ASEAN is pleased that the overall security
situation remains calm and that there has been
substantial progress in addressing the two residual
consequences of the 2006 crisis. In particular, we note
with satisfaction that all 65 camps for internally
displaced persons were officially closed without
significant incident and the reintegration of the
“petitioners” into civilian life has proceeded smoothly.
We are confident that Timor-Leste will continue to
move ahead in this positive direction.
Secondly, ASEAN is pleased that, since May, the
national police of Timor-Leste has started to gradually
resume primary policing responsibilities in some
districts or units on the basis of the criteria for
resumption that were mutually agreed between the
Government of Timor-Leste and UNMIT. ASEAN
strongly supports further international efforts, both in
terms of bilateral and multilateral assistance, to support
Timor-Leste in strengthening the capacity of its
national police. We also support efforts to establish
clear command and control arrangements between
security institutions in border areas and to establish
accountability mechanisms and civilian oversight of
those security institutions.
Thirdly, ASEAN fully supports the strong
commitment of the Government of Timor-Leste to
promote the socio-economic development of the
country, which has resulted in steady progress in areas
of national priority. We also support the Government’s
commitment
to
mainstream
the
Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) into its national
development strategy. Here, we must not allow the
world financial and economic crisis to adversely affect
international assistance and partnership for TimorLeste. As Timor-Leste proceeds with its nationbuilding process, development assistance from
international partners is vital to help the country
through this delicate period.
With that in mind, as noted by the Special
Representative, individual ASEAN Member States are
working closely with the Government of Timor-Leste

09-57362

in areas that are consistent with the latter’s national
priorities, such as poverty eradication, employment
generation, food security, rural development, fisheries,
infrastructure development, public health and human
resource development.
Fourthly, ASEAN supports the recommendation
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/504) that the
present strength and composition of UNMIT, including
its formed police units, should be maintained while
Timor-Leste is undergoing the delicate process of
security sector reform. Continued peace and stability
will be essential for socio-economic development and
efforts to lay a strong and durable foundation for
democratic governance of the country. At the same
time, ASEAN believes that we should be clear about
the future role of the United Nations in Timor-Leste
and about how best to ensure a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to durable peacebuilding. In that
connection,
ASEAN
looks
forward
to
recommendations by the Secretary-General in his next
report on possible adjustments to UNMIT’s mandate
and strength.
On a final point, which we feel is most important,
ASEAN wishes to reiterate that the principle of
national ownership should be, not only a principle that
guides every facet of UNMIT’s work, but also the
ultimate goal of the international community in TimorLeste. ASEAN strongly believes that it is of vital
importance to ensure ownership by the leaders and the
people of Timor-Leste of any strategy and benchmarks
that the United Nations would develop for the country.
We should all strive for a nation-building process that
is a process of, by, and for the people of Timor-Leste.
Here, ASEAN stands firm in solidarity with TimorLeste as a regional partner and, above all, as a friend.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). Turkey,
Croatia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia,
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union congratulates Timor-Leste
on the tenth anniversary of the 30 August referendum,
which gave the country its long-awaited independence.
The groundbreaking State-building effort that has
followed since then is a major achievement, even if

23

S/PV.6205

many challenges remain. The EU takes this opportunity
to remember the many Timorese who lost their lives
during the violence at the time of the referendum. We
would also like to pay tribute to those who have died
while serving in United Nations missions in TimorLeste.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2009/504), important steps have been taken
over the past year to address the security situation and
develop the State’s structures, but the events of
February last year were a reminder that the long-term
stability and sustainable development of Timor-Leste
cannot be taken for granted. The United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) will
continue to play an important role in assisting TimorLeste in the period ahead.
The successful conclusion of the local elections
on 9 October was another milestone in Timor-Leste’s
democratic process. The manner in which they were
held showed that important progress has been made in
institutional
capacity-building
and
democratic
governance. We encourage the authorities to conduct
the district and municipal elections in 2010 in the same
spirit. It is also encouraging that the security situation
in Timor-Leste has remained calm in recent months.
Substantial progress has been made in addressing
the situation of internally displaced persons. The EU
commends the Timor-Leste Government for its
accomplishment in closing the camps for internally
displaced persons in Dili and Baucau.
The EU concurs with the Secretary-General’s
view that, for the time being, UNMIT should maintain
its current strength, including the police units’
capability to assume interim law functions if requested
to do so. At the same time, the process of handing over
responsibilities to the national police force must
continue with a view to setting the stage for a future
transition and the drawdown of UNMIT.
There is a link between security sector reform
and the eventual scaling down of UNMIT. We welcome
the Government’s efforts to further develop a national
security policy and to strengthen security sector legal
frameworks. The role of the national defence forces in
a peacetime setting must be defined, and their
relationship with the national police force clarified. A
comprehensive and coherent concept for the entire
security sector should be developed, including the

24

establishment of accountability and civilian oversight
mechanisms.
Another critical challenge in the coming period
will be to build a sustainable socio-economic system
that can create jobs and help fulfil the basic social
service functions of a State. The European Union
encourages Timor-Leste to make use of the Petroleum
Fund for future investment projects and to stimulate
the non-oil part of the economy, with a focus on job
creation and infrastructure.
For the period of 2008 to 2013, the European
Union is providing support of about €200 million, with
particular attention paid to key public sector areas. The
European Union aims to support labour-intensive work
programmes, mainly through the implementation of the
rural development programme.
We welcome the efforts to develop an integrated
strategic framework that outlines goals and activities in
support of State-building in Timor-Leste. Concrete
benchmarks will enable the international community to
further focus its assistance on priority areas and
facilitate UNMIT’s eventual drawdown. We also look
forward to the revised national development plan
signalling Government ownership of the process,
which will give donors the longer-term orientation they
need.
Since 1999, the European Union has provided the
people of Timor-Leste with more than €800 million in
development and humanitarian assistance. Our
assistance will continue, and we look forward to an
active partnership with the Government and the people
of Timor-Leste in the period ahead.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Portugal
welcomes the opportunity to be associated once again
with the Council’s deliberations on Timor-Leste. I wish
to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting.
As previous speakers have done, allow me to
extend warm greetings to Deputy Prime Minister
José Luís Guterres and to express our appreciation for
his valuable contribution to the present debate. Allow
me also to thank Mr. Atul Khare for his very useful
report.

09-57362

S/PV.6205

Portugal of course concurs with the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union, but as a representative of a
country that has had a long shared history with TimorLeste, I would like to underline some specific points.
This reporting period was marked by the tenth
anniversary of the popular consultation of 30 August
1999, in which the people of Timor-Leste expressed
their strong will for independence. Despite all the
difficulties, Timor-Leste has since then pursued the
path of consolidating peace, democratic stability and
economic development. Portugal commends the
Government of Timor-Leste for its achievements in
addressing long-standing security and economic
challenges, reinforcing political stability and
addressing the situation of internally displaced persons,
thus surmounting the grievances of the dramatic crisis
of May 2006.
In that context, I wish to underline the
resumption of operational responsibilities by the
National Police of Timor-Leste through a gradual
process agreed with the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which should be
fully achieved in the near future. We encourage the
Timorese authorities in that regard. Parliament and the
development of political dialogue have also had an
important role in reinforcing democratic governance
and the consolidation of the State. The elections
recently held at the local level were another milestone
in the democratic process. We encourage further steps
to consolidate the democratic institutions of TimorLeste.
UNMIT played a central role in that process,
actively contributing to the achievements in all four
areas of its mandate: the review and reform of the
security sector, the strengthening of the rule of law,
economic and social development, and the promotion
of a culture of democratic governance, including
enhancing political dialogue.
Portugal concurs with the Secretary-General’s
view concerning the need for renewed dialogue across
the entire political spectrum and all segments of
society. We also share the view that long-term security
and stability will depend on the capacity of the security
institutions to function in an accountable and effective
manner and with due respect for the rule of law and
human rights.

09-57362

The people of Timor-Leste have repeatedly
demonstrated their resolve to build a democratic,
peaceful and stable society. However, the consolidation
of those objectives requires continued support from the
international community. It is important that the people
of Timor-Leste know that they do not stand alone when
it comes to their endeavours.
For those reasons, we believe that UNMIT should
maintain its current strength for the time being,
including the police capability to assume interim
functions. At the same time, the process of handing
over responsibilities to the national police must
continue with a view to laying the groundwork for a
future transition and drawdown of UNMIT.
Another critical challenge in the near future will
be to build a sustainable economy that is nurtured by a
culture of accountable and transparent governance,
creates jobs and helps to fulfil the basic social
functions of a State. The elements introduced by
Mr. Guterres to our debate in that context are indeed
encouraging, in particular where economic growth is
concerned.
Portugal has and will contribute consistently to
those objectives as a leading donor within a large
spectrum of areas, including governance and public
administration, justice, education and security sector
reform. We are also strongly committed to UNMIT; we
have contributed 200 peacekeepers and fully support
all areas under the responsibility of the Mission.
The continued presence of UNMIT is essential in
order that the work in the consolidation of peace,
democracy and development in Timor-Leste may be
adequately sustained. May I also mention the most
valuable work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary General and, under his skilled direction, of
all UNMIT staff. During the past three years,
Mr. Atul Khare has done an outstanding job that will
remain inseparable from all the accomplishments
achieved by UNMIT. We wish to commend him for all
his efforts and dedication.
Finally, allow me to offer the Timorese people
and their democratic leaders our best wishes for
success in meeting these important challenges, and to
assure them of our constant solidarity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.

25

S/PV.6205

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and for the
opportunity to participate in it. I would also like to
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste. His comprehensive briefing demonstrates
how active the Government has been in addressing the
many challenges faced by the country, with many
positive results.
I also thank Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste, for his briefing today and commend him for his
outstanding work. Let me take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Mr. Khare for his leadership and engagement
with Timor-Leste and its people. When he concludes
his term at the end of this year, he will leave behind a
legacy of an extraordinary contribution that is reflected
in the many accomplishments of Timor-Leste in
consolidating peace and making progress towards
social and economic development. I wish him all the
best in his future endeavours.
As Timor-Leste and its many friends celebrate the
tenth anniversary of the popular consultation, it gives
us great pleasure to see that the country is moving
forward and slowly but steadily building and
strengthening the institutions proper to a modern
democratic State. The Timorese can be proud of what
they have achieved so far and remain confident in their
future.
Such a positive trend is evident in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/504). It
describes a significant improvement in the overall
situation in the first nine months of 2009.
Of special relevance is the fact that the security
situation remained calm and that the consequences of
past instability are being addressed. The continued
resumption of policing responsibilities by the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste is particularly positive.
We support the gradual and phased approach taken in
this regard, based on criteria agreed mutually between
the Timorese Government and the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). It is
encouraging that, despite shortcomings, this process
has not been accompanied by an increase in crime or
disorder. Quite to the contrary, the average number of
incidents reported each week has actually decreased.
The closure of all camps for internally displaced
persons is a significant development from both the

26

humanitarian and political perspectives. It signals
progress. In order to firmly turn a sad page in the
history of the country and avoid potential
destabilization, attention should be given to aspects
related to the return of internally displaced persons, in
particular housing, land and property rights and income
generation.
It is encouraging to note the continued
engagement of the political parties in the democratic
debate. The holding of peaceful local elections on
9 October, for which we commend the Government of
Timor-Leste, is yet another step towards consolidating
democracy. Democratic stability is key to ensuring
prosperity, State-building and effective popular
representation. We therefore congratulate political
leaders and encourage them to continue to participate
in the democratic process as the only way to
successfully address the challenges facing the country.
Strong economic and social development is
essential to consolidating these achievements. The
progress made in meeting the targets of the
international compact for Timor-Leste, the vigorous
increase in non-oil gross domestic product in 2008, and
the strong growth expected for 2009 and 2010 are
excellent news. In the long term, consolidating the
economy and reducing poverty will require significant
investments in the productive non-oil sectors, as
indicated by the Secretary-General.
It will also be necessary to increase and improve
social investment. The measures taken by the Timorese
Government to further improve basic education, health,
nutrition and child protection and to stimulate rural
development are commendable and should be
supported. They are essential to the country’s
achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
Brazil has contributed to such endeavours
through bilateral cooperation in areas as diverse as
education, agriculture and culture, in addition to
justice, security, democratic governance and defence.
We intend to further strengthen our cooperation, which
will continue to be focused on helping to build muchneeded capacity.
Timor-Leste’s progress in a number of areas is
certainly due to the determination of its Government
and people. It is also a result of the unwavering
commitment of the international community. This is
the time for all of us to maintain this commitment,
given that progress and stability are still fragile, as

09-57362

S/PV.6205

noted in the report. Recent security gains should not
mislead us. UNMIT remains a vital actor on the ground
and will remain so until such gains are firmly
consolidated. Brazil is convinced that, with our
collective support, the Timorese Government will keep
working intensely and effectively to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I join others in
thanking Mr. José Luís Guterres, Deputy Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, and Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary General, for their
presentations today, as well as the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2009/504) on the situation in TimorLeste. We particularly acknowledge Mr. Khare’s role in
overseeing the progress we are reviewing today, and
we wish him well for the future.
For 10 years, New Zealand has been pleased to
work with Timor-Leste, successive United Nations and
international missions and other bilateral partners, and
is proud of the role it has played in helping to build
that new nation. We appreciate the comments by
various Council members acknowledging that role. We
are committed to continuing our assistance and fully
support a continued mandate for the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
We have heard today of the considerable progress
that has been made in Timor-Leste since we last met.
The country is calm. Peaceful, free and fair village
elections were very recently held, supported by the
United Nations. Slowly but surely, Timor-Leste’s
institutions are growing in strength. There have been
relatively few security incidents this year, and those
that have occurred have been criminal in nature rather
than resulting from any breakdown in stability.
The
Australia/New
Zealand
International
Stabilisation Force (ISF), is increasingly focusing on
capacity-building and development assistance. At the
same time, we recognize that the mere presence of that
Force, like that of the United Nations police, provides
a disincentive to those who might otherwise seek to
foment unrest.
The National Police Force of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) is taking back from the United Nations
responsibility for practical policing, district by district.
We will be watching with interest the resumption of
policing in Viqueque next month.

09-57362

New Zealand continues to assist the PNTL in its
development through cooperation in community
policing. Our pilot projects in Becora prison in Dili and
in Suai in Covalima District are going well, and
progress is being made in working with the PNTL and
other United Nations police personnel to extend
community policing approaches to other areas. We
believe that community policing can significantly
contribute to promoting a peaceful and harmonious
society.
These are all positive developments. Together,
they are helping to create exactly the sort of
environment that the Government of Timor-Leste needs
if it is to succeed in taking on longer-term challenges,
including those identified by the Secretary-General.
There are the challenges of building the institutions of
statehood, developing effective and representative
systems of governance and creating credible
mechanisms for addressing justice and human rights
issues. There are also the challenges of creating a
strong
economy
and
generating
meaningful
employment, particularly for the young. We need to
support the Government in enabling the growth of a
private sector, because only that sector can provide the
many jobs needed in the future.
It is New Zealand’s assessment that Timor-Leste
is entering a transitional period. We cannot yet be fully
sure that the current peace and calm equate to longterm stability. The unexpected eruption of violence in
2006 reminded us of the danger of making that
calculation too early or too quickly. But it is equally
clear that the country is no longer in a state of crisis.
As the Timorese Government itself has put it, the
situation is moving from conflict to development.
This means that, while the support of the
international community is still required, the nature
and direction of that support may have to evolve and
change. It also means that we will increasingly need to
call on contributions — multilateral as well as
bilateral — from a wide range of international players
with different areas of skill and expertise.
The United Nations has a central role to play in
this changing environment. In our view, it must
continue to assist Timor-Leste to strengthen its national
institutions and work towards peaceful and credible
elections in 2012. But to ensure that it remains
effective, UNMIT must be allowed to evolve. It is vital

27

S/PV.6205

that the Mission remain responsive to the changing
environment in which it operates.
In that respect, the upcoming visit to Timor-Leste
of a United Nations technical assessment mission is
timely, and we look forward to its recommendations
regarding UNMIT’s medium-term future. We do not
wish to speculate as to the likely outcome of the
mission, but we agree with the Secretary-General’s
report that any adjustments in UNMIT police numbers
should be undertaken only in a gradual, step-by-step
manner that helps to maintain confidence in the current
stable security situation.
As one of the two partners in the International
Stabilization Force (ISF), we also believe that any
decisions made about UNMIT’s future should continue
to recognize the close interlinking of United Nations
and ISF operations. The ISF is charged with providing
security to UNMIT, and it is vital that planning for the
future of those two core components of the
international security presence continue to be closely
coordinated.
New Zealand assures the Security Council of its
continuing support for and encouragement to the
leaders and the people of Timor-Leste and to Mr. Khare
and his UNMIT team. We thank the Council for its
ongoing support for Timor-Leste and Viet Nam for
presiding over today’s discussions.
Amid the chaos and violence of 10 years ago, it
was hard to see the prospect of the new nation that is
emerging today. The security, social, economic and
governance challenges of the past decade have been
faced and largely met. Timor-Leste can now take up
with some confidence the further challenges of
developing the institutions of statehood and national
democratic, representative Government, of creating
credible mechanisms for ensuring justice and the
protection of human rights, and of building a strong
and sustainable economy. In the spirit of cooperation of
those 10 years, New Zealand shares and takes some
quiet pride in all those developments and in having
helped and supported the emergence of this new
member of the international family of free and
independent nations.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate once again in the Security

28

Council’s
deliberations
on
Timor-Leste.
We
particularly welcome the participation of Deputy Prime
Minister Guterres today. We congratulate Timor-Leste
on its recent tenth anniversary of the United Nationssponsored popular consultation, and we endorses the
statement issued by the President of the Security
Council on 27 August, which reaffirmed the Council’s
support for the efforts of the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste and for the work of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) in fulfilling its mandate. The effective
implementation of that mandate continues to be vital.
For Australia’s part, we remain a steadfast friend
of Timor-Leste and will continue to contribute what we
can to international efforts to assist it in becoming a
stable and prosperous nation. We welcome the positive
developments in the security situation since the
11 February 2008 attacks on President Ramos-Horta
and Prime Minister Gusmão — developments recently
demonstrated in the successful local Suko elections
held on 9 October, which took place with only minor
and isolated security incidents. Equally pleasing has
been the closure of the last of the camps housing
internally displaced persons. We congratulate the
Government of Timor-Leste and others involved on
that achievement.
However, we recognize that the closure of those
camps is only the first step in the reintegration process.
The return of significant numbers of people to
communities with limited infrastructure and other
support services presents new risks and challenges.
Certainly Australia will continue to support efforts by
the Timorese Government to ensure the long-term
sustainability of the return and reintegration process.
The Australian-led International Security Force
(ISF) has commenced a shift in focus from a purely
security support role to one of defence cooperation
with Timor-Leste’s military to support the work of
Australia’s own bilateral Defence Cooperation
Programme. We wish to acknowledge the significant
cooperation of UNMIT and other international partners
with the ISF. In particular, we wish to express our
appreciation to New Zealand for its contribution.
In addition to the work of the Defence
Cooperation Programme, Australia’s bilateral TimorLeste Police Development Programme is working
closely with the Government and the National Police of
Timor-Leste (PNTL) to develop its capacity. While

09-57362

S/PV.6205

good progress has been and continues to be made, the
United Nations role on the ground in Timor-Leste in
this area in particular remains significant and quite
crucial. A major development this year has been the
commencement of the handover of policing
responsibility from the United Nations police to the
PNTL. The process mutually agreed between the
Government of Timor-Leste and UNMIT is for the
handover to be done gradually, with each district and
specialized unit required to meet a set of objective
criteria. That has resulted, as we know, in three
districts and one unit being handed back to the PNTL
to date.

country strategy for development assistance to TimorLeste for the next five years. It will reflect a tighter and
more explicit focus around priorities that have been
clearly identified by the Government of Timor-Leste
itself. Our aid programme under the new strategy,
which of course is conditional on Timor-Leste’s
approval, will likely focus on delivering services —
particularly in child and maternal health — in rural
areas; creating training and employment opportunities
for young men and women, a crucial task; improving
food security; and assisting with capacity-building
within the institutions and the Government of TimorLeste itself.

We very much support that joint approach, which
not only ensures a controlled and orderly handover, but
also provides valuable information to international
partners as to the critical needs of the PNTL. We
support the view expressed in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2009/504) that continued monitoring by
UNMIT will be critical in this respect and that TimorLeste and UNMIT are at the beginning of a delicate
process — as the report says — of handover on which
we should not impose a predetermined artificial
timeline.

A positive development has been progress in
institutional reform supported by donors. Those
developments include the establishment of a public
service commission and the adoption of legislation to
establish an anti-corruption commission, both of which
are significant landmarks.

The development of the justice sector has
continued with the addition of more judges, public
defenders and public prosecutors. District courts are
now functioning and providing increased judicial
services to the rural population. Australia continues to
support the development of the justice sector, as do
others. While progress overall in that sector has been
positive, the clear principle of separation of powers
must be kept in mind at all times to ensure a strong and
independent judiciary.

As a significant donor to Timor-Leste and
mindful of the broad and complex range of
development cooperation taking place, we look
forward to continuing to work in partnership with the
Government of Timor-Leste and closely with other
development partners, including the United Nations in
all its forms, to ensure a carefully coordinated
approach.
It is axiomatic that the international community,
led by the United Nations, will continue to support
Timor-Leste as it moves towards more effective and
sustainable governance arrangements. For our part, we
remain committed to continuing our own strong
support for Timor-Leste during this important period of
transition.

Of course, the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste will themselves continue to take primary
responsibility for the development of a stable and
prosperous nation, including through institutional and
economic reform, the development of the private sector
and the provision of infrastructure, health and
education services and housing. The SecretaryGeneral’s report recognizes, however, that many of the
underlying factors contributing to the 2006 crisis —
poverty, lack of an effective land regime, weakness in
the justice sector and still-nascent security
institutions — remain.

The President: I now call on the representative
of the Philippines.

In support of capacity-building to address those
and other challenges, Australia is finalizing a new

Mr. Davide (Philippines): At the outset, the
Philippines congratulates you, Mr. President, on Viet

09-57362

In concluding, I would like to commend the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative,
Mr. Atul Khare, not just for his professional
contribution — which we expect — but also for his
impressive personal commitment to Timor-Leste. We
have all been present at a point in history that has seen
the emergence of this new nation, and Mr. Khare and
his United Nations team have been a very significant
part of that history.

29

S/PV.6205

Nam’s successful leadership of the Council, an
undoubted testament to its fidelity to the legacy of last
year’s successful presidency, and thanks you for
convening this important meeting to discuss the
situation in Timor-Leste.
My country welcomes back Deputy Prime
Minister José Luis Guterres and thanks him for his
important statement this morning. We also thank the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Atul
Khare, for presenting the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/504) on the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). Once again, the Special
Representative has given us a front-row view, even an
eyewitness account, of how the United Nations is
conducting successful peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations in Timor-Leste. The Philippines also notes
that Mr. Khare’s tour of duty with UNMIT ends in
December and acknowledges the exemplary work he
has done in the past three years as head of UNMIT and
in his previous capacities as Chief of Staff and Deputy
Special Representative in earlier peacekeeping
operations in Timor-Leste. The Philippines wishes him
all the best in his future endeavours.
The Philippines also associates itself with the
statement delivered by Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). We
would, nonetheless, like to stress some points.
The Philippines’ special relationship and solidarity
with Timor-Leste date back to the latter’s formative
years. The Philippines started its involvement in 1999
with a 600-strong humanitarian support mission as part
of the International Force in East Timor, and has
deployed a significant number of personnel in every
United Nations mission in Timor-Leste from that time
until the present. The majority of its individual police
officers are in UNMIT. The Philippines continues to be
committed to Timor-Leste’s nation-building efforts
through, inter alia, bilateral arrangements for assistance
and cooperation in capacity-building, working with
various relevant groups and institutions in Timor-Leste,
and remains a member of the Core Group on TimorLeste.
As such, the Philippines is heartened to note that
developments in all aspects of Timor-Leste’s nationhood
have been very positive and encouraging since the last
Security Council meeting on the subject in February.
Highlights in this area include the successful
celebration of the tenth anniversary of the popular

30

referendum in an atmosphere of continuing safety and
stability, for which the people of Timor-Leste and its
State institutions, with the support of UNMIT and the
United Nations country team, should be commended.
Another such example is the resumption on 14 May of
primary policing responsibilities by the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL). The international
community, through the United Nations and bilateral
donors, should provide long-term assistance to support
the PNTL and the Timorese Government in
reconstituting and developing the police force.
There has also been progress in efforts to enhance
democratic governance by establishing anti-corruption
and civil service commissions and by ratifying the
United Nations Convention against Corruption.
Significant progress has also been made in meeting
targets for the national priorities set forth in the
international compact for Timor-Leste (see S/2008/501,
para. 36). Development partners should endeavour to
reinforce the Government’s commitment to the
priorities in order to ensure that the high degree of
compliance in meeting targets for the first and second
quarters of this year will be sustained.
The Philippines acknowledges the comprehensive
role that UNMIT and the United Nations country team
have played and will continue to play in promoting
peace and development in Timor-Leste. It is imperative
that the international community continue to express its
strong support for their work. A case in point is the
resumption of primary policing responsibilities.
UNMIT’s presence is still necessary to ensure that the
gradual takeover of policing responsibilities by the
PNTL continues to go smoothly. The Philippines fully
concurs with the observation in paragraph 58 of the
Secretary-General’s report that UNMIT’s present
strength and composition should be maintained.
The path to nationhood is never smooth. Looking
back, we have seen Timor-Leste toiling through
tragedies and triumphs, sufferings and joy. The
Philippines congratulates the people and Government
of Timor-Leste for their courage, determination and
faith. Their spirit of hope is outstanding. Thus far, we
can say with certainty that with the character and
idealism of the Timorese people, the time, effort and
resources that the international community has
invested in Timor-Leste have been worth it.
The experience in Timor-Leste is still definitely
one of the best examples of a successful international

09-57362

S/PV.6205

enterprise engineered through the combined cooperative
efforts of the United Nations, regional players and
partners. The Timorese leadership has remained focused
on being proactive in promoting democracy and the
rule of law and on enhancing stability, security,
development and progress in a way that is sustainable
and consistent with the needs of the Timorese people.
It is incumbent on us to be relentless and enduring in
our support to them to help maintain this positive
attitude. As the saying goes, “When the only tool you
own is a hammer, every problem begins to resemble a
nail.”
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Thank you very
much, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting. We
thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2009/504) on the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), and we are also grateful to
Mr. Atul Khare, the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, for his briefing today. We also
welcome the personal presence and participation here
of Mr. Guterres, the Deputy Prime Minister of TimorLeste.
South Africa is pleased with the progress made by
Timor-Leste since the 2006 crisis. Both the people and
the political leadership of Timor-Leste have risen to
overcome those events, and have ultimately made
many strides towards restoring normalcy and bringing
sustainable peace and stability to their country. We
particularly applaud the personal efforts and leadership
of President Ramos-Horta. South Africa welcomes the
positive developments in Timor-Leste as reflected in
the current report of the Secretary-General, which
include
progress
in
security,
dialogue
and
reconciliation, as well as in amicably resolving the
issues of the petitioners and internally displaced
persons. My delegation supports continued efforts to
foster dialogue and national reconciliation at both the
national and the local levels among various
stakeholders in Timor-Leste.
We congratulate the Government and people of
Timor-Leste on their celebration of the important
milestone of the tenth anniversary of the popular
referendum, as noted in paragraph 3 of the report. My
delegation is also encouraged that most of the
country’s critical challenges, such as the issue of the
petitioners and internally displaced persons, have been
resolved in an amicable manner, and we welcome the
efforts made by the Government of Timor-Leste to
address the outstanding challenges.

09-57362

South Africa underlines the continued importance
of a holistic and comprehensive approach to the review
and reform of the security sector in Timor-Leste under
the full national ownership of the country. We
encourage the Government of Timor-Leste to continue
to intensify and enhance its efforts towards developing
a national security policy. My delegation also reiterates
its backing for the protection and promotion of
democratic governance, human rights and justice in
Timor-Leste. We support the increased efforts to
strengthen the country’s security and justice institutions.
In this context, we note with appreciation the gradual
resumption of primary policing responsibilities in some
districts by the national police.
We believe that the significant strides made thus
far in Timor-Leste now require that its people, in
partnership with the international community, must
focus on the economic development of the country.
Peace must be anchored in development. We therefore
support the measures taken by the Timorese Government
to further improve basic education and health and to
enhance rural development. The bilateral and
multilateral partners should align their support and
programmes with the Government’s development
strategies and priorities.
We continue to reiterate our view that the
international community must make a long-term
commitment to assist the Government of Timor-Leste
to achieve sustainable peace and prosperity. It is also
crucial that bilateral and multilateral partners continue
to assist the country to develop and strengthen its
institutions and further build capacities in various
sectors, in line with the country’s prosperities. For their
part, the leadership of Timor-Leste should continue to
seize the opportunity to work with all segments of
society in building national unity, reconciliation,
promotion of human rights, justice and peace.
I wish to conclude by paying tribute to
Mr. Atul Khare for his excellent service in UNMIT
and, above all, for his dedication to the people of
Timor-Leste. We wish to commend the invaluable work
of UNMIT under his leadership.
South Africa, working with other partners, is
ready to join the international community to assist the
people of Timor-Leste in their effort to consolidate the
progress made so far. We are convinced that TimorLeste can succeed only to the extent to which the

31

S/PV.6205

international community provides political support and
much-needed resources for development.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
Mr. Khare to make a further statement in response to
comments from the floor.
Mr. Khare: I would like to begin by
communicating my sincerest thanks to all the speakers
for the very strong support expressed for the
observations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, particularly that the present strength and
composition of UNMIT should be maintained while
awaiting the recommendations of the technical
assessment mission, which will be valuable in the
formulation of proposals for possible adjustments, to
be contained in the Secretary-General’s next report, in
February 2010.
Several speakers also reiterated the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation regarding the need for
stronger civilian oversight of the F-FDTL and the
PNTL and for differentiation of their roles and
responsibilities. I wish to assure the Security Council
that the authorities of Timor-Leste are cognizant of
those requirements and that UNMIT — and indeed, the
entire United Nations family — will continue to assist
them in implementing those two recommendations.

I was also grateful for the strong support for the
Secretary-General’s observation regarding the need to
strengthen the rule of law, promote greater
accountability and fight impunity. Again, I am pleased
to inform the Council that the authorities of TimorLeste are committed in that regard, and so is the United
Nations committed to supporting the efforts of TimorLeste to achieve a greater degree of accountability and
to strengthen the rule of law.
I was also delighted to note several indications of
continued bilateral and multilateral support for TimorLeste from all the Member States. I wish to assure the
Council that the United Nations will continue to work
with those bilateral and multilateral partners to ensure
that under the leadership of the Government and
authorities of Timor-Leste the people have the required
resources for success in socio-economic development,
security sector reform, strengthening the rule of law
and promoting democratic governance.
Finally, allow me to say how touched I have been
by the very kind words directed to my team and,
indeed, to myself.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

32

09-57362
