UNITEDiNATIOiVS

TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:’ 15 SEPTEMBER 1971

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1578) . . , . . . , . . . . . , . , . , . . , . , , , , . . . . .
Welcome to Mr. Ismael Byne Taylor-Kamar?, Permanent Representative of Sierra
Leone to the United Nations . . . . , , . , . . . . . . , . . . , . , ,: , . . . . , , . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda

. . . , . . . . , , . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . L~ . . , . . . .

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of Qatar for membership in the United Nations (S/10318) . . . . .

s/Pv.l578

1

I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SEVENTY-EIGHTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 15 September 1971, at 3 p.m.
Pieside&:

Mr. Toru NAKAGAWA

(Japan).

Present: The representatives of the follow~g States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 578)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Qatar for
membership in the United Nations (S/ 103 18).
Welcome to Mr. Ismael Byne Taylor-Kamara, Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone to the United Nations

1. The PRESIDENT:
Before we turn to our agenda for
today’s meeting, I wish to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone, Mr. Taylor-Kamara.
Adoption of the agenda
77le agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members

Report

of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Qatar for membership in the United Nations (S/103 18)

2. The PRESIDENT: A request has been made by the
Permanent Representative of the People’s Democratic
Republic of Yemen, in a letter dated 13 September 1971
[S/l 0316/, to be permitted Lo participate, without vote, in
the Council’s consideration of the item now before US. In
accordance with the practice established on previous
occasions and with the provisional rules of procedure, and
if there is no objection, I shall invite that representative to
participate in our discussion.

4. As we requested yesterday afternoon, the Committee
on the Admission of New Members has submitted a
report on this question, which is before this Council in
document S/10318.
5 I The representative of the People’s Democratic Repu!&
of Yemen has asked to be allowed to speak at this stage,
and I now call on him,
6. Mr. ISMAIL (People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen):
Mr. President, may I extend my deep gratitude to you and
to the Security Council for permitting me to addressthe
Council on a matter of deep concern to my Government?
7. I am speaking in order to clarify the position of my
Government regarding the request of Emir Ahmad bin Ali
Al Thani [S/10306/ and Sultan Isa bin Sulman Al-Khalifah
[S/10291/ for membership in the United Nations. Before
embarking on the subject matter, I should like to mention
just a few of the brotherly bonds that have bound together
the people of the Arabian Gulf and the people of the
People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen. Apart from
sharing a common history, language and culture, our
peoples are engaged in a common struggle against colonialism and neo-colonialism. Wehave been faced with the same
colonial Power, which executed a policy of continual
political fragmentation of our people, thus creating a
number of flimsy entities headed by puppet rulers.
8. Had it not been for the heroic struggle of the Yemeni
people under the vanguard leadership of the National
Liberation Front, British colonialism would have sponsored
numerous tiny sultanates for membership in this world
Organization. But the united front of the people of the
People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen, led by the
National Liberation. Front, was much stronger than the
artificial boundaries createdby British colonialism.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. M. Ismail
[People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen) took a Place at
the Security Council table.

9. In the Arabian Gulf, too, the people are struggling
againstBritish colonialism and its lackeys to attain full
independence. The Popular Front for the Liberation of the
Occupied Arabian Gulf, together with all the national
movements in Bahrain, Qatar, and other emirates and
sultanates, are valiantly fighting to unite the whole area
under a democratic national leadership. Only then will the
people of the area be able to enjoy the wealth of their
country; and only such a country, united, will be able to
play an active role in this world Organization.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
proceed with its examination of the application for
membership of the United Nations submitted by Qatar.

10. The spontaneous declaration of independence of
Bahrain and Qatar is a colonial trick meant to COdain the
ever growing victories of the National Liberation Move-

ment. While this colonial ploy completely failed in the
People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen, it is being tried
again in the Arabian Gulf.

20. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): The tieri
tween the British Government and the rulers andpeop
Qatar are of long standing, and it was therefore
particular pleasurethat my delegation voted in favol
the draft resolution which has just been unanimc
adopted by the Security Council.

11. My Government categorically rejects all the contracts
and agreements that are aimed at frustrating the real
independence of the people of the Arabian Gulf.

21. Qatar has long been one of the most imp01
commercial centres in the Persian Gulf, and, with
discovery of oil in 1940 and its commercial exploit;
after the end of the Second World War, Qatar rose ra’l
to become, in terms of income per capita, oneof the
prosperous Statesin the world. In recent years the
and his Government have energetically devoted 1
resourcesto the developmentof the State for the benel
its people. They have achieved spectacularand impre
results,notably in the fields of health and education ar;
asin the diversification of the State’seconomy.

12. Before looking into the request of Ernir Ahmad bin
Ali Al Thani for membership in the United Nations, my
delegation would like to set the record straight on the
following points.
13. First, my delegation maintains that the declarations of
independence of Qatar and the other sultanates and
emirates do not change the colonial relationship between
those entities and their colonial patron and are therefore
fikes. Disregarding the wishes of the people for real
independence and self-rule is not conducive to peace and
stability in the area.

22. In the field of external affairs, the British Govern
has, by virtue of various treaties and agreements,bee
many years responsiblefor the defenceof Qatar and fcl
conduct of its foreign relations. Qatar is, howevei
stranger to the international scene;it has, for exam
played an active part-through its distinguishedreprcl;
tive who is with us today-in the complex deliberatio
international organizations concernedwith oil agreen
Last month the Government of Qatar decided that the
had come to bring to an end its specialtreaty relations,
Britain, a decisionwith which my Government was fu
sympathy and indeed welcomed. Accordingly, all
agreementsflowing from our specialtreaty relations
terminated earlier this month by an exchangeof note:’
a new treaty of friendship between our two countrie
signedand will be duly registered with the United Na

14. Secondly, it is apparent that the declarations of
independence which have been concluded between the
Government of the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland
and the respective rulers are aimed at perpetuating the
colonial hegemony and exploiting the resources of the area
with the complicity of the puppet rulers.
15. Thirdly, the British-appointed Sultans and Emirs are
totally alien to the best interests of the people of the area
and they are not qualified to conclude agreements in the
name of the people.
16. My country would have heartily welcomed the membership of a democratically elected government of the
people of the area. Such a government would have well
represented the wishes of the people, but in these circumstances my Government finds itself totally opposed to the
membership of both the Sultan of Bahrain and the Emir of
Qatar.

23. I do not proposeto take up the points made b
representative of Southern Yemen. The vote we havl
taken is the best answerto the allegationshe hasmade
24. Qatar has thus resumed full international res]
bi.lity asa sovereignand independent State andhas af
sought to set the sealon its independenceby applyir
membershipof this Organization. My Government v
happy to seeQatar take its place in this world Organizi
and we are very gratified by the Security Council’s de1
today.

17. The PRESIDENT:
Unless I hear any objection, I
would propose to follow the customary practice and ask
the Council to proceed at this stage to vote on the draft
resolution which has been recommended by the Committee
on the Admission of New Members in paragraph 4 of its
report [S/I 03181.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

Finally, I should like to take this opportuni
25.
wish the Emir and the people of Qatar well in the j
and to assurethem of the continued goodwill c
Government and people.

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 1
18. The PRESIDENT: May I take it that the Council also
wishes to approve the recommendation
made by the
Committee on the Admission of New Members in paragraph 3 of its report, namely, to have recourse to the last
paragraph of rule GO of the provisional rules of procedure in
making this recommendation to the General Assembly? AS
I hear no objection, it is so decided.

26. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): First, 1
join you, Mr. President, in your welcome to the nej
distinguished representative of Sierra Leone and sa)’
pleasedwe are to have him on the Security Councii
Government looks forward to working with him
closely.
27. My delegationconcurred warmly and whole-hea’
in the recommendationof the Committee on the Adm
of New Members and is happy to support the Str
Qatar’s application for United Nations membership

19. A number of representativeswish to speak at this
stage,and I shallnow call on them.
1 Seeresolution297

(1971).

2

-

United States is looking forward to welcoming the delegation of Qatar to the twenty-sixth session of the General
Assembly and to working with it then and at subsequent
Assembly sessions.

drafting their constitutions countries acceding to independence will take inspiration from this noble example.
34. Moreover, we have followed the Qatar activities as an
associate member of several specialized agencies of the
United Nations, including UNESCO, WHO and FAO, and
various governmental organizations.

28. My Government welcomed the decision of the United
Kingdom and the State of Qatar to end a historic treaty

relationship so that Qatar might assume full responsibility
for its relations with the community of nations. Surely all
Members of the United Nations share our satisfaction with
the friendly and orderly way that decision was taken and
implemented. On 5 September my Government announced
its recognition of the State of Qatar. Qatar, which has a
population of over 100,000 in a land area of 6,000 square
miles, has for two decades made steady progress in
developing its substantial natural wealth to bring to its
people prosperity and accelerating economic and social
progress. Its annual income from petroleum alone exceeds
$150 million and provides the best basis for one of the
world’s highest gross national products on a per capita basis
and a substantial balance of payments surplus.

35. In the course of its history Qatar has contributed to
the glorious heritage reflected in the rich Islamic civilization
of the Near and Middle East.
36. We wish this new Member of the United Nations a
prosperous and peaceful future, and, as permanent representative of Belgium, may I express the hope that the
relations already existing between our two countries and
which have recently been further strengthened, will develop
in a harmonious manner to the benefit of our two nations,

manage the affairs of a progressing society. During this

37. I should not like to conclude my statement without
also extending my Government’s congratulations to the
Government of the United Kingdom, which, faithful to its
generous traditions, has contributed decisively to the
accession of Qatar to full international sovereignty.

evolution the Government and the people of Qatar have
rapidly and constructively expanded their contacts with
other peoples, including the United States, and the relationship between our two countries has been consistently
friendly and co-operative.

38. Finally, I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to extend a welcome to the new representative of
Sierra Leone in this Council and to say that we shall have
great pleasure in working with him.

29.

The leadership of Qatar has proven its ability to

39. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President,
first of all I should like to join you in welcoming the new
Ambassador of Sierra Leone and in expressing the hope
that we shall have the same fruitful co-operation with him
aswe had with his illustrious predecessor.

30. Thus my Government warmly welcomes Qatar’s application for United Nations membership. In announcing its
intention to become independent the State of Qatar has
reaffirmed its adherence to international commitments and
the principles of the United Nations Charter. I am
confident that this new Member will be a valued and
constructive participant in the activities of the United
Nations, and we therefore supported the resolution before
us today.

40. The emergence of a country from the status of
dependence to the position of self-realization and full
sovereignty is always a memorable and happy event. It
marks still another positive step in the struggle for the
freedom and independence of nations. It fills the people
with a new sense of pride as they become an integral part of
the community and continue their struggle to achieve full
sovereignty among nations. It vindicates the essential
principle of equal sovereignty to which I have alluded and
on which the fabric of the United Nations is based. It
augurs well for the emancipation of other countries from
the yoke of foreign occupation and it gives rise to the hope
that the human aspirations to freedom and equality will not
be in vain.

31. If I may close on a personal note, I should like to say
that I had the pleasure of visiting Qatar a few years ago, and
I look forward to working with its delegation to the United
Nations,
32. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation .f?om
J%~ch/: My delegation welcomed with the greatest satisfaction the unanimous adoption of the resolution by which
the Security Council recommends to the General Assembly
that the Emirate of Qatar should be admit:ed to mem.be-ship of the United Nations.

41, In the case of Qatar, its admission without delay was
recommended unanimously by the Committee on the
Admission of New Members in its report, and my delegation supported that recommendation. Qatar is a sister Arab
country whose staunch population and rulers have struggled
for the realization of their aspirations constantly until this
day of attainment of their sovereignty and equal rights
among their brothers and in the community of nations.
Like Bahrain, which attained its full status only a few
weeks ago, Qatar is small in size and population but rich in
the quality of its people and in its resources and equally
rich in the purity of its values, in its determination to go
ahead with the development of its natural resources for the

33. In examining the qualifications that the new State has
advanced in support of its candidature for membership of
the world Organization, we noted with particular interest
the commitment set forth in article 5 of its provisional
constitution whereby the Emirate of Qatar affirms that it
will abide by the principles of the United Nations Charter,
particularly those which relate to the self-determination of
peoples, international co-operation, the peaceful settlement
of disputes and the establishment of mutual relations on
the basis of justice and equality in accordance with the
principles of international law. I believe I speak for all the
members of the Council in expressing the hope that in
3

49. It is with those beliefs in mind that my delegation
welcomes the achievement of independence by the Gcvernment and people of Qatar and warmly congratulates them
on the unanimous adoption by this Council of the
resolution recommending to the General Assembly their
admission to membership of the world Organization.

benefit of its people and in its prospects for a valuable
contribution to the region and to the international community .
42. At a time when the Arab nation is facing a ruthless
imperialist onslaught aimed at the conquest of its territories, the despoiling of its resources, the division of its
unity and the expulsion of its people from their homeland,
it augurs well for the victory of the struggle that another
component of that nation ends the long years of foreign
tutelage and completes the prerequisite steps to playing its
full constructive role in the struggle for liberation and
reconstruction. Not only do we support the admission of
Qatar to the United Nations but we voice the hope and the
conviction that gradually and continuously its role will be a
significant one, its contributions valuable and its stand firm
on the principles of justice, peace and progress.

50. Those two historical events for the State of Qatar
indicate that the process towards the fulfilment of the
well-founded aspiration of peoples to shape their destiny in
accordance with their own free will-a process which has
characterized the last twenty-five years-has not lost me.
mentum; on the contrary, it produces significant results anti
will continue to do so until the last remnants of colonialjsm
in all its forms have disappeared.
51. The proclamation of Qatar’s independence broadcast
by its Head of State on 1 September 197 1 stressed the main
principles by which that country desires to inspire its
conduct, both in the domestic fieId and in its foreign
policy. Those principles give ample proof of the new
possibilities and new horizons which are now open to its
action. In this connexion, may I also recall the forward
steps which the Government of Qatar, even prior to its
achievement of independence, took in order to guarantee
its people consistent progress in all directions?

43. Finally, I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to thank sincerely the many delegations which in the
Committee on the Admission of New Members had the
courtesy to express the friendship of their countries with
the Arab peoples and their joy at seeing Qatar join the
independent Arab ranks.
44. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, first of all I wish to
thank you for the kind and generous comments you made
yesterday in speaking of my tenure of office during the
month of August, Whatever I was abIe to achieve I owe in
reality to the goodwill, understanding and full co-operation
of all members of the Council, to whom I feel deeply
indebted. Let me reciprocate by saying to you that my
whole delegation and I personally place the greatest
confidence in you and we are sure that this month will be
marked by greater achievements.

52. We are confident, therefore, that Qatar, notwithstanding the size of its territory and population, can and
will-also because of its natural resources, its geographical
position and its historical ties with ancient civilizationsplay a positive part in the family of nations and will make
its contribution to the efforts made by Members of this
Organization for the progress of mankind and the strengthening of international peace and security, particularly in the
Near East, a region to which Italy, for geographical, cultural
and economic reasons, feels very close and to whose
deveIopment and progress it has, to the extent of its
capacities, consistently contributed.

45. I should like also to associate myself with the
expressions of welcome addressed to the new representative
of Sierra Leone, We are looking forward to the same
confident co-operation we had with his esteemed predecessor.

53. For aII those reasons the Italian delegation voted in
favour of the resolution which has just been adopted and
will be most happy to co-operate with the delegation of
Qatar to achieve the goals enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

46. My delegation draws satisfaction and encouragement
from the fact that, only a few weeks after we recommended
the admission of Bahrain to the United Nations, we have
adopted another unanimous decision on the application of
a newly independent Arab country, Qatar. We consider it
an auspicious event that we do so on the eve of the opening
of the General Assembly session.

54. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Vinci for the
kind words he addressed to me.
55. Mr. LUDWICZAK (Poland): Mr. President, I wish to
congratulate you most warmly on your election as Presi.
dent of the Council for the month of September. I assure
you of my delegation’s full co-operation. I wish also to
congratulate the outgoing President, Ambassador Vinci of
Italy, on his guidance of the Council during the month of
August.

47. In the view of the Italian ddegation, the admission of
a new Member to our Organization clearly bears witnessto
its vitality. It shows the expectations wkich the high
principles and purposes enshrined in the Charter raise in all
peoples throughout the world, especially at this stage of
history *

56. My ,delegation associates itself with previous speakers
in welcoming the new Permanent Representative of Sierra
Leone. We are looking forward to friendly and close
cooperation with him and his delegation during the coming
months,

48. The Italian Government is convinced that the open,
uninterrupted dialogue between peopIes of different areas,
religions and cultures which can take place in this world
forum enables them better to understand each other, to
overcome their differences and to broaden the fields of
their cooperation, thus paving the way to a more peaceful,
just and prosperous worId.

57. The Council has just voted unanimously in favour of
the draft resolution recommending to the General Assem.
4

bly that Qatar be admitted to membership in the United
Nations. The Council based its decision on the unanimous
decision of the Committee on the Admission of New
Memberscontained in its report of 14 September 1971,in
which the Committee also recommended that the Security
Council have recourse to the last paragraph of rule 60 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

64. I should also like to convey similar wishes to the
delegations of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala and
Honduras, which today also celebrate this very important
and significant event in their history.
65. May I also associate myself with the delegations that
have spoken before me in welcoming to our midst the new
representative of Sierra Leone. We dre sure that Ambas.
sador Taylor-Kamara, like his distinguished predecessor,
will make a substantial contribution to the effective
progress of our work.

58. The delegation of Poland welcomed Qatar’s application, considered it with great interest and favour and acted
accordingly in the admissions Committee. On behalf of my
delegation, I wish sincerely to congratulate the Government
and the people of the State of Qatar on the achievement of
its independence and on today’s unanimous decision of the
Council recommending to the General Assembly that Qatar
be admitted to membership of our Organization.

66. A few weeks ago the Security Council approved the
admission of Bahrain to the United Nations. Now we have
just adopted the same decision with respect to Qatar. Two
new Arab States will thus shortly become full Members of
this Organization, bringing to it the centuries-old wisdom of
their peoples and the renovating impetus of those who have
recently attained independence.

59. We have taken note of the fact that Qatar has
terminated the special treaty relations-as well as all
agreements and arrangements arising therefrom-between
Qatar and the United Kingdom. We are convinced that
Qatar-the new independent, sovereign Arab State-is capable of accepting the obligations incumbent upon Members
of the United Nations and that it is capable of fulfilling
them with a view to the strengthening and the further
development of international relations; it can thus contribute to the attainment of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. Poland wishes Qatar, a country
which holds faith in the brotherhood of all Arabs, a
sovereign and independent development and progress in all
possible fields-political, economic and social.

67. The Argentine Republic is gratified by these developments. The ties linking my country with the Arab States
have always been close and friendly, and I am sure that the
same qualities will characterize our relations with the new
State of Qatar.
68. In his application for membership the Emir of Qatar
stated:
“My Government endorses the purposes and principles
stated in the United Nations Charter and declares that it
accepts the obligations incumbent upon Members of the
Organization and solemnly undertakes to fulfil them.”

60. My delegation looks forward to Qatar’s praticipation
in the work of the twenty-sixth session of the General
Assembly. It is convinced that Qatar will be an active
Member of the United Nations, that it will play its part in
the work of our Organization, that it will join the common
efforts of the Members of the United Nations in the
struggle for the full and complete liberation of all peoples
which are still under colonial rules and that it will join the
efforts of the United Nations in the search to strengthen
international peace and security, and in particular to
promote the Arab struggle to regain their occupied territories.

[S/l 0306J.

69. It is certainly not very often that a statement of that
type is confirmed, as in the present case, by express
provisions of the constitutions. That is why I think it
worthwhile to draw particular attention to the fact that the
provisional constitution now in force in the State of Qatar
contains an explicit provision in its article 5, paragraph fe)
“The State will abide by the principles of the United
Nations Charter, the purpose of which is to support the
right of peoples to selfdetermination, to promote international co-operation to the benefit of all mankind, to
defend peace and security throughout the world, and to
support all States in implementing the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the establishment of
relations based on justice and equality, in conformity
with the principles of international law .”

61. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Poland for the kind words he addressed to me.
62. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, as this is my first statement
since you have assumed the chair, may I convey to you my
sincere congratulations on this important event and assure
you at the same time of my wholehearted co-operation. I
should also like to pay a tribute of thanks to Ambassador
Vinci of Italy for his effective and very constructive service
as President during the month of August.

70. On that basis we can foresee the active and useful
participation of the delegation of Qatar in the various
organs of the United Nations. For all these reasons I am
most gratified to extend a cordial welcome to the State of
Qatar to the United Nations and to expressmy confidence
that the delegations of our two countries will establish
fruitful co-operation for the most satisfactory achievement
of the purposes of the Charter.

63. E should now like to make a few comments concerning
the Republic of Nicaragua, a sister country which today is
celebrating the 150th anniversary of its independence. On
this day of rejoicing I should like to convey our warmest
congratulations and good wishes to the Nicaraguan nation,
Government and people, with whom Argentina maintains
the closest and most fraternal ties of friendship.

71. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Ortiz de Rozas
for the kind words addressed to me.
5

72. Mr. C. M. CHANG (China): Mr. President, it gives us
great pleasure to seeyou presiding over the proceedings of
the Security Council during this month. We wish you every
success in the discharge of the responsibilities of the
Presidency.

wishes for a prompt recovery, exemplifies a most wise use
of the wealth of a country for the benefit of its whole
population. On a particularly arid, difficult territory, it has
set up in the last 10 years a modem infrastructure, has
undertaken the development of agriculture, and has acquired industrial equipment. One of the first in that part of
the world to do so, it has utilized its natural gas resources
to produce fertilizers. Thermal power plants, plants for the
desalinization of sea water, and a large cement factory bear ~
testimony to the will of Qatar’s leaders to turn towards the
future and not make the general standard of living
dependent solely upon revenues from oil extraction.

73. A few weeks ago the Council had occasion to approve
unanimously the application of Bahrain for membership of
the United Nations. Today the Council has voted unanimously for the admission of another Gulf State, the State
of Qatar, to membership. All this marks the passing of one
era and the beginning of another, the era of independent
development in the Gulf area. With the termination of the
special treaty relations with the United Kingdom, Qatar is
now a fully independent State. The Emir of Qatar has
expressed his country’s willingness to abide by the purposes
and principles of the Charter and to carry out all the
obIigations incumbent upon a Member State. My delegation
is confident that Qatar will be able to play a positive and
constructive role in the United Nations.

80. My delegation is happy about the relations that have
been established between Qatar and France and expresses
the hope that as they develop they will help the young
State to pursue its economic and social progress.
81. Qatar, a prosperous country, proud of its traditions
and of its past, already a full-fledged member of the Arab
and Islamic community, fully deserves to be admitted
among us. We are therefore happy to extend to it our most
sincere and friendly wishes.

74. On behalf of my delegation I take this opportunity to
extend to the Government and people of Qatar our best
wishes for a prosperousand happy future.

82. Mr, MALIK

75. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of China
for the kind words addressedto me.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated jkom Russian): Mr. President, may I be all.,wed

to congratulate you on your assumption of the office of
President of the Security Council. In this connexion, I
should like to express the hope that the friendly and
co-operative relations which we established on a personal ~
basis in Moscow, during your stay there as Ambassador of I
Japan to the Soviet Union, will be continued and strength- ~
ened in the United Nations.

76. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET (France) (interpretation
fiorn French): Mr.President, first of all I should like to
associate myself with the words of welcome addressed to
our new colleague the representative of Sierra Leone. A
friend succeedsa friend, and we are most happy at this.
77. I am also happy to be able in turn to express, on
behalf of the French Government, the satisfaction with
which we recommend to the General Assembly the admission of Qatar. My delegation wishes to avail itself of this
opportunity to addressto the Government and people of
Qatar and to their eminent representative, who well knows
the feelings of my country, our warmest congratulations,
We shall certainly not forget in this achievement and the
evolution which led to it the specific accomplishments of
the United Kingdom. We are convinced, as we proved by
our unreserved support for its candidacy, that the newly
independent State of Qatar is able and willing to discharge
the obligations conferred by the Charter upon Member
States and to take part in the efforts of the United Nations
in building a more united, peaceful, just and prosperous
world.

83. I should also like to congratulate Mr. Vinci, who
presided over the Security Council last month. Through his
experience of United Nations activities, he has made a
valuable and important contribution to the work of the
Security Council.
84. I also want to welcome our new colleague in the
Security Council, the represeT.tative of Sierra Leone, and to
express the hope that the friendship and co-operation
which was so happily established between our missions
under his predecessor will continue and be strengthened.
85. The Government of the Soviet Union supports the
proposal for the admission of the Arab State of Qatar to
the United Nations and has instructed its delegation to the
Security Council to vote in favour of the admission of this
State to membership of the United Nations.

78. Less than a month ago my delegation was welcoming
the unanimous vote by which the Council recommended to
the Assembly the admission of another coastal State of the
Gulf, Bahrain; we wereespecially happy to see the family
of Arab States, with which France is united through deep,
age-old ties, acquire an additional membe;, and to see the
United Nations approach its ideal, which must be to gather
together as fully as possible all members of the international community. Those feelings are even stronger and
more marked today, since each new admission brings us
closer to that desirableuniversality.

86. The proclamation of the independence of Qatar and
its entry into the United Nations represents yet another
step forward in the great historical process of the national
liberation of the Arab peoples from the colonial past.
87. The Soviet people welcomed with satisfaction the
news of the proclamation of the independence of Qatar,
and the news that Qatar had abrogated all colonial
agreements and conditions which subjugated it to a foreign
Power and that, as from 3 September 1971, the State of
Qatar had resumed “full international responsibility as a
sovereignand independent State” f ibid. J.

79. The State of Qatar, under the enlightened guidance of
Emir Ahmad bin Ali Al Thani, to whom I address my
6

88. The telegram sent to the Emir of Qatar by Mr. N. V.
Podgomy , Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the USSR, contains the following passage:

94. The Soviet delegation wishes the people of Qatar
success in consolidating their independence and in their
social and political advancement. We wish them successin
developing friendship and co-operation with all the progressive and freedom-loving forces in the world in the struggle
against imperialism and colonialism, which have brought
such immeasurable evils and sufferings to the people of
Qatar and to other Arab peoples.

“Your Highness, please accept our sincere congratulations on the occasion of the proclamation of the
Independence of Qatar and our good wishes for’ the
well-being of the people of Qatar and for their progress
along the road of independent development.

95. In advocating the admission to the United Nations of
the newly independent Arab State of Qatar, whose Government has accepted a solemn obligation to abide by the
purposes and principles of the United Nations and to
pursue a peace-loving policy in the interests of the whole
Arab nation, the Soviet delegation wishes to take this
opportunity to express its firm conviction that the day is
not far off when all the Arab peoples and those of their
territorles which are stiIl under colonial and imperialist
domination and are labouring under the yoke of foreign
military occupation will be completely liberated and when
the consequences of imperialist aggression in the Middle
East will be finally eliminated.

“The Soviet Union, which consistently basesits policy
on the recognition of the equal rights and self-determination of peoples and advocates the development of
friendship and practical co-operation between all countries, hereby declares that it recognizes Qatar as an
independent sovereign State and expressesits willingness
to establish diplomatic relations a.nd to exchange ambassadors with that State”.
89. This clear-cut attitude of the Soviet Union, consisting
of firm support of the right of peoples to self-determination, independence and complete liberation from colonial
domination or semicolonial dependence on imperialism, is
the corner-stone of Leninist foreign policy.

96. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
Soviet Union for the very kind words he addressed to me.

90. The Soviet Government has consistently offered and
continues to offer all possible assistance and support to
colonial countries and peoples in their struggle for independence, the strengthening of their sovereignty and the
development of their economies. This position of principle
adopted by the Soviet Union has often helped the peoples
of Arab and many other countries to withstand the pressure
which has been exerted and continues to be exerted on
them by imperialism and colonialism.

97. Mr. MAGENGE (Burundi) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, allow me to convey my best wishes
to Mr. Taylor-Kamara, the new permanent representative of
our brother country, Sierra Leone.
98. Your predecessor as President, Ambassador Vinci of
Italy, had the privilege of presiding over an unusually
peaceful meeting of the Security Council and we find that
the same privilege is being granted to you as well. Hence, at
the risk of breaking with the new traditions, I should like to
convey my delegation’s congratulations to you, not only as
President of the Security Council, but also as the President
of a meeting which has just welcomed the accession to
independence of a country which is a part of your own
continent. My delegation therefore shares the pride that
you must feel now.

91. This policy, which the Soviet Union has consistently
pursued during more than half a century of the existence of
the Soviet Socialist State, has created firm foundations for
the establishment, development and strengthening of
friendly relations between the Soviet Union and the Arab
States. This policy was recently reaffirmed at the XXIVtb
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
92. In the well-known Programme for Peace and Co-operation among Peoples confirmed at this Congress, special
attention was paid to the relations between the Soviet
Union and countries which have freed themselves from
colonialism and to the further struggle against colonialism
and neo-colonialism.

99. Qatar, like Bhutan and Bahrain, will increase and
strengthen the family of countries of the third world whose
aspirations to independence, peace and economic and social
progress are still ‘impeded by various obstacles including
colonial domination.

93. In the report to the Congress by Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, it was emphasized that the Soviet Union firmly supports this just
struggle of the peoples and that the political and economic
co-operation of the USSR with the liberated countries has
been further developed in recent years. One of the
important
provisions of the Programme for Peace and
Co-operatio,, ti;nong Peoples adopted by the Congressreads
as follows:

100. The Emirate of Qatar, a prosperous region, was only
waiting to pass this stage, this milestone of self-determination, in order to begin its course of progress in a restored
framework of freedom and independence under the enlightened guidance of its sovereigns, to whom I wish to pay a
tribute on behalf of the delegation of Burundi. I would ask
the delegation of this new country to convey that tribute to
its sovereign.
101. The delegation of the Republic of Burundi could not
let this occasion pass without mentioning the work of the
United Kingdom and we congratulate that Government for
its attitude; it is continuing to fulfn its commitments to
decolonize all of its possessions, thus preferring in place of
the old domination a new formula, that of co-operation of

“The decisions of the United Nations concerning the
abolition of the remaining colonial regimes must be fully
impIemented.
Manifestations of racism and apartheid
must be universally condemned and boycotted”.
7

independence. That Qatar should become a Member State
of the United Nations is a natural corollary to its political
development. This Organization has much to offer a newly
independent State particularly at the time in its develop.
ment when it needs to forge new links with the outside
world and benefit in its national development from the
fruits of international co-operation. The United Nations oa
its part also grows in stature and scope with each increase la
its membership particularly if those Members are not only
able and willing to discharge their obligations under the
Charter but in practice actually match their pledges with
due performance.

tbo Commonwe~th, whoseeconomic and other advantages
the British authorities are the first to appreciate.
102. Moreover, it seemssurprising to say the least, to any
observer, no matter how inattentive he may be, to note
how stubbornly certain Powerswhich Still dominate areas
of the third world, and in particular parts of Africa-I am
refer-ring to Portugal and South Africa-still refuse to
understand that the right to decolonization is the most
appropriate solution to meet the need to ensure mankind’s
progress in dignity.
103. May the encouragingexample set today inspire and
strengthen those who are trying to run counter to the
current of history and who, by their narrow views, impede
progress and solidarity among peoples. The key to peace,
security and material and moral well-being is to be found in
the mutual respect and esteem which govern relations
between countries ashasjust been recognized by the British
and the people of Qatar to whom my delegation is pleased
to reiterate its warm congratulations on their new relations.

111. Representing a country which has had a long aad
harmonious relationship with the people of the Gulf States,
the Somalia delegation has no doubt whatsoever that the
State of Qatar will prove an exemplary Member State and
will make a valuable contribution to the realization of the
common objectives which have been set by the United
Nations.
112. Mr. President, I should like to take this opportunity
to extend to you my delegation’s wishes for the successful
conduct of the Council’s heavy and important programme
of work which remains to be done during this month. In
this programme the problems of Africa will feature prominently. In the discharge of our collective responsibilities to
those problems, it is fortunate that we will be able to
benefit from the valuable experience of one of Sierra
Leone’s outstanding sons, Ambassador Ismael Byne TaylorKamara. Like you, Mr. President, my delegation extends to
him a warm welcome and looks forward to co-operating
with him in the search for a solution to these problems.

104. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Burundi for the kind wordsaddressedto me.
105. Mr. ROMAN (Nicaragua) (interpretation
from
Spanish): Mr. President, Nicaragua would like to join with
you in conveying a warm welcome to the representative of
Sierra Leone.
106. The delegation of Nicaraguawishes to set forth in a
few brief words the deep feeling of satisfaction we derive
from the resolution unanimously adopted today by this
Council, recommending to the General AssembIy that the
State of Qatar should be admitted as one more Member
which will do honour to this, the most eminent Intemational Organization.

113. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Farah for the
kind words he addressedto me.
114. Mr. TAYLOR-KAMARA
(Sierra Leone): Mr.Presi.
dent, I thank you, on my own behalf and that of my
delegation, for the warm words of welcome and the sincere
expressions of friendship and co-operation which you and
other members of the Council who have spoken on this
subject have showered on me. It is, indeed, an attestation of
the esteem and friendship you have for my country, Sierra
Leone, and for my predecessor and friend, Ambassador
Davidson Nicol, who was last week called to other
important duties by my Government. To all of you he
sends his best wishes and profound appreciation of the
atmosphere of friendship and mutual respect that prevailed
in this body during his tenure of office. We have no doubt
that this atmosphere will continue during the remaining
term of our membership in the Council.

107. On behalf of Nicaragua we should like to extend our
very cordial congratulations to Qatar. We offer them our
Government’s friendship and the sympathetic understanding of our people and expressour best wishes for the
prosperity of their noble people.
108. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
our warm appreciation to the representative of Argentina,
our very esteemed colleague and friend Ambassador Ortiz
de Rotas, who on this occasion mentioned the 150th
anniversary of the independence of Nicaragua, which also
marks the independence of our brother countries of Central
America. I assurehim of our unswervingfriendship and our
effective co-operation in the Security Council and in the
United Nations.
109. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): The Somali delegation wishes
to congratulate the people of Qatar on the achievement of
independence and to extend to them its sincere wishes for
their Well-being, progressand good fortune.

115. Like my predecessor, I shall work together with the
other members of the Council for the promotion of
international peace and security and, conversely, to bring tc
an end the forces that tend to impair progress towards a
more stable world order.

110. It is indeed a privilege that my delegation should
have been able to participate in the deliberations that have
taken place in this chamber on the application of the State
of Qatar to join the United Nations. We recognize the right
of all Peoples to self-determination and to sovereign

116. Having only this morning presented my Letters of
Credence to our much esteemed Secretary-General, whom
we are glad to see among us, I consider it an auspicious
occasion for me to address the Council this afternoon on s
matter in which my country has always manifested e
8

deep-seated interest, namely the admission of a new
Member State to the United Nations.

peace-loving State, abIe and willing to carry out the
obligations incumbent upon Member States under the
Charter. We are also confident that that nation, which is on
the threshold of dynamic development in the Gulf region,
will participate as fully as possible in the collective efforts
of the United Nations to create a more peaceful, secureand
prosperous world and that it will make significant contributions towards that end.

117. My Government welcomes unreservedly the application of the sovereign State of Qatar for admission to this
Organization and by our vote we have indicated our strong
approval of and welcome to the new State.
118. We note with deep satisfaction the declaration on the
part of the Emir, Ahmad Al Thani, that his Government
accepts the obligations incumbent upon Members of the
Organization and that it endorses the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. We have no doubt that
Qatar will live up to its promise as well as to our
expectations.

124. Japan has recently announced its formal recognition
of the State of Qatar. Our warm and cordial friendly
relations with Qatar have been maintained and nurtured
through diplomatic channels or visits of economic missions.
I am pleased to note in this connexion that members of a
Japanese economic mission which visited Doha early this
year were deeply impressed by the rich potentiality for the
future economic development of the State, aswell asby the
warm hospitality, characteristic of Arab society, which was
accorded to them,

119, The accord which has prevailed between the United
Kingdom and the Emirate and led to the independence of
the latter has its basis in the British senseof justice and the
Arabian strong awarenessof history. With its great wealth,
Qatar has far fewer of the problems that face many newly
emerging States. This in itself is a great blessing. We are
confident that it can put this asset to good use.

125. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
pay a tribute to the special envoy of the State of Qatar,
Mr. Hassan Kamel, who has been dispatched here by His
Highness Sheik Ahmed on this felicitous occasion and is
with us today.

120. My delegation is very happy to join in recommending
the admission of Qatar to the United Nations and we look
forward to the warmth and wisdom of its representatives
when they take their place among us.

126. The Government and people of Japan look forward
to increasingly close and friendly relations with the
Government and people of the State of Qatar, within and
outside the United Nations.

121. The PRESIDENT: As the list of speakers has been
exhausted, I now wish to speak as the representative of
JAPAN.

127. Speaking as PRESIDENT,
I would say that in
accordance with, the second paragraph of rule 60 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, I
shall immediately request the Secretary-General to transmit
to the General Assembly the text of the resolution just
adopted, together with the verbatim record of this meeting.
At the same time, I shall draw attention to the Council’s
decision to make this recommendation subsequent to the
expiration of the time limit set forth in the fourth
paragraph of rule 60.

122. On this auspicious occasion, I wish to express, on
behalf of my delegation, our genuine feelings of warm
congratulations to the Government and people of the State
of Qatar on the unanimous adoption of the resolution
recommending to the General Assembly that Qatar be
admitted to membership of the United Nations.
123. It is gratifying that we were ready to support the
application of the State of Qatar for membership of the
United Nations, because we are confident that it is a

The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

9

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

COMO

SE PROCURER

CONSEGUIR

Las publicaciones
en tcdar
porter
Ventas,
Nueva

in United

Nations,

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

Ler
publicoticnr
der
diporitairer
du monde
Notions
Unies,
Section

Litho

NATIONS

New York

Nations
Unier
rant
entier.
Informez-vow
der venter,
New York

PUBLICACIONES
de

be obtained
or write

10s Naciones

Price:

$U.S.

DES NATIONS

estdn

en vento

a su librero

o dirijase

0.50 (or equivalent

throughout
New York

UNIES

en vente
dons
les libroiries
oupr&
de votre libroirie
ou
ou Gen&ve.

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidos

del mundo.
Consulte
York o Ginebra.

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

et

les

ogences

q dressez-vou.s

6:

UNIDAS
en librerios

in other

o: Nocioner

currencies)

y casas
Unidos,

distribuidoras
Secci6n

de

820654uly

197%2,050
