A /70/PV.46

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

46th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 4 November 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 118
Follow-up to the commemoration of the
two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition
of the transatlantic slave trade
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/70/136
and A/70/221)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.5)
The President: Today’s debate is an excellent
opportunity to reflect on history, lessons learned and
progress made since the abolition of slavery and the
slave trade. Without any doubt, slavery remains one of
the darkest chapters in our past, and in this seventieth
anniversary year of the United Nations it is timely that
we recommit ourselves to raising public awareness
about its legacy of unprecedented horror.
As we meet today we should continue to honour
the enslaved Africans and their descendants and
recognize their respective contributions to our world
and societies. The latest report of the Secretary-General
(see A/70/221) highlights the educational outreach and
public-awareness efforts undertaken to commemorate
and honour the victims of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade. In this regard, I commend the Department
of Public Information for selecting the topic “Women
and slavery” as the theme for 2015. As one historian
tells us, to be a slave and female was a triple-edged
sword — a slave woman was black in a white society, a

slave in a free society, and a woman in a society ruled
by men.
Despite the hardships, enslaved African women
were largely responsible for preserving and passing on
the culture and traditions that form such an integral
part of the African diaspora of the Americas and the
Caribbean that we know today. This year’s theme
therefore is timely and relevant, and we should pay
tribute to those women who contributed immensely to
the abolition of slavery and the creation of our societies.
I should like to commend the sustained commitment
and actions of Member States to ensure that this
issue remains a priority of the General Assembly. In
particular I wish to recognize the dedication of the
States members of the Caribbean Community and the
Group of African States for their efforts over the years.
Let me also take the opportunity to congratulate
the Permanent Memorial Committee for its tireless
efforts, which resulted in the construction and
unveiling earlier this year of the permanent memorial
to honour the victims of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade. We are thankful also to those Member
States, organizations and individuals who contributed
to the creation of the memorial and eagerly anticipate
the conclusion of the final steps in the project. I
look forward also to the collaboration between the
Secretariat and States members of the Assembly aimed
at promoting the annual observation of the International
Day of Remembrance for the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade as reflected in the reports of
the Secretary-General.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-34949 (E)

*1534949*

A/70/PV.46

While significant progress has been achieved since
the abolition of slavery and the slave trade, the struggles
of millions of descendants of enslaved Africans did not
end with the close of that dark chapter. The challenge
facing us all today is to take concerted action to fight
all forms of discrimination, including institutional
racism and gender discrimination, and to eradicate
contemporary forms and manifestations of slavery,
including sexual slavery, of which women and girls are
the primary victims. Many of these matters are at the
core of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), whose implementation must be
a priority for all Governments and for all of us. It is
crucial also that we maintain our political commitment
to the principles of the United Nations Charter, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and all other
international human rights standards relevant also to
this case.
I now give the floor to the representative of Jamaica
to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.5.
Ms. Richards (Jamaica): I am honoured to introduce
draft resolution A/70/L.5 for the consideration of the
Assembly. The Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
and African member States collaborated with a wide
range of partners to arrive at a text that truly reflects
the consensus which similar resolutions have enjoyed
over past years. The draft, as is customary, enjoys the
full support of the membership, as demonstrated in its
sponsorship by the vast majority of Member States.
I thank the Secretary-General for the two reports
submitted under this agenda item, the first being on
the status of the Trust Fund and the second on the
educational outreach activities on slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade.
Since the General Assembly’s last consideration
of this agenda item, we have achieved a lot. Most
significantly, the permanent memorial was completed
and unveiled on 25 March 2015. The Ark of Return
now occupies a prominent place here at United
Nations Headquarters, in keeping with the decision of
successive resolutions. Visitors to the United Nations
are not only struck by its captivating presence but also
drawn to its symbolism and interactive nature. I use this
opportunity to reiterate the gratitude of the members
of the Permanent Memorial Committee, which Jamaica
has had the honour to chair, for the steadfast support of
the membership towards the completion of the project.
The financial contributions made are reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report and every dollar has been
2/17

04/11/2015

prudently managed by the United Nations Office for
Partnerships.
The outpouring of financial support in the final
weeks of the fundraising campaign, reinvigorated in
earnest at a pledging luncheon last December, ensured
that all the funds required were raised. I am proud to
say that the memorial has been completed on time and
on budget. This has been due in no small measure to
the support received and also to the collaboration with
the Department of Management, the capital master
plan and the architect and designer, Mr. Rodney Leon,
whose professionalism and dedication was exemplary.
I encourage everyone to pay a visit to the memorial
and to spend what will prove to be a worthwhile few
moments of reflection to acknowledge the tragedy
and to consider the legacy. The Ark of Return is not a
memorial just for people of African descent; it is the
United Nations memorial; it belongs to us all.
The Ark of Return has been erected, yet our work
does not cease. As demonstrated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the educational outreach activities
(A/70/221), there remains broad scope for actions
to teach present and future generations about what
slavery truly was, how it was sustained, how it was
opposed, how it was defeated, and, very importantly,
what lingering legacies remain for us to address. The
work being undertaken by the Department of Public
Information, both at Headquarters and globally,
is of utmost importance so that the message of the
memorial can be disseminated widely. Within each
of our countries and regions there is work to be done
to address systemic and ingrained legacies that often
result in discrimination and other disparate challenges
faced by the descendants of African slaves.
We face injustice where we seek justice; we
encounter suppression where we seek empowerment;
we suffer marginalization where we seek recognition.
There are social, economic and psychological scars
that need to be healed in order for us to properly move
forward. And while some of that healing must of
necessity come from within, it is undeniable that much
more must come from outside.
It is quite disappointing that so few Member States
contributed information on the activities they are
undertaking to ensure that the lessons of slavery are
taught within their jurisdictions. I encourage Member
States to implement programmes and activities,
including with the support of the United Nations system,

15-34949

04/11/2015

in particular UNESCO, which has excellent resources,
such as its Slave Route project and the General History
of Africa project.
Implementing such programmes and activities
serves to bolster our collective efforts to build a world
of justice and equality, where slavery is eliminated and
its tragic effects are reversed. Let us take the message
of the memorial as our guide. We should acknowledge
the tragedy. Let us teach the facts and the impacts. We
should consider the legacy. Let us address systemic
imbalances, redress wrongs and defeat modern-day
slavery. We should never forget.
Mr. Kataria (India): I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his reports under the agenda item.
I should also like to pay a rich tribute to Ambassador
Courtenay Rattray, Permanent Representative of
Jamaica, for his tireless efforts in making the permanent
memorial Ark of Return a reality.
The evil of slavery was deeply rooted in economic
greed, racism and different forms of discrimination
during the period of colonization and imperialism.
Millions lost their lives, during the unprecedented
middle passage. African civilization was torn apart,
and it left an indelible mark on society for many
generations. In this context, I must recall that Prime
Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, speaking at the AsianAfrican Conference at Bandung in 1955, in referring
to transatlantic slavery, declared that there was nothing
more terrible, nothing more horrible, than the infinite
tragedy of Africa in the past few hundred years.
The historic unveiling of the permanent memorial
Ark of Return at the United Nations in March this year
was a small but significant gesture of remembrance
to the victims of slavery who perished in dark
oblivion. It symbolizes long-overdue condemnation
by the international community, which will remind
generations to come of the four-century-long grief
and tragedy borne by the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade.
India remembers its own tragedy of colonialism
and the export of indentured labour, which was
initiated to replace freed slaves on sugar plantations
in British colonies in the 1830s. We welcome the
UNESCO International Indentured Labour Route
project as a complement to the Slave Route project.
India’s contribution of $260,000 to the memorial
Trust Fund reflects its sharing the pain and suffering
of the affected countries and their people. We are

A/70/PV.46

happy to co-sponsor draft resolution A/70/L.5, entitled
“Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”,
introduced by the Caribbean Community, which we
have been co-sponsoring since 2007.
The Slave Route project of UNESCO has
contributed immensely to raising awareness of the
history and consequences of the transatlantic slave
trade and slavery. The recognition of 2015-2024 as the
International Decade for People of African Descent
provides us the opportunity to showcase and recognize
the important contribution made by people of African
descent to modern societies.
The international community must utilize the
opportunity in the implementation of Agenda 2030 to
redouble its efforts and allocate more resources for the
promotion and preservation of the dignity and worth
of all human beings, especially vulnerable women and
girls, and the fight for the complete abolition of slavery
in all its contemporary manifestations and forms as
envisioned in the Durban Declaration.
Mr. Amihai Bivas (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. We also thank the delegation
of Jamaica for its leadership on this issue, and we
recognize the many other Caribbean and African States
that have lent momentum to the drive to formally honour
the victims of slavery and the transatlantic trade.
Earlier this year, on a cold, grey March day, the
efforts of many Member States, organizations and
individuals came to fruition. With the unveiling of
the permanent memorial to the victims of slavery,
the Ark of Return, visitors and diplomats will now be
starkly reminded of the unnamed millions who endured
unspeakable suffering, and those who perished. With
the completion of the memorial, one chapter of our
work has come to a close. And while we have good
reason to be satisfied with this accomplishment — long
overdue — we must now turn to the work ahead.
As draft resolution A/70/L.5 stresses, the
responsibility for educating about the causes,
consequences and lessons of slavery falls to us, as
Member States and as individuals. In this regard, we
support the efforts of the United Nations, including the
activities of the Department of Public Information, to
teach these lessons across cultures and generations,
and we encourage all Member States to do the same.
In adopting the draft resolution, Member States
will recognize the indomitable spirit of the millions

15-349493/17

A/70/PV.46

of slavery’s victims, and in their honour, pledge to
continue to teach the lessons of the past.
One of the most important holidays on the Jewish
calendar is the observance of Passover. The holiday
recalls the 400 years of bitter slavery of the Jewish
people and celebrates the joy of freedom gained after
generations in bondage. A key part of that holiday,
also known as the Feast of Freedom, is the relating of
this epic story to the next generation. In fact, the act of
carefully teaching it is so important that the Passover
observance has changed little for hundreds of years.
I mention this because a crucial purpose of
teaching and honouring the past is to inform how we
act today and how we influence future generations. Our
knowledge and understanding of past injustice should
compel us to act whenever it echoes in the present. We
must therefore recognize that the long arm of slavery
continues to touch the modern world. Slavery’s legacy
lives on in discrimination and inequality, racism
and prejudice. The most fitting tribute we can pay to
slavery’s victims is by addressing these issues and by
committing ourselves to fighting modern-day slavery
in all its forms. Wherever a child is forced into hard
labour, wherever a person is sold into prostitution, we
must put into action the responsibility that comes with
memory.
In conclusion, Israel is proud to have played its part
in honouring the memory of the victims of slavery by
contributing to the Permanent Memorial Fund and by
co-sponsoring the present draft resolution, as we have
done each year. We are grateful for this opportunity.
Mr. Kaganda (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting to consider agenda item 118, entitled
“Follow-up to the commemoration of the two-hundredth
anniversary of the abolition of the transatlantic slave
trade”. We thank and commend the Permanent Mission
of Jamaica to the United Nations and members of the
Caribbean Community for the facilitation of draft
resolution A/70/L.5, to be adopted under this agenda
item, which Tanzania and other members of the Group
of African States have naturally co-sponsored.
We wish to extend a word of appreciation to our
illustrious Secretary-General for overseeing the
implementation of the resolutions adopted by this body
under this item, as illustrated in his recent reports
before us.

4/17

04/11/2015

Slavery and the slave trade across the Atlantic, on
the shores of the Indian Ocean and elsewhere, were
a global tragedy whose legacy must be shared with
present and future generations with a view to preventing
its recurrence in any shape or form. That is why my
delegation welcomes the eighth annual observance of
the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims
of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade under the
theme “Women and slavery”, which coincided with the
unveiling of the permanent memorial the Ark of Return,
in honour of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade.
We are delighted that the Ark has found a permanent
and prominent berth at the United Nations Headquarters.
We hope and believe that the memorial will help
visitors, the general public, students, delegates, United
Nations staff, and other stakeholders to appreciate the
tragedy and consider the legacy of slavery in general
and the transatlantic slave trade in particular. Whereas
the memorial sufficiently presents a sombre portrayal
of the tragedy, it would benefit a great deal from the
application of audio guide technology providing a
recorded spoken commentary to visitors.
The permanent memorial initiative is a great
success. As such, we would like to thank and commend
the Permanent Memorial Committee for its tireless
efforts to ensure its successful completion. We also
thank the Department of Public Information, the
Office of the President of the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session, and partners such as UNESCO for
ensuring the successful observance of the International
Day. We acknowledge the significance of the United
Nations Trust Fund for Partnerships — Permanent
Memorial, and thank all Member States, organizations
and individuals that have generously contributed to it.
Modern forms of slavery persist in many parts
of the world despite its abolition and classification
as a crime against humanity. According to the
International Labour Organization, around 21 million
men, women and children globally live in some form
of slavery, generating a profit of around $150 billion
a year to unscrupulous operators and criminal gangs.
Devastatingly, some of the victims of this vice are
descendants of persons who experienced the horrors
of the transatlantic slave trade, and hence are reliving
a fraction of the dark history of the past. In that
vein, resolution 61/19 could not be more accurate in
recognizing that the slave trade and slavery are at the
heart of situations of profound social and economic

15-34949

04/11/2015

inequality, hatred, bigotry, racism and prejudice, which
affects people of African descent today. Against this
background, we would like to underscore the following.
First, we recognize the importance of educating
and informing current and future generations about the
tragedy, lessons, history and consequences of slavery
and the slave trade, which, as was once described in
this Hall, represents one of the low points in the history
of humanity.
Secondly, we recognize the importance of
upholding human rights, especially pertaining to the
equality and dignity of all humankind, without any
distinction. We note that the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights adopted by this body in 1948 declares
that no one shall be held in slavery or servitude and that
slavery and the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their
forms. We must enforce these rights, including through
the enactment of appropriate national legislation. We
must also put into effect the relevant provisions of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, which
is as relevant today as it was almost a decade and a half
ago.
Thirdly and finally, we recognize the importance of
eradicating poverty in all its forms and manifestations,
and of addressing the chronic inequality that persists
among and within countries and communities. We
know too well that poverty, protracted inequality,
socioeconomic and political exclusion, as well
as conflicts, expose the vulnerable members of
society — especially women, girls and boys — to a
myriad of misfortunes, including modern-day slavery,
sexual violence and abuse. It is very opportune,
therefore, to address these challenges, including
in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) and the African Union
Agenda 2063, which we have recently adopted. We
need to forge greater partnerships to address the root
causes of these problems. Failure is not an option.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
pay a glowing tribute to the many enslaved women
who endured untold suffering and abuse from their
tormentors, who advocated the abolition of slavery and
the slave trade, and who succeeded in transmitting the
rich and vibrant African culture to their descendants.
Their incredible fortitude and steadfastness, which
Ms. Sylviane Diouf eloquently described in her keynote
address in March (see A/69/PV.83) and which actresses
such as Lupita Nyong’o, Aunjanue Ellis and Oprah
Winfrey magnificently depicted in their films Twelve

A/70/PV.46

Years a Slave, The Book of Negroes and Beloved, will
never be forgotten. We all have a duty to prevent the
horrors of yesteryear, and work towards building a
prosperous future for all humankind, a future free from
slavery in all its forms and manifestations. It can be
done. We must play our part.
Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
The Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
recognize that slavery and the transatlantic slave trade
were atrocious tragedies of human history, not only
because of their abhorrent barbarism but because of
their magnitude, their organized character and, in
particular, their denial of the essence of the victims.
The Declaration also recognizes that slavery and the
slave trade, in particular the transatlantic slave trade,
constitute and should always have constituted a crime
against humanity.
In the framework of this commemoration, Colombia
celebrates the imminent adoption of draft resolution
A/70/L.5, on the permanent memorial recalling the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, and
is pleased to join the group of sponsors, as we have
traditionally done on this subject. We also celebrate the
placement of the Ark of Return on the grounds of the
United Nations as a permanent memorial to the victims
and a recognition of their tragedy, the legacy of their
lives and, in many cases, their heroic resistance.
The communities of people of African descent now
living in all regions of the world have trod a long road
to claim their rights and have raised their voices in our
societies, generating awareness of human rights and
contributing invaluably to our cultures and identities
as peoples and nations. In America, Colombia was
particularly enriched by the cultural contributions and
labour of the black people whom the transatlantic slave
trade brought to our lands. Cities such as Cartagena,
Popayán and Santafé de Antioquia received this bitter
legacy. The millions of men and women brought from
Africa are embodied in our most important cultural
manifestations — our language, our cuisine, science
and art. We also recall the contributions to freedom
made by the descendants of Bantus, Anzicos, Minas,
Viásfaras and Congos to American countries, in
particular Colombia, with the struggles waged by their
autonomous communities of runaway slaves, including
their own patriot armies.
For these reasons, there is a long cultural and
life-affirming bridge between our countries and African
countries that makes it unthinkable to discriminate

15-349495/17

A/70/PV.46

against them on the basis of their former enslavement.
The presence of cultures of African origin enriched
our nationality and gave it a multicultural character
of rich human content. Colombia is a multi-ethnic
country, and our African origin is claimed as one of our
greatest assets. In this context, Colombia reiterates the
importance of resolution 69/16, which proclaimed the
“International Decade for People of African Descent:
recognition, justice and development”. We believe
that this proclamation constitutes a great opportunity
for Governments, civil society and the international
community to pool their efforts in the common purpose
to adopt effective public policies aimed at making a
difference over the next 10 years.
The International Decade for People of African
Descent 2015-2024, proclaimed by the General
Assembly and welcomed by the countries of Latin
America and the world, opens a window for redressing
the human catastrophe of the transatlantic slave trade,
based on the fact that it is not possible in any part of
the world to build a nation from the starting point of
the exclusion, invisibility and denial of the other, in
particular when that other gave his and her life to the
material and symbolic wealth of our countries and
societies. The Decade seeks recognition on the part
of the international community that people of African
descent represent a specific group whose human rights
must be promoted and protected. The communities of
people of African descent have the right to equality,
non-discrimination, education, ethno-education and
participation and inclusion in society.
In Colombia, the Decade was launched on 21 May
through a national campaign entitled “La hora contra el
racismo”. A few months later, a national development
plan enshrined in law the commitment of the Colombian
State to the Decade through measures such as a 10-year
plan for the Afro-Colombian population, a special
statute for the Raizals — the black communities of
San Andrés, one of our island communities in the
Caribbean — and compensation for the property
tax imposed on the collective territories of the black
communities.
Recognition of multicultural and plural ethnicity
by my country’s political Constitution launched
a fruitful way for Colombia to be recognized as a
country of immense cultural wealth based on the
differences and autonomy of its various population
groups. These principles have allowed the country to
deepen its understanding of its own history and that

6/17

04/11/2015

of its populations. The socialization of that history is
one of the most important strategies for the eradication
of racial discrimination, insofar as it allows us to
highlight the role of each of these communities in the
development of the country and the nation.
Today, as we join in the commemoration of the
200th year since the abolition of the transatlantic
slave trade, we recall the victims and the immense
and invaluable contribution they made to each of our
nations. Once again, we join voices to ensure that this
shameful episode in the history of humankind is never
repeated.
Ms. Butts (United States of America): I am
honoured to represent the United States today on this
important occasion to recognize the commemoration
of the 200th anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade.
Two hundred and seven years ago, on 1 January
1808 in New York City, a young Peter Williams Junior,
a self-described descendant of Africa who would
become a leading pastor and noted abolitionist, chose to
recognize the effective date of the legislation abolishing
the transatlantic slave trade in a speech entitled “An
Oration on the Abolition of the Slave Trade”. He exalted
in the moment:
“Rejoice, Oh, ye descendants of Africans!
No longer shall the United States of America, nor
the extensive colonies of Great Britain, admit the
degrading commerce of the human species: no
longer shall they swell the tide of African misery
by the importation of slaves. Rejoice, my brethren,
that the channels are obstructed through which
slavery, and its direful concomitants, have been
entailed on the African race.”
Today we, too, rejoice in the United Nations
recognition of the bitter history of the transatlantic
slave trade through the permanent memorial the Ark
of Return unveiled this past March. The United States
is pleased to join more than 90 Member States that
have made contributions in support of the permanent
memorial — designed by an American architect of
Haitian descent, Rodney Leon — that now stands on
United Nations Headquarters grounds as a public
tribute to all of slavery’s victims. The United States
contribution supports this crucial project in partnership
with so many others who came together to fight injustice
with the particular leadership of Member States, the

15-34949

04/11/2015

Mission of Jamaica, the Caribbean Community and the
African Union.
As a multicultural society, the United States
strongly believes in spreading awareness of the struggle
of all who fell victim to slavery. While we take pride
in the tremendous progress we have made in our great
nation, led by such historic women leaders as Harriet
Tubman, Sojourner Truth, Fannie Lou Hamer and Ella
Baker, we also recognize that the scars of the past still
linger. As such, we are dedicated to educating future
generations of this tragic past as a means of combating
racism and prejudice.
The United States continues to press forward on
eliminating discrimination within our country as well
as joining the global community in creating a world of
freedom and equality for all. In that vein, the United
States is proud to be a sponsor of this draft resolution
and to support the ongoing efforts of the United Nations
to fight racial injustice and intolerance. Also, we are
proud of the fact that more than 120 United States mayors
have joined the International Coalition of Cities against
Racism, an initiative launched by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. The
United States network has been the fastest-growing
part of the global coalition. Every day United Nations
representatives and Government officials, along with
tour groups, visitors and schoolchildren, will experience
the Ark of Return.
The memorial stands as a reminder not only of the
horrific injustices of the past but also of our shared
responsibility to fully realize the aspirations outlined in
the United Nations Charter. We must continue to study
the history and legacy of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade. We must never forget the terrible human
tragedy and the moral courage of those who work to
end it.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): Every year, on
25 March, we pay tribute to the victims of slavery. The
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of
Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade is also a sober
reminder that many modern forms of slavery and longestablished stereotypes and biases continue to prevail,
all calling for strong, concerted multilateral action.
Slavery did not end with its abolition in the
nineteenth century. It continues to prevail in numerous
ways, in some form or another, in almost every country
in the world. This illegal practice takes the form of
women caught in prostitution, children and adults

A/70/PV.46

forced to work in agriculture, domestic work, factories
and sweatshops. Unfortunately, the illegal practice of
slavery still blights the contemporary world. According
to the International Labour Organization, around
21 million men, women and children throughout the
world are in a form of slavery. Contemporary slavery
takes various forms and affects people of all ages,
gender and races, restricting their freedom.
What we learned from past tragic experiences in
our part of the world is best summarized in the words of
President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, while
inaugurating in 2002 the monument dedicated to the
victims of political repression. He said “We remember
not to sprinkle ashes on our heads, but to prevent such
tragedies in the present and in the future”. We should
remember historical tragedies each day of our lives
in every thought, word and deed, and not merely at
commemorative observances.
My country, in its national legislation, condemns
and forbids genocide, racial segregation and all forms of
racial discrimination, propaganda and agitation for racial,
national and religious superiority. Kazakhstan supports
the creation of inclusive multiracial and multi-ethnic
organizations and movements. The country, where about
130 ethnic groups and 20 religious denominations live
peacefully, has a unique constitutional organ to ensure
inter-ethnic harmony — the Assembly of the People of
Kazakhstan — the public entity that has nine seats in
the Parliament. In Astana, we organize regularly the
triennial Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions as a platform for dialogue among spiritual
leaders to promote mutual respect and understanding
worldwide, thus contributing to peace and security.
My country considers the transatlantic slave
trade to be one of the most tragic pages of human
history — one that still has lasting consequences,
severely damaging human rights and international
law. The erosion of international law demands from
us all a reaffirmation of its cornerstone principles and
our commitment to preserve them to overcome the
challenges ahead. At the general debate of this session,
the President of Kazakhstan proposed convening in
2016 a United Nations international conference at the
highest level, designed to reaffirm the basic principles
of international law (see A/70/PV.13).
Kazakhstan has co-sponsored draft resolution
A/70/L.5, entitled “Permanent memorial to and
remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade” to reconfirm my country’s

15-349497/17

A/70/PV.46

robust commitment to combating racial and ethnic
discrimination and to upholding human dignity,
freedom and justice for all — the primary prerequisites
for peace and security.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba attaches special importance to the commemoration
of the bicentenary of the abolition of the transatlantic
slave trade. Cuba is proud to sponsor draft resolution
A/70/L.5, before us today.
We reaffirm the special declaration of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
(CELAC) in favour of erecting a permanent memorial
in honour of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade. We also support the CELAC Latin American
and Caribbean People of African Descent Action Plan,
adopted in the context of its third Summit in January
2015, held in Costa Rica. Cuba welcomes both the
proclamation of the International Decade for People of
African Descent and the approval of the programme of
activities for the Decade, and reiterates its commitment
to continuing to participate actively and support efforts
for its effective implementation.
In Cuba, as in other countries in Latin America
and the Caribbean, we can feel the consequences of
the transatlantic slave trade. That cruel trade brought
approximately 1,300,000 Africans to our island. These
men, women and children from Africa were torn from
their villages and families and sold as slaves on the
other side of the Atlantic. The identity of the Cuban
nation emerged from the mixing of the cultures of
various ethnic groups in difficult colonial and, later,
neocolonial circumstances.
In 1959, we launched a stage of true integration
and recognized the value of all components of Cuban
culture. We are essentially a mixture of Hispanics and
Africans; we also have influences from Asia and the
American indigenous peoples. The Cuban people are
very proud of their African origins, which are embodied
in our idiosyncrasies and cultural characteristics. Cuban
culture and nationality are enriched by the legacy of the
Africans. Freed slaves and their descendants were the
main actors in the various stages of the war that enabled
the Cuban people to exercise its self-determination.
Furthermore, Cuba has contributed its own blood to
the emancipation of Africa, a continent to which all
humankind will forever be in debt.
As stated by the historic leader of the Cuban
revolution, Fidel Castro Ruz, in his statement at

8/17

04/11/2015

the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,
held in Durban in 2001:
“The inhuman exploitation imposed on the
peoples of three continents, including Asia, marked
forever the destiny and lives of over 4.5 billion
people living in the Third World today whose
poverty, unemployment, illiteracy and health rates
as well as their infant mortality, life expectancy and
other calamities — too many, in fact, to enumerate
here — are certainly awesome and harrowing.
They are the current victims of that atrocity,
which lasted centuries, and those who clearly
deserve compensation for the horrendous crimes
perpetrated against their ancestors and peoples.”
The developed countries and their consumer
societies, responsible for the accelerated and almost
unstoppable destruction of the environment, have
been the main beneficiaries of conquest, colonization,
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, and the
terrible exploitation and extermination of hundreds
of people of the South. Cuba supports the just request
for compensation put forward by the countries of the
Caribbean Community. Cuba also advocates the special
and differentiated treatment requested by the developing
countries, in particular in Africa, in their economic and
international relations. Cuba rejects selfishness and the
shameful wealth of a few that serve as the blueprint for
the ongoing globalization.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin), Vice-President, took the Chair.
To conclude, we reaffirm the importance of
strengthening the activities of the United Nations and
other international organizations, such as UNESCO,
with regard to this issue. It is the minimum that the
international community can do to repair the crime
against humanity committed through slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade of Africans.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): I am truly honoured to
represent Sierra Leone at this moment as we celebrate
the 200th anniversary of the abolition of the slave
trade. We are truly grateful for the leadership provided
by Jamaica, and we commend Ambassador Rattray for
his leadership of a memorial committee that led to the
creation and the establishment of the Ark of Return
designed by a Haitian American architect, Rodney
Leon, and supervised by Sierra Leonean engineer
Melbourne Garber.

15-34949

04/11/2015

A/70/PV.46

As we commemorate the lives lost, let us celebrate
the resilience of the descendants. As we commemorate
the lives lost, let us also educate those who need to
know the lessons of the slave trade. Certain names ring
true when we talk about the transatlantic slave trade,
but all of us might not be familiar with them. Names
such as Elmina, Cape Coast, Gorée Island and Bunce
Island are all locations where the commercialization of
the slave trade occurred on the West African coast.

to do our part to make sure that the world we wish to
live in truly comes about.

All delegations support the total abolition of the
slave trade, but let us understand that while the tide of
slavery has receded, it has not completely gone away. We
must remain vigilant. We must remain attentive to make
sure that a world without prejudice, without bigotry,
without discrimination and without slavery truly comes
about. We note the terms, the clauses and the promise
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We also
take note of the aspirations of this noble Organization,
but the future is not guaranteed and it is for all of us
as diplomats, as those who are influence-makers and
opinion formers, to make sure we remain vigilant on
the question of slavery in all its forms to ensure that
the world we wish to live in, and the world we wish to
bequeath to generations yet unborn, is truly free, fair
and as we wish it to be.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

In a village in Cuba I had the privilege of meeting
descendants of slavery who still sing the songs of a
West African village in Freetown, Sierra Leone. A film
crew managed to record these songs in Cuba and also
to go to West Africa to try to find the origins of these
songs. When he played the songs in Sierra Leone in
this particular village, these songs were immediately
recognized by the old people who said: “Those are our
songs. Those are the songs our grandmothers used to
sing to us. We recognize these songs.” The result of
this discovery was that members of the Cuban village
went to Sierra Leone and met those in the Sierra
Leonean village and even though they were separated
by language, the one phrase that both of them could
manage to understand among themselves was simply
the phrase “they are we”. In other words these are our
people, our cousins, our sisters, our descendants.
Slavery has united many in misery, but the promise
of the future is for us to realize that the resilience of
the descendants can make a future for the world we
wish to live in. As we celebrate and commemorate,
let us rededicate ourselves to what we need to do. We
welcome the leadership of Jamaica, but it is for all of us

The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda item 118.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.5, entitled “Permanent memorial
to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”.

Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/70/L.5, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra,
Argentina, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
the Czech Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Georgia,
Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Maldives, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Paraguay, Peru, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Sweden,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uruguay, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly adopted a similar draft resolution
at the previous session without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.5 without a vote?
Draft resolution A/70/L.5 was adopted (resolution
70/7).
The Acting President (spoke in French): I shall
now give the floor to the speaker who wishes to speak
in explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
I give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.
Mr. Whiteley (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Slavery and the slave trade are a crime against
humanity and should always have been so, especially
the transatlantic slave trade, and are among the
major sources and manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.

15-349499/17

A/70/PV.46

Building on that notion, acknowledged at the World
Conference against Racism in 2001, in 2007 the General
Assembly agreed to establish a permanent memorial on
the grounds of the United Nations to honour the victims
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade. Working
together in unity, on the one hand to honour the victims
of slavery but also to acknowledge and remember such
manifestations of racial discrimination, it was with
great contentment that in March we witnessed the
unveiling of the memorial the Ark of Return.

04/11/2015

often has been ceded to or taken up by other bodies.
Therefore, we recall the fundamental importance of
promoting the efficiency, transparency and inclusivity
of our work as basic pillars to improve and perfect
the working methods of the Assembly and each of its
committees.

We warmly acknowledge the work of the Committee
of interested States, pay tribute to the efforts of Jamaica,
the Caribbean Community and African Union States
and others, and the generous voluntary contributions
from Member States, complemented by funding from
foundations and private individuals.

In that regard, the work done and efforts made
are worthy of recognition. The process headed by
Ambassador Vladimir Drobnjak and Wilfried Emvula
have to be highlighted; they led to the adoption of
resolution 69/321, which is innovative in many respects,
in particular with regard to the process of the selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General. We are
grateful to the entire membership for the flexibility and
constructive spirit demonstrated during the process,
which must continue during this session.

The memorial reminds us, and will continue to
remind those after us, of the tragic legacy of the slave
trade and the need to continue the fight against racism and
prejudice. We believe that the project is just beginning.
The memorial helps us to remember the past and what
racism and prejudice brings. We must work together in
raising awareness of, educating and informing current
and future generations about the causes, consequences
and lessons of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
No effort should be spared, and the European Union
will always be in the forefront of efforts to combat all
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance.

One question that we think is important to reflect
on for the future is the need to strengthen the Office
of the President of the General Assembly. We must
guarantee that the exception is not the rule. Both
from a personnel perspective and from the budgetary
point of view, the Office of the President has to have
the necessary resources to function appropriately and
predictably. It is clear that the resources currently
allocated from the regular budget are insufficient and
have not been substantially increased since 1998, when
they were established. On the other hand, the trust
fund established in 2010 is not the most efficient or
transparent way to finance the Office.

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 118.

It is essential to establish mechanisms that
guarantee total accountability with regard to the
resources available for the trust fund, as well as the
origin and way in which they are used. We must reflect
collectively with regard to the best way to guarantee
that the Office of the President adjusts to the highest
standards of transparency. In previous years we have
discussed these issues in the framework of the debates
on the revitalization of the General Assembly. We
cannot continue delaying a solution to these problems.
The time for action is now.

Agenda items 119 and 120 (continued)
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, we would like to thank the President of
the General Assembly for convening the Assembly to
exchange ideas with regard to the implementation of the
resolutions of the United Nations and the revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly.
The General Assembly is the most representative
and democratic organ of the Organization. Our
delegation is convinced that we must work seriously to
recover the leading role that, for different reasons, very

10/17

Another point I wish to make is the need to respect
the equilibrium in geographic representation as well
as gender equality for the posts of the Organization.
That leads us to underscore the appeal to invite women
candidates for the highest post, which is to be filled
next year. After eight Secretaries-General and seven
decades when the administration of the Organization
was headed by men, and with everything that the United
Nations is doing for the empowerment of women, the
15-34949

04/11/2015

time has come to continue to make history and ensure
that a woman heads up that important post.
Another aspect of concern is the timeliness and the
updating of the reports we receive. Argentina reiterates
the need to implement the provisions of resolution
46/190, which establishes that documents must be
submitted by the Secretariat six weeks in advance, and
in the six official languages of the United Nations.
Finally, in relation to the implementation
resolutions, we ask the membership to make the
political commitment to carry them out as a legal
obligation. That is one of the most serious problems
faced by the General Assembly, and one reason that it
has lost in its leadership. But the deep analysis, hours of
debate and the commitments and negotiations will all
be for naught if States Members ignore the resolutions
that are adopted and we do not comply and keep our
word in the most inclusive and democratic organ at our
disposal. We thus cannot complaint that other organs
are encroaching on our functions and leaving us out of
the discussions.
Ms. Argüello González (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): We are grateful for the convening of this
important meeting. First and foremost, our delegation
wishes to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Wilfried
Emvula, Permanent Representative of Namibia, and
His Excellency Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent
Representative of Croatia, on their reappointments
as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
We wish them every success in the performance of their
functions.
Our delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/70/PV.45).
Our delegation reiterates its firm commitment to
the process of the revitalization and democratization
of the General Assembly. We want to continue to
work constructively so that this organ can act in all its
dimensions as the most representative and legitimate
organ of the Organization.
As established on different occasions, Nicaragua
believes the democratization of the United Nations
to be an overriding concern. To achieve that goal, we
must continue to take measures so that the authority
of the General Assembly is restored in order for
it to act as the most democratic, deliberative and
normative organ of the Organization. We therefore

A/70/PV.46

highlight the importance of the full implementation of
resolution 69/321, adopted by the General Assembly on
11 September 2015 and entitled “Revitalization of the
work of the General Assembly”. We recall the flexible
approach and consensual adoption of the resolution. We
also agreed to continue the review of the four clusters,
among which is the nomination and appointment of the
Secretary-General during this seventieth session of the
General Assembly.
The resolution marks a milestone in the following:
through a letter from the President of the General
Assembly and the President of the Security Council,
the resolution invites applications for the post of
Secretary-General and requests that the names of the
candidates be circulated to the membership in general,
that meetings with the Member States be held and that
there be women candidates.
The Working Group is at an auspicious crossroads in
terms of revitalizing the General Assembly. Nicaragua
reaffirms its vision to make the United Nations and
the General Assembly the principal global forum for
debate. The Assembly must be a genuine bridge of
communication with global governance stakeholders.
As such, it is necessary for it to be a transparent and
inclusive forum, where each country, however small,
can feel that its voice is heard.
We already have at our disposal the necessary tools
by way of the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and the resolutions of the General Assembly.
The division of labour is clearly defined among the
different organs. We must respect and ensure that the
Security Council does not take up subjects that are
within the competence of the General Assembly.
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations is
a crucial time, which is vital because of its importance
to international law, global security and peace. We
hope that this historic time will be taken full advantage
of to create awareness of the role and activities of the
General Assembly.
In no way can we minimize the achievements and
importance of the General Assembly. The decrease in
its role and functioning could cause doubts as to its
relevance and credibility. The voice and the vote of
all States Members of the Organization for the good
of all our peoples must be increasingly strengthened.
Nicaragua is committed to every initiative that allows
us to recreate, reinvent and reshape the United Nations.
We are in favour of reshaping the United Nations so

15-3494911/17

A/70/PV.46

that the interests of everyone prevail and we can speak
and hear under equal conditions as Member States.
We conclude with the inspiring words of our
President, Commander Ortega Saavedra. May the
United Nations lead us to play our role of ensuring
dialogue, respect, understanding, security with
sovereignty, peace and a future without interference or
dependency, but working on a footing of equality, that
is, with all, for all, for the good of all. May that be so.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica associates itself with the statement
(see A/70/PV.45) made by the representative of Estonia
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group (ACT), with whom we co-chair the
ACT working group on transparency.
My delegation is grateful for the convening of this
joint debate on agenda items 119 and 120, as well as
for the appointment of the Ambassadors of Croatia and
Namibia as co-facilitators for this session of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly. We recognize their excellent work
at the previous session, which we are convinced will
facilitate significant progress at the present session.
Allow me, in my national capacity, to make the
following points with regard to the process of the
selection and the appointment of the person who will
occupy the post of Secretary-General as of 2017.
First I should like to highlight that it is with a
feeling of urgency that we have to follow up resolution
69/321 and all the relevant resolutions on the process
of the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral. Although adopted, those resolutions have not
been implemented fully or have to be modified because,
until just a few months ago, there was no clear, defined
process for such appointment.
As with all processes, implementation is decisive.
Resolution 69/321 includes clear and forceful language
as to how the membership considers that the process
should be carried out for the selection of the next person
who will become Secretary-General. Costa Rica hopes
that the next Secretary-General will be a woman.
In that connection, Costa Rica calls upon the
Presidents of the Security Council and of the General
Assembly to remit a joint note to the membership as
soon as possible officially inviting the submission of
nominations, as established clearly in the resolution.
That letter should also invite Member States to put

12/17

04/11/2015

forward women for the post of Secretary-General;
thereby an open, transparent and inclusive process will
be launched.
Once the process is formally begun, we will have
an opportunity to know on a regular basis the names
of the candidates and their curricula vitae, as well as
the possibility of interacting with them in informal
meetings of the General Assembly or in formats that
include meetings with regional groups — or even under
an Arria-Formula format. We want to, and should, know
their visions and platforms for action. This upcoming
appointment will be decisive for the Organization.
Furthermore, Costa Rica supports the idea that
the Security Council must recommend more than one
candidate to the General Assembly. We are happy to
know that a permanent member of the Security Council
has expressed its support for that option.
Since nobody questions the legitimacy and the
mandate of the President in any of our countries that are
democratically elected, we should not fear that a process
of this nature will in any way affect their mandate. A
vote serves to confer greater legitimacy on the selection.
Even when we consider the many achievements of past
sessions, with the onset of the next session Costa Rica
will continue to promote changing the mandate to a
single, non-renewable term of seven years, which will
thus guarantee the independence of the post.
It is necessary that the next person who becomes
Secretary-General perform with moral authority,
integrity and courage, so that the United Nations can
do its work in a more effective way. We need a strong
and impartial leader, one who will not be involved in
campaigns or making undue promises to assure his
reappointment. On the contrary, the next SecretaryGeneral must focus on current concerns that demand
our maximum attention and clear action. All members
represented in the General Assembly, not just the 15
members of the Security Council, must be involved in
the process of selection. The General Assembly must
play a more active and vigorous role, as should be the
case in any democratic system.
Not only do we wish to have a voice in the process,
we want to participate in it. Costa Rica aspires to an
open, transparent election based on merit, with a
feeling of predictability, and which is taking place in a
structured and timely fashion.
With regard to the strengthening of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly, we are convinced
15-34949

04/11/2015

that we must make a very serious analysis of how we
can ensure transparency and improve the effectiveness
of its management. We think the Office should have a
minimum number of resources from the regular budget
that corresponds to the mandate we have given to it as
the General Assembly and which will allow it to act
without any level of financial dependency with regard
to a specific country or donor.
The fact that the Office has not received an
increase in its budget for 20 years shows the little
strategic thinking we have devoted to its functions,
competencies and necessary resources to do its work.
We must therefore carry out a debate on the scope
of its powers and the level of activities that Member
States expect from the Office, with a view to finding
a way of strengthening the institution. In that respect,
the discussion on the biennial budget is an opportunity
that we cannot miss, as it will allow us to take concrete
action to correct past deficiencies.
We think that the time for major change in the
United Nations has come. We must start without delay.
We have all the necessary tools at our disposal. Let us
use them. The time is now.
Mrs. Zarrouk Boumiza (Tunisia) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Namibia for
their great efforts as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly during the seventieth session. We welcome
them both and congratulate them on their re-election
as co-Chairs.
We align ourselves with the statement (see
A/70/PV.45) made by the representative of Algeria on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
I would like to make the following comments in my
national capacity.
The Working Group will continue its work
throughout this session on the four topics it was already
considering. Our great interest and priority continues
to be on the selection and appointment of the next
Secretary-General, which will take place in 2016.
With regard to strengthening of the role of the
General Assembly and its delegations, we believe that
to be among the main priorities in the overall reform of
the United Nations, given the Assembly’s role as a key
deliberating body and one that defines overall policies.
It is the most representative organ of the United Nations.
It also has a key role to play in the establishment of the

A/70/PV.46

norms and codification of international law, as well as in
questions related to the budget and the administration.
At the same time, we must strengthen the role of this
body and its authority and move forward to revitalize
its work. In the same context, we must pursue the
implementation of the relevant resolutions, including
on the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral, as that is essential for progress to be made in
this area.
My delegation believes that strengthening the
role and authority of the General Assembly requires
pursuing and including in its agenda urgent issues
that are relevant to the international community. It is
necessary for this body to be able to address current
challenges, including making progress on implementing
our obligations under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) and strengthening our
efforts to combat terrorism.
We believe the holding of thematic debates to be an
important interactive tool that enables us to exchange
points of view on topics of common interest that are of
current relevance. We hope that such discussions will
continue under the presidency of the seventieth session
of the General Assembly.
On another point, we reaffirm the importance of
improving the content of the annual Security Council
reports submitted to the General Assembly so that they
are more thorough and more analytical and reflect the
contexts in which resolutions were adopted and the
issues that remain unresolved.
We would also like to underscore the importance
of holding regular meetings among the heads of
the various entities within the United Nations and
regularly informing Member States of the results. That
is a matter of increasing coordination and cooperation
among the essential bodies. We favour expanding such
coordination so that it encompasses all the agendas of
those bodies, in order to strengthen integration and
mainstreaming.
With regard to the work of the General Assembly,
my delegation notes that we have already taken many
measures to improve the methods of work of the Main
Committees of the General Assembly. However, we need
to go into the substance of the discussions of certain
recommendations that are related to this as follows: to
attempt to summarize and be brief in resolutions and
reports and other United Nations documents and to
focus on the practical aspects and avoid redundancy; to

15-3494913/17

A/70/PV.46

exchange best practices among the various committees
while maintaining the specificity of each committee
and the distribution of responsibilities among them;
to avoid the dates of meetings of various committees
interfering with one another; and that discussions are
well planned.
As to the nomination of the Secretary-General
that will take place next year, my country takes a
favourable view of the consensus reached during the
sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly to send a
joint letter of the General Assembly and the Security
Council to invite delegations to present the names of
their candidates, to make the whole process clearer
and to regularly circulate the names and curricula
vitae of the candidates. We hope that there will be
close collaboration with the President of the General
Assembly and the President of the Security Council to
officially begin that process as soon as possible.
We underscore the importance of the full
implementation of the Assembly’s resolutions, including
resolution 69/321, on the role of the General Assembly,
which should be transparent, exhaustive and guarantee
the participation of all Member States in the various
stages. We are certain that there are a number of very
qualified candidates to take up the post of SecretaryGeneral. And it is important to include names of women
on the list of candidates, especially since no woman has
been appointed to the post since the establishment of
the Organization, 70 years ago.
With regard to the strengthening the Office of the
President of the General Assembly, we believe that it is
necessary to provide all the necessary human resources
and financial support to the President so that he can
carry out his mandate effectively and so that taking up
the presidency does not pose an additional burden for
countries with limited resources. We also underscore
the importance of strengthening the institutional
memory of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly and to transmit the lessons learned and best
practices from one President to another. That could
guarantee effectiveness in managing the presidency.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our support
for resolution 69/321, which was adopted in September
and which re-establishes the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
We hope that its agenda will be very precise.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation would like to congratulate

14/17

04/11/2015

Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak and Mr. Wilfried Emvula, the
Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Namibia,
respectively, on their reappointment as co-Chairs of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly during its seventieth
session. We commend their enormous, constructive and
tireless efforts during the negotiations. We assure them
of our full cooperation.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
(see A/70/PV.45) made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The process of revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly is part of the major efforts to reform
the United Nations and constitutes a driving force, as
it has done from the beginning. Facing new types of
problems and challenges, the roles of the United Nations
have increased and diversified, requiring new ways of
working and also new sources of financing.
During the general debate in September, world
leaders mainly focused on the reform of the United
Nations so that the Organization can be capable of
effectively carrying out its mandate while reflecting
the geopolitical realities of today’s world, strengthening
international peace and security, combating the
phenomenon of terrorism, strengthening the means
of prevention and combating the recurrence of crises
and conflicts, and preventing the deterioration of our
environment and our biodiversity. The achievement of
those goals will certainly enable us to make the main
deliberative body a strong, credible and effective body
that is capable of addressing the new challenges of the
twenty-first century and of contributing to building a
better world, one that is peaceful, more prosperous and
more just.
Resolution 69/321, adopted by the General
Assembly on 11 September, is a major step forward
due to the spirit of compromise and flexibility that
delegations demonstrated throughout the negotiations.
It is certainly possible to make tangible progress in the
process of the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly — specifically as far as its methods of work
are concerned — and that requires of the Chairs and
members of the bureaux of the Main Committees
to take better account in their consultations with
Member States so that they can improve the work of
the Committees. We call on the Secretary-General and
on Chairs of the Main Committees to better coordinate
their work in order to optimize the interactive nature
of their relationship. We recall the decision to proceed
15-34949

04/11/2015

to the election of the non-permanent members of the
Security Council and the members of the Economic
and Social Council six months before they assume their
functions, including during the seventieth session.
Beyond working methods, we would also like
to recall that the subject that has gained the most
interest this year is mainly the process of the selection
of the Secretary-General, which introduced major
innovations in the selection procedures. My delegation
also welcomes and strongly supports the measure
of the relevant resolution to send a joint letter of the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security
Council addressed to all Member States inviting
candidates for the post of Secretary-General and
regularly communicating the names of the candidates,
who will interact with the members of the General
Assembly. In that regard, my delegation encourages
candidates to officially present their candidacies in a
timely manner so that exchanges with Member States
will not be hurried. My delegation also supports the
principle of geographic distribution, which should be
more balanced, as well as that of gender equality, which
should absolutely be taken into account. Finally, my
delegation believes that a democratic, transparent and
inclusive process, if it is seen through to fruition, will
mark a decisive turning point in the selection of the
next Secretary-General. My delegation is prepared to
work alongside other delegations in order to participate
constructively in the process.
On another point, it is important to note that the
role and activities of the President of the General
Assembly have evolved throughout the years and that
the Assembly is increasingly considering issues related
to global challenges. It is therefore essential to give
the Office of the President the proper personnel and
necessary resources, specifically financial resources,
so that he is able effectively and efficiently to carry out
the functions of his mandate in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, thereby preserving the
institutional memory of this Office.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that, in
spite of the significant progress that has been achieved,
the process of revitalization is still far from complete.
It requires the commitment of all Member States
and an unfailing political will in order to focus on
multilateralism and its noble objectives, which we all
support.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation associates itself with the statement (see

A/70/PV.46

A/70/PV.45) made by the representative of Algeria on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We, too, thank the President for convening this
meeting to discuss the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly and the implementation of United
Nations resolutions.
The delegation of the Sudan welcomes the
reappointment of the Permanent Representative of
Croatia and the Permanent Representative of Namibia
to co-chair the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
We thank them for their efforts in that regard. We would
also like to welcome the adoption of resolution 69/321,
entitled “Revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly”, especially as it relates to the nomination
and appointment of the Secretary-General and the role
of the General Assembly in that connection. We also
appreciate the President’s contribution to that process.
We emphasize that it should be based on the principles
set out in the Charter of the United Nations and carried
out with full transparency and with the participation of
all Member States. We also reiterate the need to abide by
all of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
especially those related to the rules and regulations
for nominating and appointing the Secretary-General,
including resolution 69/321.
Nominating and appointing the next SecretaryGeneral is a source of concern for many Member
States. In that regard, my delegation reiterates the need
to respect the General Assembly’s rules of procedure,
including rule 141, which relates to the nomination and
appointment of the Secretary-General. We also note
that the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly should discuss
this issue, so as to guarantee broader participation by
all Member States.
As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of
the United Nations, many geopolitical, security and
humanitarian changes have occurred and we are
witnessing new threats to international peace and
security. That requires a comprehensive review of the
Organization. Therefore, my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General’s initiative in appointing Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, former President of Timor-Leste, to
undertake a comprehensive review of peacekeeping
operations, as well as the report (see A/70/95) issued
by the Panel in June. My delegation will take part
in that process. We call for the implementation of
all the recommendations in all the relevant United

15-3494915/17

A/70/PV.46

Nations bodies, such as the Fourth Committee, the
Fifth Committees and the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.
It is the duty of all Member States, which are
members of the General Assembly of course, to
safeguard and reinforce the Assembly’s mandate and
authority, as well as the practical authority that it has
developed throughout the seven decades following the
establishment of the United Nations, in 1945, especially
with regard to its role in peacekeeping operations. We
warn against encroaching upon the General Assembly’s
work and mandate, which could negatively reflect on
developing countries.
Mr. Bodini (San Marino): I would like to
congratulate the Permanent Representatives of Croatia
and Namibia on their appointments to co-chair the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly.
San Marino believes in a strong United Nations
and in its universal values. The General Assembly
is at the centre of the authority and decision-making
process of the United Nations system. Over the years,
many resolutions on the revitalization of the General
Assembly have been adopted and have improved the
work of this very important body. I should like to
mention briefly a few items on which we could focus
our attention.
We could give to the President of the General
Assembly more authority in his role and increase the
human and financial resources of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly to make sure that
he can effectively accomplish his tasks. We might
also improve coordination of the work of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Second Committee in order to fulfil the mandate of the
Sustainable Development Goals and to monitor their
implementation.
We should continue to hold high-level thematic
debates. However, the General Assembly should
organize fewer events than in the past — not only to
secure greater participation by our leaders but also to
allow a small country like ours to be more involved in
such endeavours.
We can improve the working methods of the
General Assembly and of the various committees by
streamlining their workload with biennial or triennial
draft resolutions and coordinating the many events in
a manner that will allow the greater participation of
16/17

04/11/2015

all our Missions. We might try to engage one another
during meetings like this with greater interaction
and fewer formal speeches. Doing so might create a
friendlier environment and a more expeditious path for
our deliberations.
While the General Assembly should not be a
substitute for the Security Council in the selection of
candidates for the post of Secretary-General, we should
pursue the implementation of resolution 69/321, in
particular by conducting informal meetings with the
candidates.
We should continue with the good practice of the
Secretary-General in providing informal briefings on
his travel activities and his priorities. Under the able
leadership of the President, we can advance the reform
of the Security Council. Hopefully, that reform will be
embraced by the vast majority of the membership or
by consensus. With the goal of improving the financial
health of the United Nations, we should prepare
accurate United Nations budgets and monitor carefully
actual expenses.
In conclusion, like many other small countries with
limited resources and small missions, San Marino seeks
a more efficient, more effective and more user-friendly
General Assembly.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I have the honour
to deliver a brief joint statement on behalf of the
Permanent Representative of Namibia, Ambassador
Wilfried Emvula, and myself.
At the outset, allow me to thank the President of
the General Assembly for reappointing us as co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly. We feel deeply
honoured to continue facilitating such a vital, important
and far-reaching process. We thank Member States for
all the kind words of praise and support.
Evidently, there is widespread recognition that
resolution 69/321 represents a success for us all — for
the United Nations and Member States alike — and it
serves as the best proof of how much can be achieved
through constructive, reform-oriented and consensusbased work. It is a result of the willingness of Member
States to engage in a thorough, substantive debate
on numerous crucial issues on the subject of General
Assembly revitalization and, in particular, those related
to the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral. Clearly, during the sixty-ninth session certain
issues were successfully addressed and provided with
15-34949

04/11/2015

appropriate, effective solutions. On the other hand,
some issues are still to be addressed properly during
this session and beyond.
As requested by the President of the General
Assembly, during the seventieth session co-Chairs
will focus in particular on the issue of transparency,
efficiency and accountability in the work of the Office
of the President of the General Assembly. At the same
time, we should pay due and full attention to all other
clusters on the General Assembly revitalization agenda,
bearing in mind the latest report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group (A/69/1007), which is an important point of
departure for some aspects of our future discussion,
and remains our point of reference.
We have taken very careful note of yesterday’s and
today’s debate, and we shall take everything that has
been said as guidelines for our upcoming work. We
remain, as always, at the disposal of Member States for
consultation, exchanges of views and the exploration of
new ideas in the months to come.
The co-Chairs note an interest by Member States
to exchange views on the subject of the Office of the

A/70/PV.46

President of the General Assembly, its transparency
and financing aspects, and especially in hearing the
views of the President of the General Assembly on
that particular matter. Therefore, the co-Chairs are
considering organizing some informal discussions in
that regard in the course of this year. It is an important
matter, and early informal exchanges of views will
benefit the co-Chairs immensely in charting the best
way forward.
Let me conclude by saying that we look forward
to another fruitful year of deliberations in the Ad
Hoc Working Group. We express once again our
full appreciation for being entrusted with such an
important task at this session of the General Assembly.
We also look forward to members’ positive and active
engagement.
The Acting President (spoke in French):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 119 and 120.
The meeting rose at noon.

15-3494917/17
