S/2020/576

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 June 2020
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the sixty-seventh submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017),
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018), and
paragraph 8 of resolution 2504 (2020), in the last of which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to provide a report at least every 60 days, on the implementation
of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system
regarding their humanitarian deliveries have been re ported for April and May 2020.

II. Major developments
Key points
1.
The number of cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) announced by the
Syrian authorities as at 31 May 2020 stood at 122. Another six cases were recorded
by local authorities in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, including one death.
The economic impacts attributable to COVID-19 aggravated a sharply deteriorating
economic situation.
2.
Steep price increases were recorded alongside reports of shortages in some basic
goods, as the rate of decline in the value of the Syrian pound accelerated. In May, the
Syrian pound reached its lowest point on record against the United States dollar. The
World Food Programme (WFP) revised its estimate for the number of people
considered as food insecure in the Syrian Arab Republic to 9.3 million people.

20-08327 (E)

020720

*2008327*

S/2020/576

3.
The ceasefire in the Idlib de-escalation area largely continued to hold, albeit
with frequent reports of relatively small-scale violations. Civilian return movements
continued but remained limited, with some 780,000 of the nearly 1 million people
displaced in the north-west between December 2019 and early March 2020 still
displaced. Incidents of mutual shelling and attacks using improvised explosive
devices around Afrin and Bab resulted in civilian casualties, including children. An
attack in a crowded market in Afrin on 28 April killed at least 46 people, of whom at
least 31 were civilians, and injured 53 other people.
4.
Humanitarian assistance continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic,
including the distribution of food assistance by WFP to 4.5 million people in April
and 4.5 million people in May. COVID-19 preparedness and response efforts included
support by the World Health Organization (WHO) for the gradual expansion o f testing
capacities. Support also continued for COVID-19 infection prevention and control,
from risk communication and community engagement to isolation centres.
5.
The humanitarian cross-border operation continued at record levels to respond
to the acute needs of millions of civilians in the north-west of the country. The highest
total number of United Nations humanitarian aid truck crossings per month since the
establishment of the cross-border mechanism in 2014 was recorded in May 2020, with
1,781 trucks crossing into the country from Turkey.
6.
WHO dispatched an overland delivery of medical supplies to the north-east from
Ladhiqiyah, in two consignments. That was the first overland delivery of WHO
supplies to the north-east of the country since May 2018. Deliveries also continued
by air. Despite increasing quantities of assistance reaching the north -east, medical
supplies from those deliveries did not reach the majority of medical facilities that had
previously depended on the cross-border delivery of supplies. Non-governmental
organizations operating in the north-east reported stock-outs of some essential
supplies, including some emergency medicines and anaesthetics.
7.
At Rukban, a commercial delivery of five trucks in May generated limited
improvement in the availability of basic commodities. Access to medical services,
hygiene supplies and other basic items remained extremely limited. Between
25 March and 31 May, 282 individuals departed Rukban, including 20 individuals
needing medical care and who received appropriate support.
Humanitarian update
3.
The number of cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) announced by the
Syrian authorities as at 31 May 2020 stood at 122, including 46 recoveries and 5
deaths. Another six cases were recorded by local authorities in the north -east of the
Syrian Arab Republic, including one death. No cases were recorded in the north-west
of the country, with over 700 tests conducted as at the end of May. The majority of
cases confirmed by the Syrian authorities were in Damascus (87 cases), with the
remaining cases in Rif Dimashq (34 cases) and Dar‘a (1 case). Overall testing
capacity increased but remained insufficient. Five laboratories are testing samples, in
Damascus, Ladhiqiyah, Aleppo, Homs and Idlib. Polymerase chain reaction testing
capacity has been established in Qamishli and Tall Rif‘at, in the north-east. In the
north-west, in addition to testing being carried out by a laboratory in Idlib, some
samples are being sent to laboratories in Turkey.
4.
The economic situation continued to deteriorate during the reporting period,
with steep price increases and shortages in some basic goods, as the rate of decline in
the value of the Syrian pound accelerated. The informal exchange rate weakened in
May to its lowest point on record, at more than 1,950 Syrian pounds to the Uni ted

2/20

20-08327

S/2020/576

States dollar in some parts of Idlib, for an increase of more than 240 per cent over
12 months. On 26 March, the Central Bank of Syria adjusted the official rate from
438 to 704 Syrian pounds, representing a devaluation of 61 per cent. Prices increased
by 40 to 50 per cent on average for food staples and by 300 per cent on average for
personal sanitization items, although prices and availability fluctuated. The national
average reference food basket recorded in April by the World Food Programme (WFP)
was at 56,668 Syrian pounds, a year-over-year increase of 133 per cent and the highest
price ever recorded for the Syrian Arab Republic. Prior to the COVID -19 crisis, it
was estimated that about 90 per cent of the population lived below the poverty line,
with high levels of food insecurity. According to WFP, 9.3 million people in the Syrian
Arab Republic are now food insecure, representing an increase of 1.4 million in the
past six months and the highest number ever recorded in the country. Increasing
malnutrition rates were recorded in the north-west, with some 30 per cent of pregnant
and breastfeeding women reportedly malnourished.
5.
In the north-west of the country, while the ceasefire in the Idlib de -escalation
area largely continued to hold, frequent small-scale violations were reported. These
included exchanges of artillery fire along the contact lines and limited ground -based
clashes. Incidents of mutual shelling and attacks using improvised explosive devices
took place around Afrin and Bab, resulting in civilian casualties, including children.
Other incidents included reported small arms fire in Bab town on 16 May, resulting
in the death of a pregnant woman. On 28 April, a reported fuel truck explosion in a
crowded market in Afrin killed at least 46 people, of whom at least 31 were civilians,
including 2 women and 4 boys, and injured 53 other people, including 10 women,
3 boys and 1 girl, with no party claiming responsibility for the attack.
6.
Return movements of displaced civilians continued in areas not under
government control in Idlib and western Aleppo Governorates, with over 180,000
people estimated to have returned, mainly to the subdistricts of Ariha, Atarib, Ihsim,
Darat Izzah, Jisr al-Shughur, Sarmin, Muhambal and Taftanaz. In southern and so utheastern Idlib, approximately 8,500 people returned between January and May 2020,
including to Sinjar, Tamani‘ah and Khan Shaykhun. In north-western Aleppo, a
humanitarian assessment mission conducted on 14 May to the Huraytan subdistrict,
which was retaken by the Government in January 2020, found limited returns, with
approximately 5,000 people having returned to communities there. The mission found
that the scale of destruction to residential property and public infrastructure and the
dire lack of public services posed a major impediment to civilian returns. In northern
Aleppo, insufficient potable and farming water supply was reported at Bab, where the
main water supply system runs across lines of control and needs to be restored,
affecting water access for the local population and the ability to maintain health and
hygiene standards that are critical to avoiding the spread of infectious diseases,
including COVID-19.
7.
In the north-east, intermittent artillery shelling, including limited ground -based
clashes, were reported along the eastern and western edges of the Operation Peace
Spring area between Tall Abyad and Ra’s al-Ayn. The Aluk water station and the
power supply were disrupted multiple times in April and May, owing to shelling or
the rerouting of electricity by non-State armed groups. Approximately 460,000 people
rely on the Aluk water station as their primary source of water, which is particularly
critical to maintaining health and hygiene standards in overcrowded camps and other
high-risk areas to avoid the spread of infectious diseases, including COVID -19.
Approximately 1 million people across four districts are affected by the disruption of
electricity.
8.
At Rukban, humanitarian access from within Syria remained heavily restricted,
as the border with Jordan has been closed since March 2020 as part of preventative
measures related to COVID-19, constraining access to the United Nations-run
20-08327

3/20

S/2020/576

medical clinic. There was limited improvement in the availability of basic
commodities in May, as five commercial trucks reportedly delivered goods to the
local market. Access to medical services, hygiene supplies and other basic items
remains extremely limited. On 9 May, a group of 99 people who had left Rukban,
including 61 children, arrived at the Abdul Rahman Shattoor shelter in Homs after
passing through the Julayghim checkpoint and spending time at the Wahah reception
and transit centre. Since March, 282 people have left Rukban. An estimated 12,000
people remained in Rukban and surrounding areas as at 31 May 2020.
Update on overall developments
9.
The Special Envoy for Syria continued his efforts with the Syrian parties to
further a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, United Nations-facilitated political process,
in line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). On 18 May, the Special Envoy
informed the Council that he would convene a third session of the small body of the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva as soon as global travel conditions allowe d. Both
the government and opposition Co-Chairs affirmed the importance of a substantive
third session on the agreed agenda and the equal importance of there being no
preconditions to moving on to other items of the Constitution in subsequent sessions,
consistent with the mandate of the Committee and its Terms of Reference and Core
Rules of Procedure.
10. International and regional actors continued their own diplomatic engagements
on the Syrian Arab Republic and with the Special Envoy, who reminded interlo cutors
of the importance of renewed and meaningful international cooperation.
11. On 11 April, the Special Envoy, together with other United Nations envoys in
the Middle East, called upon warring parties to negotiate an immediate halt to ongoing
hostilities, exercise maximum restraint, de-escalate tensions and work to resolve
differences through dialogue. Building on the appeal of the Secretary-General for an
immediate global ceasefire, and on his own appeal for a nationwide ceasefire in the
country and an all-out effort to combat COVID-19, the Special Envoy reiterated his
readiness to work with all key players so that significant calm in many areas could be
sustained, enhanced and expanded into a nationwide ceasefire, as called for in
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
Protection
12. Civilians, including many women and children, were killed and injured as a
result of increased sporadic fighting between and within armed groups and the
apparent indiscriminate use of weaponry between various non-State armed groups in
the north-western, northern and eastern parts of the Syrian Arab Republic. The
majority of civilian deaths were reportedly caused by indiscriminate attacks carried
out with various types of improvised explosive devices, including vehicle -borne
improvised explosive devices, by unidentified perpetrators and from explosive
remnants of war, including unexploded ordnances.
13. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Ri ghts
(OHCHR) documented at least 59 incidents, occurring from 1 April to 31 May 2020,
in which at least 105 civilians, including 5 women and 21 children, were killed and
at least 213 civilians, including 21 women and 52 children, were injured as a result
of hostilities across the Syrian Arab Republic, including through ground -based
strikes, improvised explosive devices, explosive remnants of war, armed clashes and
targeted killings at the hands of various parties to the conflict or by unidentified
perpetrators. The largest cause of civilian deaths (at least 44) appeared to be
indiscriminate improvised explosive device attacks by unidentified perpetrators in
busy markets and residential areas. The deadliest of those attacks occurred in a
4/20

20-08327

S/2020/576

commercial area in Afrin city on 28 April, when at least 46 people were killed, of
whom at least 31 were civilians, and 53 people injured. In the light of the patterns
observed and the high number of incidents and civilians killed and injured in markets
and residential areas, it appears that parties to the conflict have failed to respect the
key principles under international humanitarian law of distinguishing civilians from
fighters and civilian objects from military objectives; of refraining from
indiscriminate attacks; of respecting proportionality in attack; and of taking
precautions in the conduct of military operations.
14. Armed groups, as well as Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), appear to
have taken advantage of the focus on the COVID-19 pandemic to escalate attacks in
various areas. OHCHR recorded incidents in which the use of force by non -State
armed groups in the context of pandemic-related precautionary measures, such as
curfews and the closure of some businesses, resulted in civilian deaths and injuries.
15. Both pro-government forces and non-State armed groups continued to detain
individuals, including women and children, in areas under their effective control. In
most cases recorded by OHCHR, detainees were denied information about the reasons
for their detention and other due process rights, while their families were denied
information concerning their whereabouts. In areas under the control of the
Government, OHCHR continued to document cases of detainees dying while in
custody, allegedly due to natural causes, without formal notification given to their
families. In many such cases, the detention of individuals by the Government did not
become known until their deaths were acknowledged. The bodies of the deceased are
rarely returned to their families. The situation of thousands of detainees and prisoners,
including former ISIL fighters and their families, continues to be of major concern,
in particular in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic. Scores of people remain in
detention facilities and in internally displaced persons camps managed by the Syrian
Democratic Forces and other parties to the conflict, held in unsanitary conditions,
without access to their families, and lacking adequate medical care.
16. In the south-western part of the country, an increase in popular unrest and
tensions was recorded. Anti-government activities increased in number and scale,
including protests against arbitrary detentions by the Government and violent attacks.
Killings and kidnapping attempts also increased, largely targeting government and
pro-government forces and fighters reconciled from former armed opposition groups.
Government forces and security branches expanded their deployment and activities
across the region, including in areas subject to agreements between for mer armed
opposition groups and government forces. During April and May, the overall number
of targeted killings increased significantly, with over 400 reported cases. Negotiations
between government officials and local representatives were convened. On th e
ground, additional government checkpoints were established, reportedly constraining
the freedom of movement of local populations in some areas.
17. Both pro-government forces and non-State armed groups in the north-western,
northern and eastern parts of the Syrian Arab Republic continued to target civilians,
including those perceived as being affiliated with opposing forces, including through
killings, the arbitrary deprivation of liberty, torture and other ill -treatment and
kidnappings. In Idlib, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, designated as a terrorist group by the
Security Council, continued to impose rules and codes of conduct on civilians living
in areas under its control that are fundamentally contrary to human rights, including
the rights to life, liberty and security of person, to freedom of movement and to
freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association. Through self -appointed
courts, members of the group continue to inflict harsh penalties, including death, on
those who have either been perceived as being critical of those rules or accused of
having affiliations with an opposing party to the conflict.

20-08327

5/20

S/2020/576

18. During the reporting period, non-State armed groups carried out seizures of
houses, land and property of civilians, including those who had fle d the hostilities. In
the north-west and north-east of the country, non-State armed groups seized houses
of other displaced civilians and of individuals accused of having affiliations with
other armed groups and occupied them with their own families. OHCHR received
reports that, in April, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, scores of families of
non-State armed group fighters were transferred from the Jarabulus area, in eastern
rural Aleppo, to areas in Tall Abyad, in northern rural Raqqah, and Ra ’s al-Ayn, in
western rural Hasakah, and placed in houses of civilians who had fled or who had
been forcibly evicted.
19. During the reporting period, ongoing hostilities continued to impede civilian
access to health care and education, a situation that has been exacer bated to some
extent by some of the precautionary measures related to COVID -19. In the eastern
part of the country, including in Dayr al-Zawr, the Syrian Democratic Forces appear
to have taken advantage of movement restrictions and the suspension of in -person
classes to position armed fighters inside temporarily empty schools in the area.
20. Hostilities damaging educational facilities and harming civilians continued to
be reported by humanitarian organizations. Three incidents were verified by the
United Nations during the reporting period: 1
(a) On 2 March 2020, airstrikes hit Arri al-Qibliyah-Adwan school in Ariha
subdistrict, Idlib Governorate, causing material damage;
(b) On 2 March 2020, a girls’ school in Balyun, southern Idlib Governorate,
was put out of service by airstrikes, with no casualties reported;
(c) On 14 April 2020, several improvised explosive devices detonated inside
Ubayd Salama school in Hawij town, Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, causing partial
destruction to the facility. The school was occupied by an armed group at the time of
attack.
21. The Surveillance System for Attacks on Health Care of the World Health
Organization (WHO) reported two incidents affecting health-care personnel, with no
reported deaths or injuries. Additional incidents have yet to be verified as part of the
Surveillance System.
Humanitarian response
22. Humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations agencies throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic included the distribution of food assistance by WFP to
4.5 million people in April and 4.5 million people in May, across all 14 Governorates.
WHO delivered some 646,000 treatments across the country, in addition to over
132,000 primary health care consultations. In April and May, 283,000 protection
interventions were provided, including child protection services for more than 63,000
children (see table 1).
23. The United Nations continued to support COVID-19 preparedness and response
efforts across the country. That included WHO support for the gradual expansion o f
testing capacities in Damascus, Aleppo, Ladhiqiyah and Homs, from conducting
repairs to providing essential equipment, reagents and on-site training of laboratory
technicians, and for further expansion across the Syrian Arab Republic in accordance
with the epidemiological situation and needs. Support continued for infection
__________________
1

6/20

These attacks have been confirmed using tried and tested systems, whereby the United Nations
receives reports from partners on the ground and reviews them against at least two other independent
sources. Only attacks that are fully vetted and confirmed by a ll independent sources are included
in the list of confirmed attacks. These systems are used worldwide and are widely respected.
20-08327

S/2020/576

prevention and control, from risk communication and community engagement to
isolation centres. Some $23 million was allocated from the Syria Humanitarian Fund
to support COVID-19 prevention and response. There remained significant shortages
of personal protective equipment, medical equipment and isolation and quarantine
centres in all areas. The United Nations coordinated the quantification of COVID -19
supply requirements across all response modalities for both health and non-health
response providers, to support coordinated requests through the global COVID -19
Supply Portal. COVID-19 preparedness and response plans were established across
all humanitarian operational hubs, with financial requirements for those plans
totalling $384 million.
24. Response modalities were adapted for the safety of beneficiaries and
humanitarian workers and to ensure continuity of the broader response. This included
such measures as distributing two months’ worth of food rations at a time in camps
in the north-east to limit crowding at distribution points; conducting door-to-door
distributions; including soap in food assistance packages; working remotely; and
providing personal protective equipment to staff and implementing partners.
Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other
organizations through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic:
April and May 2020

Organization

Average number
of people
reached monthly

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

136 000

International Organization for Migration

90 400

Mine Action Service
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Children’s Fund

700
158 300
1 329 000

United Nations Development Programme

436 700

United Nations Population Fund

248 400

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

55 400

World Food Programme

4 500 000

World Health Organization

391 000

25. Humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations agencies from within the
Syrian Arab Republic included the distribution by WFP of food assistance to
3.2 million people in April and 3.2 million people in May. The United Nations
Population Fund reached more than 535,000 people with life-saving reproductive
health services and protection services focused on gender-based violence. The United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
distributed food baskets to almost 105,000 Palestinian refugees and cash assistance
to 111,000.
26. In the north-west, the cross-border operation continued at record levels in
response to the catastrophic deterioration of the humanitarian situation that occurred
when almost 1 million civilians were displaced between December 2019 and March
2020 (see also paras. 39 and 40 below). Cross-border WFP food assistance was
distributed to 1.3 million people in April and to more than 1.3 million people in May.
WHO delivered emergency health kits and essential medicines for the provision of
over 420,000 treatment courses to the north-western part of the country in May. In
April and May, as part of COVID-19 preparedness efforts, humanitarian partners
20-08327

7/20

S/2020/576

delivered over 1.3 million surgical masks, over 1.1 million pairs of gloves and a range
of other pandemic-related medical supplies, including 35 ventilators, through the
cross-border mechanism. Supplies continued to fall far short of needs, however, with
the distribution of many personal protective equipment items covering less than 1 per
cent of requirements identified for the north-west at the end of May.
Figure I
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: April and May 2020
(monthly average)
(Thousands)

3 360

126
Nutrition

202

52

Non-food Education
items/shelter

1 200

450
Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Food

Health

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries, by sector and
by district: April and May 2020 (monthly average)

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and
hygiene

Governorate

District

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/
shelter

Aleppo

Afrin

–

282 995

–

–

–

–

Aleppo

I‘zaz

–

153 523

747 060

26 098

37 720

67 597

Idlib

Ariha

–

–

–

5 000

–

5 000

Idlib

Harim

44 500 2 923 894

405 569

88 758

88 000

190 314

Idlib

Idlib

7 260

–

35 940

82 550

–

187 010

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

–

–

11 065

–

–

–

27. During the reporting period, the Russian Federation sent informational bulletins
to the United Nations from the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and
Refugee Migration Monitoring, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief
assistance. Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms
of humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian access
28. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in
need across the Syrian Arab Republic. Access is critical for principled humanitarian
action, which depends notably on the ability to independently assess needs and deliver
assistance and to monitor and evaluate impacts independently, including by engaging

8/20

20-08327

S/2020/576

regularly and directly with affected people. The access landscape in the country is
complex, with different geographical areas and different types of services requiring
different operating modalities. More than 1,800 United Nations staff members are
in-country, with more than 600 deployed in nine humanitarian hubs outside
Damascus, in Aleppo, Dar‘a, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Qamishli,
Suwayda’ and Tartus. A further 3,860 UNRWA staff members are deployed across the
country. The decentralized presence contributes to greater access and proximity to
affected populations.
Access limitations related to the pandemic
29. The COVID-19 crisis continued to affect humanitarian access. Land border
crossings into the Syrian Arab Republic remained closed to individual civilian
movements, although exemptions were instituted at most crossings to enable the
import of supplies and humanitarian assistance. International commercial passenger
flights remained suspended, although some domestic cargo flights proceeded between
Damascus and Qamishli, as did some commercial passenger flights. The Tartus and
Ladhiqiyah maritime ports remained operational, with reduced staffing and with
precautionary measures in place, including mandatory sterilization procedures.
30. Restrictions remained in place at most crossing points within the Syrian Arab
Republic. In Aleppo Governorate, Abu Zinden, Umm al-Julud and Awn Dadat
remained closed, while Ghazzawiyah, in the Afrin district, and Tayhah were reported
as being open for commercial traffic; the latter was also reported as being open for
university students and some medical cases. Dayr Ballut was also open. In Raqqah
Governorate, Ukayrishah was closed, while Abu Asi opened on 30 May. The Tabaqah
crossing point was open to commercial and humanitarian cargo and was opened for
civilian movements on an exceptional basis for the E id al-Fitr holiday, during which
a reported 4,500 people crossed into the north-east.
31. Staff involved in life-saving humanitarian activities across the country,
including food distributions, were generally able to carry out their work while
ensuring the use of COVID-19 precautionary measures, such as physical distancing
and text messaging alerts to avoid crowding at distribution points.
Access in government-controlled areas
32. In government-controlled areas, communities and enclaves that remained
difficult to access owing to administrative and security approvals, included Duma,
Zamalka, Arbin, East Harasta, Kafr Batna, Mudayra and Nashabiyah in eastern
Ghouta; Bayt Jinn and Mazra‘at Bayt Jinn; Zakiyah and Dayr Khabiyah and Darayya.
In the southern part of the country, insecurity and administrative restrictions
continued to prevent sustained access to areas formerly controlled by non -State armed
groups, in particular in western Dar‘a and Qunaytirah. Insecurity in the western
countryside of Dar‘a resulted in the temporary suspension of some WFP food
dispatches.
33. Across the Syrian Arab Republic, aid is distributed and implemented primarily
by national actors, including non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent. United Nations agency personnel and third -party contractors
continued to mobilize to field locations, alongside national NGOs and the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent, to conduct assessment, monitoring and logistics and administrative
support missions. The United Nations was able to maintain mobility in spite of
COVID-19 pandemic-related restrictions. In April and May, 1,134 regular programmatic
movements took place under programme or blanket approvals, compared with 1,012

20-08327

9/20

S/2020/576

such movements during the previous reporting period (see table 3). 2 Of those
missions, 41 per cent were conducted in the southern Governorates of Dar ‘a,
Qunaytirah, Suwayda’, Rif Dimashq and Damascus; 21 per cent were conducted in
the north-eastern Governorates of Hasakah, Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr; 17 per cent in
Aleppo Governorate; 4 per cent in Idlib Governorate; 15 per cent in the central
Governorates of Homs and Hama; and 2 per cent in the coastal Governorates of
Ladhiqiyah and Tartus (see figure II).
Table 3
Missions conducted under programme or blanket approvals from within the
Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators,
by type: April and May 2020
Blanket
approval

Programme
approval

Total

Assessment missions

152

1

153

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

39

–

39

Monitoring missions

937

1

938

4

–

4

1 132

2

1 134

Type of mission

Security, logistics and administrative support missions
Total

Note: Missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals do not require specific approval
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Figure II
Missions conducted under programme or blanket approvals from within the
Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators,
by Governorate: April and May 2020
250
200
150
100

192

50
0

188

158

132
95

71

70

67

47

44

27

23

13

6

Note: Missions conducted with programme or blanket approvals do not require specific approval
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

__________________
2

10/20

United Nations staff and third-party contractors operating at humanitarian hubs outside
Damascus obtain programme approvals or blanket approvals to carry out movements as part of
their regular operations. These enable regular access and reduce bureaucratic requirements.
20-08327

S/2020/576

34. For missions requiring specific approval by the Ministry o f Foreign Affairs, 3 the
United Nations submitted 57 new requests, of which 26 requests, or 46 per cent, were
approved (see table 4). This is an improvement of 2 percentage points over the
previous reporting period, when 44 per cent of requests were approve d. United
Nations agencies ultimately conducted only 17 missions of the 26 approved, owing
primarily to COVID-19 pandemic-related considerations.
35. On 14 May, the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent conducted a
joint mission to areas recently retaken by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
in western rural Aleppo, visiting the communities of Huraytan, Babis, Hayyan, Kafr
Hamra, Ma‘arat al-Artiq, Anadan and Yaqid al-Adas in the Huraytan subdistrict. The
mission was conducted to identify needs following shifts in control in January (see
para. 6).
Table 4
Missions from within the Syrian Arab Republic requiring the submission of a
note verbale by United Nations agencies, by type: April and May 2020
Number
requested

Number
approved

Per cent
approved

Assessment missions

12

9

75

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

8

5

63

Monitoring missions

28

8

29

Security, logistics and administrative support missions

9

4

44

57

26

46

Type of request

Total

Note: Missions by United Nations personnel departing from Damascus or travelling cross-line
generally require specific approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Access in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
36. In the north-east, the United Nations maintained regular and sustained
humanitarian access in most parts of Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates, while other
areas, including Manbij and Ayn al-Arab, remained difficult to access from
Damascus, owing to the lack of agreement between parties in control and insecurit y.
Cross-line access constraints continued along the border between the Syrian Arab
Republic and Turkey, between Ra’s al-Ayn and Tall Abyad. On 25 May, a section of
the M4 highway between Ayn Isa and Tall Tamr opened to commercial traffic for the
first time since October 2019. Accessibility of the M4 highway is required to scale up
humanitarian overland deliveries to the north-east. Humanitarian NGOs reported that
regular use of the M4 highway had not yet started, owing to ongoing security
concerns.
37. Following the adoption of resolution 2504 (2020), efforts continued with regard
to replacing the supply of critical medical items previously provided to the north -east
of the country through the Ya‘rubiyah border crossing. In May, WHO dispatched over
56 metric tons of medical items from Ladhiqiyah to Qa mishli by road in two
consignments. Those were the first overland deliveries of WHO medical supplies to
the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic from within the country since May 2018.
Distribution of the two consignments had not been completed by the en d of the
reporting period. Another 14,000 metric tons of WHO medical supplies were
delivered to the north-east by air from Damascus. Those supplies were delivered to
__________________
3

20-08327

United Nations agency personnel generally require specific approval by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs when conducting missions from Damascus to other hubs or for cross -line missions.
11/20

S/2020/576

internally displaced persons camps, including Abu khashab, Mahmoudli, Arishah and
Hawl, and to hospitals and implementing partners in Hasakah, Raqqah and Dayr
al-Zawr Governorates. Despite increasing quantities of assistance, distributions of
WHO medical items did not reach the majority of facilities that had previously
depended on cross-border deliveries. NGOs operating in the north-east reported
stock-outs of medicines at one of the key pharmaceutical warehouses in that area,
which supplies more than 40 health facilities, including 5 hospitals, and 50 ambulances.
Thirty-two medicines, including emergency medicines and anaesthetics, are stocked
out, leaving a maximum of one month’s supply of those medicines at the medical
facilities themselves. Other critical medicines are close to stocking out.
38. Efforts continued with regard to transferring a consignment of WHO medical
supplies from Erbil, Iraq, into the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. The
supplies were originally intended for transport to the north -east through Ya‘rubiyah
but remained in Iraq following the removal of Ya‘rubiyah as an authorized border
crossing under resolution 2504 (2020). Some of the items were removed from the
consignment as they were no longer usable. The Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic approved the rerouting of the 85 metric ton consignment, now expected to
be airlifted by WFP from Erbil to the Damascus airport in early June, for onward
dispatch to Qamishli by road.
Access in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
39. In the north-west, the cross-border operation from Turkey continued at record
levels to respond to high levels of acute humanitarian needs among the population.
The highest total number of United Nations truck crossings per month since the
establishment of the cross-border mechanism in 2014 was recorded in May 2020, with
1,781 trucks crossing into the country from Turkey. Assistance from NGO partners
also remained high. While maintaining measures to prevent the spread of COVID -19,
humanitarian access in the north-west was generally permissive for cross-border
humanitarian actors, with the exception of front-line areas affected by violence in
southern Idlib and western Aleppo and some localized access issues.
40. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as mandated under Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020).
From 1 April to 31 May 2020, the Mechanism processed and confirmed the
humanitarian nature of 47 consignments consisting of 3,146 trucks that crossed into
the country from Turkey: 20 consignments from Bab al-Hawa (2,553 trucks) and 27
from Bab al-Salam (593 trucks). This brings the total number of trucks sent since the
beginning of operations to 38,052 (28,574 through Bab al -Hawa, 4,774 through Bab
al-Salam, 4,595 through Ramtha and 109 through Ya‘rubiyah). There were no
concerns or questions regarding the humanitarian nature of these consignments. For
every shipment that crossed the border, the United Nations provided 48 -hour advance
notice to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, including information on the
humanitarian goods to be delivered, the number of trucks involved, the United
Nations owner and the destination (district). The Mechanism continued to benefit
from the excellent cooperation of the Government of Turkey.
41. Humanitarian workers continued to actively pursue an all-modalities approach
to respond to the humanitarian needs of the affected population, including continued
efforts to deliver cross-line assistance to the north-west. On 14 April, the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic approved an inter-agency cross-line mission to Atarib to
assist over 51,000 individuals. The United Nations stands ready to undertake the
mission, and planning is ongoing. All missions to the north -west part of the country
have been temporarily put on hold, owing to various concerns, including those related
to COVID-19.
12/20

20-08327

S/2020/576

Access in the south-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
42. Access to Rukban remained heavily restricted, with the last United Nations
humanitarian convoy to reach Rukban from within the Syrian Arab Republi c
undertaken in September 2019. On 1 April 2020, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
requested that the United Nations undertake a health assessment mission to Rukban,
alongside the delivery of multisectoral assistance facilitated by the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent. Plans for the mission to proceed on 20 April were suspended over concerns
related to the modality of distribution by different parties to the conflict and by
representatives of the local community. The United Nations continues to engage with
all relevant parties to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid to the remaining
population of Rukban.
Visas and registrations
43. The United Nations continued to work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff (see table 5).
Table 5
Requests for United Nations visas: April and May 2020
Number
requested

Number
approved

Number
rejected

Number
pending

Visas requested during reporting period

47

7

–

40

Renewals requested during reporting period

147

80

1

66

Visas pending from before reporting period

68

15

3

43

Renewals pending from before reporting period

55

46

–

9

Type of request

Note: The United Nations withdrew seven visa requests that had been pending since before the
reporting period.

44. A total of 41 international NGOs are registered with the Government to operate
in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
45. The United Nations and NGOs continued to implement programmes in areas
affected by frequent clashes among parties to the conflict, by air strikes and by the
regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and other attacks. Humanitarian relief
personnel also operate in areas highly contaminated with unexploded ordnance,
explosive remnants of war and landmines.
46. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including 24 staff members of the United Nations and of
entities of the United Nations system, 19 of whom were staff members of UNRWA;
66 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff
members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members
of international and national NGOs have also been killed.
47. A total of 26 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system, all from UNRWA, were detained or missing at the end of the reporting period.

20-08327

13/20

S/2020/576

III. Observations
48. The impacts of accelerating economic decline are being felt across the Syrian
Arab Republic. Prices of essentials, including food and medicines, are rising sharply
as the value of the Syrian pound continues to fall. The various consequences of the
COVID-19 pandemic are additional aggravating factors. Food insecurity has already
risen to record levels, with WFP estimating that 9.3 million people are now food
insecure. I am deeply concerned by the prospect that people throughout the Syrian
Arab Republic may increasingly find themselves unable to meet their basic needs,
pushing even more people into reliance on humanitarian aid, in a country where over
11 million people already require such assistance.
49. Despite the ceasefire largely holding in the north-west of the Syrian Arab
Republic, I remain alarmed by the devastating impact of continued violence on
civilians and by the continued violations and abuses of human rights. I reiterate my
appeal for an immediate global ceasefire and support the appeal of my Special Envoy
for Syria for a nationwide ceasefire in the country and an all-out effort to combat
COVID-19, so that significant calm in many areas can be sustained, enhanced and
expanded into a nationwide ceasefire, as called for in Security Council resolution
2254 (2015). Indiscriminate attacks utilizing improvised explosive devices in
residential areas and busy markets have to end. The protection of civilian life remains
paramount, pursuant to the obligations of all parties under international humanitarian
law, as well as human rights law, which all parties are obligated to respect. I reiterate
my call upon all parties to comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including the obligation to take all feasible precautions to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure, and to respect human rights.
50. I specifically remind parties of their obligation under international humanitarian
law to allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for
all civilians in need. Full, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access to people in
need in all parts of the Syrian Arab Republic is required, using all modalities,
including scaled up cross-line and cross-border deliveries. In the north-west of the
country, the cross-border operation is delivering at record levels and still requires
further scale-up to meet acute needs, the growing demands stemming from economic
decline and the need for COVID-19 preparedness. Its continuation requires a renewal
of the cross-border authorization in resolution 2504 (2020) for the use of the Bab
al-Salam and Bab al-Hawa border crossings for an additional 12 months. The cross border operation is a lifeline for millions of civilians whom the United Nations cannot
reach by other means. A failure to renew the cross-border authorization would
immediately halt the ongoing operation, severing that lifeline. Efforts have been, and
will continue to be, made to deliver cross-line assistance into the north-west.
However, as I stated in my review of humanitarian cross-line and cross-border
operations (S/2020/401), it is currently simply impossible to replicate with cross -line
assistance what is being delivered through the cross-border operation. Cross-line
assistance is currently not a viable alternative, and a sustained, large -scale crossborder response will continue to be necessary to meet the enormous humanitarian
needs in the north-west.
51. In the north-east of the country, receipt of the first overland delivery of WHO
medical supplies in two years is a welcome step towards establishing a reliable supply
chain. However, despite recent deliveries, acute shortages in health and medical
supplies remain, five months after the removal of the Ya‘rubiyah as an authorized
border crossing and amid the heightened health risks posed by the COVID -19
pandemic. I reiterate the findings of my review of alternative modalities for the border
crossing of Ya‘rubiyah (S/2020/139): a combination of more cross-border and crossline access is required to sustain levels of humanitarian assistance in the north -east,
14/20

20-08327

S/2020/576

and preferably increase that assistance. I also noted in my report that, should adequate
steps not be taken for cross-line deliveries to work effectively, and in the absence of
consent from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic or neighbouring countries
to use border crossings into the north-east of the country, the Security Council would
need to authorize the United Nations and its implementing partners to use additional
crossings. Several options were identified, as were their limitations in comparison
with Ya‘rubiyah.
52. I remain deeply concerned about the fate and well-being of thousands of people,
the majority of whom remain detained by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, while others are being held by non-State armed groups. I call upon the
relevant parties to record and provide information on the whereabouts of those
detained and to afford them all essential judicial guarantees. The families of persons
who have died in detention should be given information on their fate. The families of
victims of serious violations should receive full and adequate reparations within a
reasonable period of time. I remain concerned about the well-being of thousands of
families with perceived affiliations with ISIL, the vast majority of which consist of
women and children, and who continue to be held in overcrowded internally displaced
persons camps, with insufficient access to services. The relevant obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights laws concerning persons deprived of
their liberty must be respected. The current COVID -19 pandemic demands even more
urgent action to ensure continued access to medical and other essential services for
those in detention and in other closed and congested facilities, as well as to facilitate
the release of those considered most vulnerable.
53. Continued impunity for alleged serious violations and abuses of human rights
and international humanitarian law by parties to the conflict remains of grave concern.
Perpetrators of serious violations and abuses of human rights and international
humanitarian law must be held accountable. I remind all States, in particular those
with direct influence over parties to the conflict, that they are bound to take proactive
steps to ensure respect for international humanitarian law, including as it relates to
the protection of civilians. I call upon all parties to the conflict, in particular the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as all States, civil society and the
United Nations system, to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the
Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, in particular by providing relevant
information and documentation. Accountability for serious violations and abuses of
human rights and international humanitarian law is both a legal requirement and
central to achieving sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call
for the situation in the country to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
54. In view of the ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to the
protection of civilians and other human rights concerns in the country, I continue to
strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with Human Rights
Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with OHCHR, including through
the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote human
rights.
55. Reconvening the third round of the Constitutional Committee is an important
priority in the immediate term for my Special Envoy. I hope that delegations to the
Committee will come ready to contribute to a substantive and forward -looking
discussion that paves the way for progress and helps Syrians to develop and build real
trust and confidence. This would be an important contribution to the United Nations facilitated, Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, focused on the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).

20-08327

15/20

S/2020/576

56. I urge international and regional actors who continue to support parties to the
conflict to exert efforts toward the renewed and meaningful international cooperation
that is key for the resolution of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. I appreciate
the continued engagement of international and regional partners with the United
Nations and call on them to maintain and deepen their support for the mediation
efforts of my Special Envoy and for the Geneva political process, with the ending of
the suffering of the Syrian people and ensuring sustainable peace as the absolute
priority. I recall that any sustainable peace arrangement depends on including women
at the negotiating table as full partners.

16/20

20-08327

S/2020/576

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: April and
May 2020 *
Idlib Governorate
• On 1 April, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham executed a detainee in Janudiyah village.
• On 5 April, a civilian was killed and seven civilians were injured, including two
women and three boys, after a reported weapons depot exploded in Qastun
village.
• On 11 April, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham executed four detainees in the city of Jisr
al-Shughur.
• On 16 April, three women were injured when a reported ground -based strike
landed in an agricultural field near the town of Taftanaz.
• On 30 April, a civilian was killed and another injured after Hay’at Tahrir
al-Sham reportedly fired weapons in the air to disperse a crowd in Ma ‘arrat
al-Na‘san. Three other civilians were reportedly injured by a Hay’at Tahrir
al-Sham vehicle in the area.
• On 10 May, three civilian men were injured when reported ground-based strikes
landed in the town of Balyun.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 8 April, a civilian was killed and another injured after a reported vehicle borne improvised explosive device detonated in Kafr Nasih town.
• On 8 April, a civilian was injured when a reported landmine detonated near the
village of Alawshah. On the same day, a boy was allegedly injured after a
reported landmine detonated near the village of Tall Susin.
• On 9 April, three civilians were injured by reported ground-based strikes that
landed in the village of Shaykh Hilal.
• On 12 April, a civilian man was killed after unexploded ordnance reportedly
detonated in the village of Kafr Nuran.
• On 15 April, two civilians were injured when reported groun d-based strikes hit
a market in Jarabulus city.
• On 18 April, three civilians, including a boy, were injured when an improvised
explosive device reportedly detonated in a vegetable cart placed in the Saraya ’
local market in the city of Afrin.
• On 25 April, a non-State armed group raided the office of a non-governmental
organization in the city of Afrin. Staff members were reportedly assaulted in the
incident.

* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
20-08327

17/20

S/2020/576

• On 28 April, at least 46 people were killed, of whom at least 31 were civilians,
including 2 women and 4 boys, and 53 people were injured, including
10 women, 3 boys and 1 girl, after a fuel truck reportedly exploded in Afrin city.
• On 1 and 2 May, nine civilians, including two women and two boys, were
injured by reported small arms fire between non-State armed groups in Jarabulus
city.
• On 8 May, a civilian was killed by reported sniper fire near the village of
Miznaz.
• On 10 May, a girl was killed and 13 other civilians, including 4 boys, were
injured after a reported roadside improvised explosive device detonated in Bab
city.
• On 16 May, a pregnant woman was killed and seven other civilians, including
one woman, one boy and one girl, were injured by reported small arms fire
between non-State armed groups in the city of Bab.
• On 14 May, six civilians, including two boys, were injured when a reported
roadside improvised explosive device detonated inside the Novoteh market in
the city of Bab.
• On 18 May, a boy was killed by reported sniper fire in the outskirts of the city
of Atarib.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 1 April, four civilians, including a woman, were injured by a reported
ground-based strike that impacted in the village of Rub‘at.
• On 15 May, two civilians, including a boy, were injured when an improvised
explosive device attached to a motorbike reportedly detonated in Shaddadah.
• On 15 May, a boy was injured when a landmine reportedly detonated near the
city of Ra’s al-Ayn.
• On 17 May, a civilian was killed and another injured by a reported exchange of
small arms fire between non-State armed groups near Makran village.
• On 23 May, three civilian men were injured by reported multiple improvised
explosive device attacks in the town of Tall Halaf.
Hama Governorate
• On 4 April, a boy was killed when a reported landmine detonated in the village
of Rasm al-Abd.
• On 11 April, two boys were injured by a reported landmine explosion in the
village of Shaykh Hilal.
• On 6 May, a boy was injured after a landmine reportedly detonated in the
outskirts of the town of Si‘in.
• On 16 May, a man was injured in a reported landmine explosion in an
agricultural field near the city of Suran.
Homs Governorate
• On 1 May, at least 15 civilian men were injured during several reported
explosions at a weapons depot in the city of Homs.

18/20

20-08327

S/2020/576

Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 2 April, a woman and three boys were injured when a reported improvised
explosive device attached to a motorbike detonated inside a local market in the
city of Busayrah.
• On 20 April, the body of five civilian men were found in a desert area near the
village of Turayf in northern rural Dayr al-Zawr. The men had reportedly been
abducted by unidentified perpetrators a day before their bodies were discovered.
• On 22 April, a civilian man was reportedly detained at a checkpoint in the
village of Hawaij. The reasons for his arrest, as well as his fate and whereabouts,
remain unknown.
• On 22 April, three boys were injured when a reported landmine detonated in the
outskirts of the town of Khusham.
• On 23 April, a civilian man was injured when a reported roadside improvised
explosive device detonated near a fuel truck in the village of Jazrat al -Buhamid.
• On 23 April, a civilian was killed in a reported drive -by shooting in Shahil city.
• On 1 May, two boys were killed and three civilians were injured after a reported
roadside improvised explosive device detonated in the city of Busayrah.
• On 10 May, a civilian woman was injured when a reported landmine detonated
near the town of Shula in southern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 21 May, a boy was killed and 15 other civilians, including 6 boys, were
injured when a reported improvised explosive device a ttached to a motorbike
detonated in the local market of Busayrah city. A second reported improvised
explosive device attached to a motorbike later detonated nearby.
• On 25 May, a boy was killed and a civilian man was injured when a reported
landmine detonated in an agricultural field in the village of Mar'iyah.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 4 April, eight civilian shepherds, including two women, were reportedly
killed by unidentified perpetrators in the town of Ma ‘dan.
• On 12 April, a civilian was injured when a non-State armed group reportedly
fired into the air to disperse a crowd of civilians in the city of Raqqah.
• On 22 April, a boy was killed and another was injured after a reported roadside
improvised explosive device detonated in the city of Raqqah.
• On 23 April, three civilians were reported detained by a non -State armed group
from a makeshift internally displaced persons camp in northern rural Raqqah.
Their fate and whereabouts remain unknown.
• On 1 May, two civilians, including a woman, were reported detained by a
non-State armed group from the ‘Rashid internally displaced persons camp near
Raqqah city. Their fate and whereabouts remain unknown.
• On 5 May, a civilian woman was reportedly abducted from her house by
members of a non-State armed group in Raqqah city. Her fate and whereabouts
remain unknown.
• On 11 May, two civilians were reported detained by a non-State armed group
from the Mahmudli internally displaced persons camp near Raqqah city. Th eir
fate and whereabouts remain unknown to their relatives.

20-08327

19/20

S/2020/576

• On 17 May, a boy was injured when a reported landmine detonated in the
outskirts of the village of Mu‘ayzilah.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 7 April, a civilian man was killed in a reported driv e-by shooting in the city
of Nawa. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) later claimed responsibility
for the incident.
• On 11 April, two civilians were reportedly detained in the town of Khirbat
Ghazalah. The reasons for their detention remain unclear and their relatives have
no further information about their fate and whereabouts.
• On 12 April, a civilian was killed in a reported drive -by shooting in the town of
Yadudah in western rural Dar‘a.
• On 20 April, a man was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the city of
Dar‘a. On the same day, another civilian man was killed in a reported drive -by
shooting in the town of Umm Walad.
• On 21 April, a boy was killed and two boys were injured when a reported
landmine detonated in the outskirts of the town of Tasil.
• On 24 April, a civilian man was killed in a reported drive -by shooting by
unidentified perpetrators in the city of Jasim.
• On 2 May, four civilians from the same family, including one woman, one boy
and one girl, were injured when a reported landmine detonated in Da‘il.
• On 4 May, a civilian was allegedly injured in a reported drive -by shooting in
Ghariyah al-Sharqiyah. ISIL later claimed responsibility for the attack.
• On 6 May, a civilian from the town of Umm Walad was repor ted abducted by
unidentified perpetrators and his body was found few hours later, near the
village of Jabib.
• On 11 May, the body of a civilian was found in the town of Jallayn after
unidentified perpetrators had reportedly abducted him two days earlier.
• On 12 May, a boy was killed when a reported unexploded ordnances detonated
in the city of Dar‘a.
• On 13 May, a civilian was injured in a reported drive-by shooting in the town
of Umm Walad.
• On 14 May, a boy was killed in a reported drive-by shooting on the road between
the towns of Ghariyah and Musayfirah.
• On 15 May, a civilian man was killed and another was injured in a reported
drive-by shooting by unidentified perpetrators in the city of Dar ‘a.
• On 18 May, a civilian was abducted in the town of Jizah. His body was found
the following day in the same town. ISIL later claimed responsibility for the
killing.
• On 19 May, a civilian man, his wife and their son were reportedly detained at
their home for unknown reasons. Their whereabouts and fate remain unknown.
• On 20 May, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the town of
Tafas.

20/20

20-08327
