VII.

1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Belize to self-determination and independence;
2. Reaffirms that the inviolability and territorial
integrity of Belize must be preserved;
3. Calls upon the Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland, as the
administering Power, acting in close consultation with
the Govemment of Belize, and the Govemment of
Guatemala to pursue vigorously their negotiations in
strict conformity with the principies of General Assembly resolution 343 2 (XXX), in consultation as
appropriate with other especially interested States in
the area, with a view to concluding the negotiations
befare the thirty-third session of the General Assembly;
4. Also calls upon the parties involved to refrain
from any threats or use of force against the people of
Belize or their territory;
5. Urges all States to respect the right of the people
of Belize to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity, and to render all practica! assistance
necessary for the secure and early exercise of that right;
6. Requests the Govemments concemed to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on
the outcome of the negotiations referred to above;
7. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to remain seized of thc question and to
assist the people of Belize in the exercise of their inalienable rights.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/33.

169

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

lnformation from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and
to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of
the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 31 /29 of 29 November
1976, in which it requested the Special Committee to
continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under
resolu,tion 1970 (XVIII),
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter4 2 and the
action taken by the Committee in respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the item, 43
Deploring that sorne Member States having responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
42 [bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1), vol. IV, chap. XXXII.
43 A/32/253.

Territories have ceased to itransmit information under
Article 73 e of the Charter,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementatíon of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in ,the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government
in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of thc Charter with respect to
that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned
to transmit, or continue to transmit, to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
the Char,ter, as well as the fullest possible information
on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six
months following the expiration of the administrative
year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee ,to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its thir,ty-third session.

83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/34.

Qucstion of East Timor

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of ali peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the principies of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Indcpendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory, 44
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of Portugal 45 and lndonesia, 46
Having also heard the statements of the representativcs of thc Frente Revolucionária de Timor Leste
Indcpcndente, 47
Mindful that all States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or national independence
44 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supp/ement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1), vol. II, chap. X.
4 5 [bid.,
Thirty-second Session, Fourth Committee, 12th
meeting, paras. 22-26.
46 !bid., 19th meeling, paras. 4-58.
4 7 !bid., 11-th meeting, paras. 135-155, and 20th meeting,
paras. 101--130.

170

General Auembly-Thlrty-second Session

of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the purposes of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned at the continuing critica! situation
in the Territory, resulting from the persistent refusal
on the part of the Government of Indonesia to comply
with the provisions of the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council,

Recalling its resolutions 3485 (XXX) of 12 December 1975 and 31/53 of 1 December 1976 and
Security Council resolutions 384 (1975) of 22 December 1975 and 389 (1976) of 22 April 1976,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
East Timor to self-determination and independence. and
the legitimacy of their struggle to achieve that right;

2. Reaffirms its resol utions 3485 (XXX) and 31 /
53 and Security Council resolutions 384 (1975) and
389 (1976);
3. Rejects the claim that East Timor has been
integrated into Indonesia, inasmuch as the people of
the Territory have not been able to exercise freely their
right to self-determination and independcnce;
4. Requests the Special Committee on ,the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of thc Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territory under
aotive consideration, to follow the implementation of
the present resolution, to dispatch to the Territory as
soon as possible a visiting mission with a view to the
ful] and speedy implementation of the Declaration and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session;

5. Requests the Secretary-General in consultation
with the Chairman of the Special Committee, in the
meantime to send urgently a special representative to
East Timor for the purpose of making a thorough, onthe-spot assessment of the existing situation in the Territory and of establishing contact with the representatives of the Frente Revolucionária de Timor Leste
Independente and the Government of Indonesia, as
well as the Governments of other States concerned, in
arder to prepare the ground for a visiting mission of
the Special Committee, and to report thereon to the
Special Committee;
6. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
conformity with Article 11, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, to the critica! situation in the
Territory of East Timor and recommends that it
should take ali effective stcps far thc implementation
of its resolutions 384 (1975) and 389 (1976) with
a view ,to securing the full exercise by the people of
East Timor of their right to self-determination and independence;
7. Calls upon the Government of Indonesia and
the leadership of the Frente Revolucionária de Timor
Leste Independente to facilitate the entry into East
Timor of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and other relief organizations in order to assist
the people of the Territory;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the ítem entitled "Question of
East Timor".

83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/35.

Activities of foreign economic and other
interests whicb are impeding the implementation of tbe Declaration on tbe
Granting of lndependence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhoclesia ancl Namibia ancl in ali other Territories uncler colonial clomination ancl ef.
forts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid
ancl racial cliscrimination in soutbern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered ,the ítem entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia and Namibia and in all
other Tcrritories under colonial domination and efforts
to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question, 48
Taking into consideration the parts of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia 49 relating to
this question,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declarntion on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implcmentation of the Declaration, as well as al! other
resolutions of the United Nations relating ,to the item,
Taking into account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
and Namibia,5° adopted by the International Conference in Support of ,the Peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977,
as well as the Lagos Declaration for Action against
Apartheid, 51 adopted by the World Conference for
Action against Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to 26
August 1977,
Taking note of the decision concerning the export
of oil ,to the illegal racist régimcs in southern Africa
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of thc Organization of African Unity at its
fourteenth ordinary session, held at Librcville from 2
to 5 July 1977," 2
Rea{firmin[J thc solemn obligation of the administering Powers under thc Charter of thc Uni,ted Nations
to promote thc political, economic, social and cducational advanccment of the inhabitants of the Territorics
under thcir administration and to protect the human
and natural resources of those Territorics against
abuses,
4 8 /bid., Thirt_V-S('CO/u/ Scssion, Supplement No. 23 (A/3::I
23/Rev.1), vol. l. cha p. IV.
49 /bid., Supplcment No. 24 (A/32/24), vol. I, part two,
chap. VI. and vol. 11, annex XII.
50 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.1, annex V. For the printed
text, sec Officia! Records of the Security Council, Thirtvsecond Y car, Supplement for Ju/y, August and September 1977.
r.t A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
52 See A/32/310.
