General Assembly-Fifth Session

28

3. Recommends to the governments of the underdeveloped countries concerned that they avail themselves of the facilities available to them through the
United Nations expanded programme of technical assistance, in order that they may obtain expert advice in the
planning of such measures as those listed in the preceding paragraph, for the purpose of improving agrarian
conditions.
312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.

402 (V).

Development of arid land

The General Assembly,
Considering that:
(a) One of the basic reasons for the low standard
of living in certain under-developed countries is the
inadequate extent of the areas at present under cultivation,
( b) The continual increase in the populations of
these countries requires the adoption of appropriate
and urgent measures for the development of their resources,
( c) It is essential in the above circumstances, if the
equitable distribution of land is to be promoted and the
standard of thing raised, that, among other measures,
the areas at present under cultivation be increased by
the development of arid zones,
( d) The Economic and Social Council, in resolution 324 D (XI) of 9 August 1950, has recommended
an intensification of scientific research to promote the
economic and social progress of mankind and has
rec()gnized the necessity for co-ordinating the efforts
of the various competent bodies of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies in order to study the
problems of the arid zones both in their scientific and
in their practical aspects,
l. Recommends that the Secretary-General prepare,
in collaboration with the competent specialized agencies, a report on the practical measures adopted for the
study of the problems of arid zones and on the technical and financial means employed by the specialized
agencies for this purpose ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to submit his report
on this matter not later than to the fourteenth session
of the Economic and Social Council ;
3. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
examine the report and., with a view to facilitating and
encouraging the development of arid land, to consider
such measures as:
(a) Devoting sufficient technical and financial means
to the study of the relevant scientific and practical
problems;
( b) Promoting and co-ordinating the activities of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies to that
end;
( c) Furnishing appropriate technical assistance to
the governments concerned.

312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.

403 (V). Volume and distribution of national
income in under-developed countries

The General Assembly,
Considering that, in order to mobilize better their
resources with a view to accelerating their economic
development, it is desirable that the under-developed
countries should have knowledge of their national income and its distribution,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 299
E (XI) of 12 July 1950 concerning national income
and social accounts,
1. Recommends that the under-developed countries
should devote special attention to studies directed
towards the calculation of their national income and
its distribution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies concerned to give the most favourable
consideration possible to requests for technical assistance made for the above purpose ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
study and report on the volume and distribution of
national income in the under-developed countries, with
special reference to :
( i) The various income groups and the respective
proportions between them ;
(ii) The amounts used by these countries to meet
their foreign commitments arising from loans and investments, public and private, and the payment of
services;
4. Directs the Secretary-General to prepare and submit to the Economic and Social Council a report to
enable it to carry out the request made in paragraph
3 above;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in carrying out
studies relating to the present resolution, to avoid any
duplication with the study recommended in paragraph
16 of Economic and Social Council resolution 294 D
(XI) of 12 August 1950.
312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.

404 (V). Economic development and international economic and commercial policy

The General Assembly,
Considering that the economic welfare of most countries depends on their imports and exports, and that
these imports and exports are directly affected by prevailing commercial policies,
Considering further that the United Nations and its
specialized agencies must thoroughly and continuously
study the extent to which prevailing commercial policies influence the plans for economic development of
under-developed countries,
Reaffirms General Assembly resolution 307 (IV) of
16 November 1949 concerning economic development
and international economic and commercial policy, and
requests that the group of experts, to be appointed by
the Secretary-General under Economic and Social
