THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

25 OCTOBER

1977

YORK

P
CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S./Agenda/2038)

. , . . . . . . . . I . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda

. . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative
of Tunisia to
the United
Nations
addressed to the President
of the Security Council
(S/12420)
.,.,......,.........,....,.,..,.........,....

1

S/PV.2038

that will inevitably lead to the liberation of Africa and we
are at one with those struggles.”

13. The Organization of African Unity has always maintained that the South African regime is a Fascist regime and
that we can expect no real change in that country as long as
the present rkgime remains in power. The events of the past
week prove that we have been right. The actions of the
South African regime are at once outrageous and “logical”;
they are part of the logic of racism and no one should be
surprised by them. Indeed, many of us had predicted that
such actions would come.

At the same time, he stated that Venezuela was giving full
co-operation to the fight being carried on by Africa for its
liberation and he notified the delegation that they could
count On VenCzLIela’s vote at the United Nations and on its
material support and solidarity.
9. ln conclusion, I wish to reiterate the fact that the
Government of Venezuela vehemently repudiates the repressive measures adopted by the racist regime. The closing
down of two newspapers that expressed the views of the
majority of the population is a violation of one of the most
eleincntary human rights: the right to receive information.
We are consoled, however, to know that those measures
reflect the insecurity and fear that daily fill the South
African racists when they see that the struggle against
injustice is gaining ground.

14. The Security Council must therefore urgently reassess
its position on the question of South Africa. My delegation
believes that we must take action now against the racist
rkgime of South Africa and that we must adopt the draft
resolutions on South Africa submitted to the Council on 29
March. That is the least we can do.
15. As we all know, certain members of the Council have
in the past insisted on caution in this matter. They have
argued that the actions demanded by the African Group
were hasty. They have said, and they continue to say, that
the Western Powers can persuade South Africa to change,
to be more reasonable, to loosen the bonds of apartheid.
The best way to ensure change, we have been told, is
through “peaceful means”, and some have even said that
“fundamental transformation
can be achieved to the
advantage of both blacks and whites”.

10. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): The events of
the last few days in South Africa have brought US to a
decisive stage in our deliberations on that tragic country.
They demonstrate clearly that the racist minority regime is
bent on crushing every sign of opposition to the violent and
inhuman practices of apartheid, that it cannot tolerate free
speech---any kind of speech-,-open criticism or any sort of
freedom for the oppressed majority, Those events mean
that the Security Council must renounce the irrelevant and
self-serving arguments about the prospects for peaceful and
constructive change in South Africa. The Council must now
take urgent action to ensure the isolation of the minority
rbgime in the international community. The United Nations
must now actively help to end the system of apartheid.

16. In the spring of this year, members were persuaded to
suspend the debate on South Africa. They were told that
representatives of the Western Powers would go to South
Africa and make it clear to Mr, Vorster that time was
running out. They would demand change and threaten
United Nations sanctions in the event of change not
materializing. Members were told that the new Administration in Washington was committed to majority rule in
South Africa and that it would use its power and influence
to force change. They were told that they would soon see
evidence that the new United States and Western policy was
workable. The Council was asked to delay the discussion on
this question for two months. We have now waited six
months, and we have been shown that the pleas for delay in
the spring were nafve, self-serving and dangerous. The racist
regime has now given unquestionable proof of its Fascist
character.

11. The so-called Minister of Justice-or the Minister of
so-called justice-.-in the racist minority rCgime of South
Africa has just carried out a putsch designed to eliminate
the vestiges of freedom there. Eighteen organizations have
been banned. They include the Black Parents’ Association,
the Black Pcoplc’s Convention, the South African Students’
Movement, the South African Students’ Organization, the
Soweto Students’ Representative Council, the Union of
Black Journalists, Black Community
Programmes, the
National Youth Organization and the Christian Institute.
Two leading black newspapers, The World and W~ekd
WU&, have been closed down. Their editors have been
arrested. In addition, dozens of prominent black South
Africans have bee11 arrested or detained and a number of
proI~~i~~c~~twhite South Africans have been banned. They
include Donald Woods, Editor of the Daily Dispatch Of East
London, and Dr. Beyers Naude, the Director of the
Christian Institute.

17. Even the Western mass media, which are scarcely
known for their critical acumen or their sympathy for the
third world, have shown that they understand what is
happening in South Africa. The Washington Post correspondent in Johannesburg said the other day of
Mr. Vorster:
“His remarks made clearer than ever before that this
country has decided to ignore pressure from the outside
world, including the United States, and intends to crush
black and white dissent, whatever the cost to its image
abroad,”

12. By banning those organizations and causing dozens of
people to be arrested and banned, the South African
Government says it will put an end to a “campaign of
which is being organized by a
hatred against whites”
“minority”
that wishes to lead the country into “anarchy”.
The language of the South African racists is as revealing as
their actions. No reasonable person can fail to see that, in
that language, we are confronted with dangerous and
paranoid ranting on the part of a regime consumed by
racism and fear, a rCgime which, in its delusions, will use its
power to do violence everywhere.

On 21 October, The Christian Science Monitor quoted an
unnamed American official to the same effect. According
to that paper’s correspondent, the official said about the
Vorster rdgime:
“There is absolutely no sign that they are preparing to
make any big change in the right direction.”
2

The official added:

transition to majority rule was a “peaceful” one, carried
out by “moderate Governments”. That was the way to
protect Western interests.

“There is every sign that they intend to continue to
follow apartheid and, if anything, to strengthen it
militarily, politically and economically,”

23. We believe that Secretary Kissinger’s logic applies
today. And it applies to all the major Western Powers. It is
this logic, and not concern about what is best for Africa
and for the African people, which leads them to ask for
delays and for caution. Governments may say that they
abhor apartheid, even that they want to see “fundamental
transformations”
in South Africa. But these are words and,
while these words are being spoken, people are dying in
South Africa.

James Hoagland, a respected writer for The Washington
Post, wrote on 20 October that the white minority was
trying “to roll back a decade of increased black political
awareness”. He pointed out that most of the organizations
banned and persons arrested in the last week were noted for
their moderation and their commitment to change through
peaceful means. He concluded that South Africa’s majority
“now have no significant political alternatives left except
acceptance of the Government’s internationally condemned separate-development policies or the resort to
violence”.

24. The fact is that Western Governments and the Western
establishment openly state that they have vital and increasingly important interests at stake in southern Africa, These
include access to the mineral resources of the region, access
to markets, the exploitation of cheap labour and the
control of strategic trade routes. Western spokesmen make
no apologies when they speak of the need to defend their
interests in southern Africa.

18. It must now be plain for even the most insensitive to
see that the racist regime in South Africa does not want
change or even reform. It is not interested in change by
“peaceful means”-or by any means. It wants to preserve
what it obscenely calls the “South African way of life”:
apartheid.

25. It is well known that these interests weigh heavily in
Western policy planning on southern Africa. Any competent journalist, international civil servant or scholar can
provide full documentation to attest to the fact. Yet such
considerations are not mentioned in our discussions here.
Would it not be better to have the real issues out in the
open? If our discussions continue to revolve around
reasons which are not reasons we shall be wasting our time
and failing in our obligation to the international community.

19. It would appear that certain members, even now,
refuse to recognize the truth about South Africa. It would
also appear that they are reluctant to have the United
Nations take vigorous action against the minority racist
rigime. The United States in particular, we are told, is
anxious about the consequences of such action, for the
international community, it is said, needs South Africa’s
co-operation in order to achieve “settlements” in Namibia
and Zimbabwe.

26. My delegation believes that the Security Council must
discuss these matters. My remarks may well be dismissed as
an arbitrary and unreasonable attack on men of good
intentions, No one should be deceived by these predictable
evasions. Let the Council investigate the facts of the matter.
Let it review the evidence, as we have, and decide whether
what WC say is true. We are confident that, if this is done,
we shall be able to discuss the real issues and to make some
headway.

20. We must look at this argument carefully, far it is being
used in an attempt to defer Security Council action yet
again. The first question which needs to be asked is whether
the Western Powers hesitate to act because they do not see
the truth or whether they do not see the truth because they
hesitate to act.
21. My delegation believes it is important to speak plainty.
In our judgement, the Western Powers have failed to take
action against South Africa, and have sought to prevent the
United Nations from taking action because they fear the
kind of upheaval which would result from the dismantling
of apartheid.

27. There is no longer a shred of evidence to support the
contention that the major Western Powers can persuade the
racist South African r6gime to reform itself or to change.
The fact that some were persuaded to accept this argument
has had only one consequence. It has exacerbated the crisis
in southern Africa. It has hurt the cause of freedom and
independence. Let us look at the evidence. The long delays
in these proceedings have helped the racist regime of South
Africa to pursue a brutal war in Namibia; they have allowed
that entity to provide economic and military assistance to
the illegal Smith regime and they have provided a diplomatic screenfor domesticrepressionand violence.

22. Former Secretary of State Kissinger made this point
clear in his press conference on southern Africa and
Lebanon of I1 September last year. He said that the United
States wanted to see a “peaceful” transition to majority
rule in southern Africa. “Armed struggle”, he stated, was a
process which led to “radicalization”. These are the words
of Mr. Kissinger. Indeed, he spoke of the “probability of
the radicalization of the whole continent of Africa”. The
United States and its allies, he went on, did not want to see
“radical” Governments emerging in southern Africa-and
these are the words of Mr. Kissinger. Such Governments, he
appeared to believe, would threaten vital Western interests
in the region. The United States and its allies would
therefore seek to use their influence to ensure that the

28. The Security Council should proceed immediately to
take action againstthe South African racist rCgimein order
to save lives and to spare the majority more suffering.
Effective action by the United Nations can make it
impossiblefor that r&gime to continue on its intransigent
course.
3

29. The Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity, meeting at Libreville in June and July of this
year, adopted a series of resolutions on South Africa. Its
resolution on sanctions affirmed the urgent riced for

35. The perpetuation of the policy of racial supremacy
practised against the Coloured population, the bloody
repression culminating in the Soweto and Lango massacres,
the encouragement of political assassination, including the
assassination of Steve Bike, the freedom fighter, have given
rise, both in South Africa and internationally, to vigorous
protests. It is surely indicative of the ever-growing concern
of the international community that the problems connected with the situation in South Africa have this year
been the subject of many international meetings, such as
those at Lagos, Maputo and Lisbon, some of which were
devoted exclusively to debating the situation which has
arisen in this part of the continent.

“the total”-1 repeat “total’‘-“isolation
of the apartheid
regime-with
utmost priority for the cessation of all
military and nuclear co-operation with that rCgime, as
well as bank loans to and investments in South Africa”.
In the view of my delegation, the Council can best respond
to that call by the immediate adoption of draft resolutions
S/12309, S/12310, S/1231 1 and S/12312 submitted by the
African members of the Council last March.
30. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation from French):
Seven months after the Security Council decision to
adjourn its debate in the hope of seeing some positive
changes in the grave and tense situation prevailing in South
Africa, and in southern Africa in general, we find ourselves
faced with new atrocities committed by the Pretoria r6gime
against the black majority. Repression of the freedom
fighters has been intensified. The suppression of fundamental
rights and freedoms of the Coloured population has
continued, and measures providing for the prohibition of
important African organizations and many publications in
South Africa have been strengthened.

36. The policy of racial segregation practised by the
Pretoria rCgime and the crimes committed against the
freedom fighters, against all the Coloured population of
South Africa, are a brutal denial of the fundamental rights
of the South African people and at the same time a
defiance of international public opinion and a flagrant
violation of the principles and norms of the Charter of the
United Nations. The effects of such a policy, the explosiveness of the situation in South Africa, and in southern Africa
in general, constitute a grave threat to peace in the
area, with unforeseeable repercussions for international
peace and security. No one any longer denies this truth.

31. Such events only serve to confirm once again, if there
were need of this, that the minority regime of South Africa
is determined never to give up, of its own free will, its
policy of apartheid and racial oppression and that in
desperation, in the face of the struggle being waged for
equality in rights and social justice, it is becoming ever
more brutal, more ferocious and inhuman.

37. In the view of Romania, the elimination of the policy
of apartheid and the state of tension in this part of the
African continent is an extremely urgent imperative. It
commands the attention and solidarity of progressive and
democratic forces throughout the world, forces which
support the just battle being waged by the South African
people to exercise their right to forge their own future and
to determine their own fate. The Security Council can
delay no longer, we believe, in meeting this imperative and
rising to its responsibilities for safeguarding international
peace, security and co-operation.

32. The racial policy of exploitation and its ill effects, the
denial of the fundamental rights of the majority of the
South African population, the forced movement of millions
of Africans and the creation of bantustans have been the
subject of considerable concern in this forum. This has been
reflected in the adoption of a large number of resolutions.

38. In the course of the debate last March, the Romanian
delegation drew the attention of the Council to the fact
that the mere reiteration of the provisions of previous
resolutions was not going to improve the serious situation
in the area. The new measures which we adopt should, in
our view, also carry a guarantee that they will be enforced,
so that the participation of the whole population of South
Africa in the building of their own future, in total equality,
without distinction as to race, creed or colour, can be
assured. This requires that the measures should aim at the
abolition of apartheid and the causes of segregationist
practices, and not at the reform of the apartheid system
which has been institutionalizcd by the Pretoria rkgime.

33. In its efforts to put an end to that policy which
generates inequality, suffering and terror in the most
humiliating way for human beings, a policy which has been
quite rightly considered as being a crime against human
dignity and conscience, the United Nations, since 1946, has
had recourse to a wide range of measures in its efforts to
bring the South African Government to its senses. Thus,
repeated appeals have aver the years been addressed to the
Pretoria rkgime, calling on it to give up its segregationist
policy and to take into account the provisions of the
Charter. In 1963, an appeal was addressed to Member
States to enforce an embargo on arms supplies to South
Africa and to isolate that country diplomatically.

39. The Charter provides the means of resort when peace
and security in the world are threatened. Our African
colleagues and other speakers have made a series of
suggestions which deserve close examination by the
Council. We give our whole-hearted support to the position
of the African countries and the proposals submitted to the
Council, according to which the Council would, pursuant to
the provisions of the Charter, take radical measures against
the Pretoria r6gime. We consider that firm and concerted
action on the part of all the members of this United
Nations body could play an important role in eliminating

34. In view of the refusal of the racist r&me to abide by
the Security Council’s resolutions and in view of the
escalation of the repression of the African population, the
Council recognized, at its meetings in 1972 in Africa, at
Addis Ababa, the legitimacy of the struggle against apartheid and racial discrimination, and reaffirmed the need to
respect the arms embargo against South Africa /resolution
311 (1972)j.
4

--

the state of tension, affording support to the South African
people and ensuring the free and independent development
of the peoples of that part of the world. This requires the
co-operation, first and foremost, of those who, by their
policy towards South Africa, have contributed directly or
indirectly to the maintenance of racist and apartheid
rCgimes on the African continent.
40. Romania believes that the final elimination of this
profoundly anachronistic and reprehensible policy pursued
by the minority regime in Pretoria requires an intensification of the efforts of the whole international community
and all those who love peace, freedom, independence and
equality throughout the world.
41. Faithful to its position of solidarity with African
peoples, and with the struggle of the peoples of the world
to exercise their sacred right to a free and independent life,
Romania supports the aspirations of the South African
people to human dignity and national progress. That
position was reaffirmed by President Nicolae Ceauaescu in
his message addressed on 23 August iast to the World
Conference for Action against Apartheid at Lagos, expressing the determination of Romania:
“to act in the future too in fighting against the policy of
apartheid and racial discrimination in all its forms of
manifestation, to support multilaterally the people of
South Africa in their efforts to achieve national independence, and to ensure their free and independent development on the way to economic and social progress”.l
42. Finally, the Romanian delegation endorses any mcasure agreed upon by the Council that would be conducive to
making substantial progress towards the eradication of the
policy of apartheid and racial discrimination.
43. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the rcpresentative of Algeria. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
44. Mr. BEDJAOUI
(Algeria)
(interpretation
from
French): It is highly symbolic that the Security Council
should resume consideration of the question of South
,Africa under the presidency of a representative of India.
India was the first country to include the problem of
apartheid in the agenda of the Organization and the first,
too, to denounce its misdeeds. It is therefore a pleasure, Sir,
to address to you, on behalf of my delegation, the warmest
congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the
Council for this month, and to express our conviction that,
under your authoritative guidance, the Council will be able
to adopt the decisions dictated by the gravity of the
situation in South Africa. I should also like to extend my
thanks to all members of the Council for permitting my
delegation to contribute to this debate.
45. Despite all the progress achieved, is mankind always to
be divided into Romans and barbarians, into the chosen
people and the goyim, the former enjoying all the privileges
and the latter having only the right to be subjugated? In
this prodigious human adventure, made up of many glories
1 United Nations publication, SalesNo. E.77.XIV.3, p. 42.

but also of serious flaws, the men of past ages had at least
the advantage over us that they could flout the rights of
other men without having to resort uselessly to solemn
declarations about respect for the outstanding dignity of all
mankind. Today, in an era of spectacular technical progress
that leaves us breathless, we still have a Stone Age
mentality, and it is one of the most striking and cruel
tragedies of our time, a time of scientific progress and
moral backwardness, that we ask in vain that members of
the human race should treat each other like fellow beings.
46. More than any other continent, the African continent
has the sad privilege of enduring Gehenna. On that African
soil which, in Hegel’s beautiful phrase, long remained “a
child shielded from the searchlight of history” and today,
little by little, is receiving the favours of that history
withheld for far too long, human rights have been flouted
more than anywhere else. A seemingly age-old curse seems
to strike Africa mercilessly: after two centuries of slave
trading with the Americas, a century of devastating
colonialism and a Conference of Berlin that carved up the
continent, Africa today still endures racial segregation, the
rkgime of apartheid and violation of the right of peoples to
self-determination.
47. In our world, which is both civilizcd and barbaric,
man, the final beneficiary of the rule of liberating international law, which is the elemental basis of any national
community, is still being scourged, somewhere there in
South, Africa, and at the same time here in our consciences,
and feels in his own body the modern version of tortures
whose severity might have fascinated Torquemada.
48. The inhuman regime of apartheid or “separate development”, as the odious euphemism has it, is flourishing
more than ever and is taking root now as a permanent and
intolerable challenge to the United Nations and to the
universal conscience. Racial arrogance has assumed the
magnitude of collective madness in South Africa and in the
rest of southern Africa, leaving the blacks to the mercy of
white power. Day after day, Vorster is injecting his poison
of racism into the blood of Africa. The international
community has tried unsuccessfully to arrest this foul
leprosy, this racist cancer, that is spreading through
southern Africa. What is left to say but a bitter accusation
of those responsible, the expression of an anger that burns
and purifies, and an oath that binds?
49. The resolutions of the United Nations, the specialized
agencies, the regional organizations, the declarations of
statesmen calling for the liberation of southern Africa, are
innumerable. But behind the kernels of words lies the straw
of8 facts; behind the magic of words, the devastated
landscape of a universe where man is still tortured and
suffering.
50. This series of meetings of the Security Council has
been convened at the request of the African Group as a
result of the latest measures of repression carried out by the
racist regime of Pretoria. This new wave of oppression of
unequalled scope was felt as a shock and a challenge by
even the traditional protectors of the racist r&gime of
Pretoria.

perseverance in trying to perpetuate white domination over
South Africa compels the racist regime to resort to a whole
series of repressive measures against the South African
people. To achieve its aims, Pretoria also has now embarked
on a frantic increase of its military strength, which extends
even into Namibian territory. That military strength is used
inside its borders to repress and oppress the African
population and outside them for aggressive purposes against
the independent neighbouring African States, thus seriously
jeopardizing and threatening international peace and security.

51. Indeed, the alarming news that has been received from
South Africa serves to show that the latest events that have
taken place are far from representing little, unimportant
and isolated incidents and should convince US all of the
gravity of the situation and its explosive nature as well as of
the permanent peril for international peace and security
inherent in the apartheid system.
52. In fact, the events of the last few days reveal the true
intentions of the leaders of Pretoria and their determination
to maintain the rCgime of apartheid. Further, they have just
offered formal proof of the error of the belief that there is
the slightest readiness on the part of Pretoria to make some
change in its policy of apartheid. Those events obey the
logic of a system that cannot survive without repression.
They serve to swell the already long list of the massacres at
Sharpeville, the murders at Soweto and the assassination of
nationalist leaders. It is in the nature of things, therefore,
that they should have moved the international community
to indignation and aroused general condemnation even
among the countries most indulgent towards the rbgime of
apartheid.

55. The attitude of certain Governments which give direct
or indirect assistance to South Africa is obviously encouraging to the Pretoria regime in its constant defiance of the
international community. That is why those Governments
must of necessity bear part of the responsibility for the
latest measures taken by Vorster’s rigime. We can no longer
accept the ambiguous behaviour of those that, on the one
hand, condemn apartheid policies and, on the other, enjoy
close and fruitful relations with Pretoria.
56. It is to the honour of the African countries that they
have ceaselessly denounced the dangers of the racist policy
of Pretoria. Once again, they have turned to the Security
Council and asked it to assume its responsibilities. What
Africa requires today of the Council is not only that it
should express itself in solidarity with the black population
of South Africa but that it should adopt all measures called
for by the situation, and particularly that it should prohibit
any relations of a political, economic or military nature
with the Pretoria rCgime. For this it would suffice that the
Council should approve the four draft resolutions put
before it last March by its three African members. In acting
thus, it will live up to its responsibilities vis-&vis a people
whose dignity has been shattered and will avert new
Sharpevilles and new Sowetos.

53. It is not, I think, useless to recall that the present
meetings of the Council are nothing more than a renewal of
the debate that began last March and that should have
culminated in the adoption of measures against the regime
of Pretoria. But certain members of the Council, perhaps
trusting too much in their capacity for persuasion regarding
South Africa, convinced the Council of the need to grant a
breathing spell to that country so that it might have a
chance to see the light of reason. The reply of South Africa
could not have been clearer: escalation of repression and
constant defiance of the international community. In a
word, South Africa has made good use of the respite
granted and has strengthened its system of servitude. It
continues, therefore, to play its role as an outlaw with the
insensate hope of wearing out the vigilance of the international community and sapping the resistance of the people
of black South Africa.

57. Until the Powers concerned have imposed a strict and
binding embargo on the supply of weapons to South Africa,
until they have ceased to grant any more investments or
credits to the racist rbgime, until the Council has adopted
the provisions contained in Chapter VII of the Charter and
called for by the situation in order to put an end to the
flagrant and persistent violations of the principles of the
United Nations, there will be no peace in South Africa, nor
in the whole southern region, nor in the African continent
which has suffered so much for so long.

54. The profound meaning of what is at present taking
place in South Africa can no longer be a secret to anyone.
It is apartheid, and apartheid alone, that lies at the root of
the tragedy that continues to afflict the black population of
Africa. It is not sufficient to condemn apartheid to ensure
its disappearance. The black population of South Africa can
no longer be satisfied, as in the past, with kind words or
even the general indignation that the latest and tragic
developments in the situation have aroused. Its diabolical

The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

6
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalentin other currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-WOO
