Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

T aking note of the reports of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council and the General Assembly, 39
and the replies contained therein, on the question of
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
region of the Middle East,
Recognizing, on the basis of the above-mentioned
reports, that the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the Middle East enjoys wide support in the
region,
Mindful of the prevailing political situation in the
region and of the potential danger emanating therefrom, which would be further aggravated by the introduction of nuclear weapons in the area,
Conscious, therefore, of the need to keep the countries of the region from becorning involved in a ruinous
nuclear arms race,
Taking note of the comprehensive study of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its aspects,40
prepared by the Ad Hoc Group of Qualified Govemmental Experts pursuant to General Assembly resolution 3261 F (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,
Recalling its resolution 2373 (XXII) of 12 June
1968, in which it expressed the hope for the widest
possible adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons41 by both nuclear-weapon and
non-nuclear-weapon States,
l. Expresses the opinion that the Member States
with which the Secretary-General has consulted through
his notes verbales of 19 March 1975 and 13 June 1975
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 3263 (XXIX)
should exert efforts towards the realization of the objective of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
the region of the Middle East;
2. Urges all parties directly concerned to adhere to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a means of promoting this objective;
3. Recommends that the Member States referred to
in paragraph 1 above, pending the establishment of the
nuclear-weapon-free zone under an effective system of
safeguards, should:
(a) Proclaim solemnly and immediately their intention to refrain, on a reciproca! basis, from producing, acquiring or in any other way possessing nuclear
weapons and nuclear explosive devices, and from perrnitting the stationing of nuclear weapons, in their territory or the territory under their control, by any third
party;
( b) Refrain, on a reciproca! basis, from any other
action that would facilitate the acquisition, testing or
use of such weapons, or would be in any other way
detrimental to the objective of tbe establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region under an ef-

fective system of safeguards;
4. Recommends to tbe nuclear-weapon States to
refrain from any action contrary to the purpose of the
present resolution and the objective of establishing, in
the region of the Middle East, a nuclear-weapon-free
at O(/iclal Record., o/ lhe Securlty Councll, Tldrtleth Year,
Supplemenl for luly, August and September 1975, documents
S/11778 ami Add.1-3 and ib{d., Supplemenl for October, November and December 1975, document S/11778/Add.4; A/
10221 and Add.l and 2.
Official Record, o/ lhe General A..rsembly, Thlrtleth Seaslon, Supplement No, 27A (A/10027/Add,1), annex l.
41 Resolution 2373 (XXII), BDDU,

"°

25

zone under an effective system of safeguards and to
extend their co-operation to the States of the region
in their efforts to promote this objective;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the item entitled "Establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the
Middle East".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3475 (XXX). Prohibition of action to influence
the environment and climate for military and
other hostile purposes, which are incompatible with the maintenance of international
seeurity, human well-being and health

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 3264 (XXIX) of
9 December 1974 it requested the Conference of the
Comrnittee on Disarmament to proceed as soon as possible to achieving agreement on the text of a convention on the prohibition of action to infl.uence the environment for military and other hostile purposes,
Convinced that the conclusion of such a convention
would serve to spare mankind from the potential dangers of the use of environmental modification techniques for military and other hostile purposes, and
thereby contribute to strengthening peace and averting
the threat of war,
Convinced also that such a convention should not
affect the use of environmental modi<fication techniques
for peaceful purposes, which should contribute to the
preservation and improvetbent of the environment for
the benefit of present and future generations,
Taking into account the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament42 as it relates to this
question,
Noting with satisfaction that the delegations of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Uni¡ed
States of America submitted at the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament identical drafts of a convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques43 and
that other delegations offered suggestions and preliminary observations regarding those drafts,
1. Requests tbe Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue negotiations, bearing in rnind
existing proposals and suggestions as well as relevant
discussion by the General Assembly, with a view tb
reaching early agreement, if possible during the 1976
session of the Confe rene e, on the text of a conventiol)
on the prohibition of military or other hostite use of en- ,
vironmental modification techniques, and to submit a .
special report on the resutts achieved for consideration
by the Assembly at its thirty-first session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to the discussion by the General Assembly at its thirtieth session of the item entitled "Prohibition of action to influence the environment and climate
for military and other hostite purposes, which are incompatible with the maintenance of international security, human well-being and health";
42 Otficial Records of the General A.ssembly, Thlrtleth Sea. slon. Supplement No. 27 (A/10027),
41 Jbid., annex Il, documents CCD/471 ami CCD/472.

26

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

3. Dectlti!J to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an ítem entitled "Convention on
the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of
environmental modification techniques: report of the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3476 (XXX). Declaration and establishment of a
nuclear-free zone in South Asia
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3265 A (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which the General Assembly, while
recognizing, ínter alia, that the creation of nuclearweapon-free zones could promote the cause of general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control, considered that the initiative for the creation of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in an appropriate region of
Asia should come from the States of the region concerned, taking into account its special features and
geographical extent,
•,
Noting with appreciation the comprehensive study
of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its
aspects, 44 which has been prepared by the Ad Hoc
Group of Qualified Governmental Experts under the
auspices of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,
Having considered the basic principie unanimously
accepted by the experts that, wherever appropriate
conditions for a nuclear-weapon-free zone exist, the
initiative for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
should come from States within the region concemed,
and participation must be voluntary,
Decides to give due consideration to any proposal
for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in an
appropriate region of Asia, after it has been developed
, and matured among the interested States within the region concemed.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3265 B (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which it endorsed, in principle, the
concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia,
Not;ng the note by the Secretary-General,411
Further noting that, in the introduction to his report
on the work of the Organization, the Secretary-Oeneral has urged the interested countries of the different
regions to consult together with a view to the establishment of additional nuclear-free zones, 48
1. Urges the States of South Asia to oontinue their
efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
South Asia, as recommended by the General Assembly in resolution 3265 B (XXIX);
2. Further urges those States to refrain from any
action contrary to the objective of establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
"'Ibid., Suppl,ment No. 27A (A/10027/Add.I), annex I.
411 A/1032.S.

48See Of/icial Record, of the Gen,ral As1embly, Thirtl1th
Sesrion, Supplement No. JA (A/10001/Add.1), sect. VIII.
,,

3. Decides to include in the provisional agend::i. of
its thirty-4irst session an item entitled "Establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3477 (XXX). Establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the South Pacific

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the urgent need for agreement on
measures to achieve the goal of general and complete
disarmament, inoluding nuclear disarmament, under
.effective international control,
Convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and the continuance of the nuclear arms race are
among the greatest threats to world peace and the survival of mankind,
Noting that article VII of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons47 acknowledges the
right of any group of States to conclude regional treaties
in order to ensure the to~ absence of nuclear weapons
in their respective territories,
N oting further the declaration of the Review Confereru::e of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons that the establishment
of internationally recognized nuclear-weaPon-free
zones, on the initiative and with the agreement of the
directly concerned States of the zone, represents an effective means of curbing the spread of nuclear weapons
and could contribute significantly to the security of
those States,48
Endorsing the declaration of the Review Conference
that the co-operation of the nuclear-weapon States is
necessary for the maximum eflectiveness of any treaty
arrangements for establishing a nuclear-weapon-free
zone, 49
Recalling, in particular, the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa, 50 adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo
from 17 to 21 July 1964, and the notable progress
achieved by the Latín American States towards the denuclearization of their region,
Noting, in addition, that the Heads of Govemment
of the independent or self-goveming States members
of the South Pacific Forum emphasized in their communiqué of 3 July 1975 the importance of keeping the
South Pacific region free from the risk of nuclear contamination and of involvement in a nuclear conftict
and commended the idea of establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone in the South Pacific as a means of
achieving that aim,
1. Endorses the idea of tlie establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the South Pacific;
2. Invites the countries concemed to carry forward
consultations about ways and means of realizing this
objective;
3. Expresses the hope that all States, in particular
the nucleár-weapon States, will co-operate fully in
achieving the objectives of the present resolution;
47 Resolution 2373 (XXII), ami.ex.

'ª49 See
A/C.1/1068, annex I, p. 9.
/bid.

11o See Of/icial Record, of th, Gen,ral Ass,mbly, Tw,nti,th
Session, Annexe,, agenda item 10.S, document A/597.S.
