THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
lh
MEETING: 25 MAY 1977

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
.. .....,,.. , ..... ,., .. . . , . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/l 23 15) . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2009)

S/PV. 2009

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.

2009TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Thomas S. BOYA (Benin).

.25 May 1977, at 3 porn*

not to recopize the Transkei should, therefore, be borne
collectively by the United Nations and not by Lesotho
alone.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

4. There is no doubt that the Pretoria r&me is in breach
of its agreement with Lesotho in closing three border posts.
By SO doing, it is trying to coerce Lesotho to recognize the
Transkei. The Pretoria regime is clearly exploiting the
natural and historical dependence of Lesotho on its
immediate environment.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ZQW)
1. Adoption of the agenda

5. The report of the Mission
sent to Lesotho (see
states that, during the British colonial period,
very little was done to develop Lesotho. Perhaps it is not
too late to rectify that historical omission and help a
former colonial Protectorate. There is no better time to do
it than now when Lesotho is in urgent need of external
assistance.
S/123I5]

2. Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/12315)
The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m

Adoption of the agenda
6. The report pays a compliment
to the people of Lesotho
in stating that Lesotho has few known natural resources
other than the industriousness of its people, a fact which
has doubtless been thoroughly
exploited by the Pretoria
regime.

The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa
Note by the Secretary-General (S/123 15)

7. Land-locked Lesotho is virtually a prisoner of South
Africa, a hostage to its racist policies; it is therefore our
duty to try to release Lesotho fromits economic imprisonment by South Africa.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken by the Council
yesterday aternoon f2007th meeting], I propose to invite
the representatives of Lesotho and Sierra Leone to participate in the debate, without the right to vote, under the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

8. We are dealing with a situation which is very special and
which, apparently, was not envisaged by those who drafted
the Charter of the United Nations, Even so, the Charter
provides the General Assembly and the Security Council
with ample general powers to rectify situations which are
the direct consequences of the discredited policies of the
Pretoria rigime.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. C D. Molapo
(Lesotho) took a place at the Council table and Mr, S,
R Nicol (Sierra Leone) took the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber.

9. The United Nations has firmly opposed the policy of
of the principles and purposes of
the Charter and as a violation
of, the humap rights and
fundamental freedoms of the majority of the people of
South Africa, It has also rejected the policy of creating
bantustans which is designed to dismember and misappropriate the natural heritage of the people and to violate the
territorial integrity of their country,
apartheid as a violation

2. Mr, JAIPAL (India): My delegation is happy that the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho has found it
possible to participate in the work of the Council. We
listened yesterday [ibid.] to his statement with very close
attention.
3. We are fully aware of the extremely vulnerable situation
of Lesotho vis-a-visSouth Africa and we admire the courage
of Lesotho all the more in its refusal to recognize the
so-called independence of the Transkei, Lesotho’s action is
consistent with the decision of the General Assembly to
deny any form of recognition to the Transkei [resolution
3.2/6,4]. The adverse consequences of Lesotho’s decision

10. It seems to us that the Pretoria rkgime should be made
financially liable for the damage caused to its neighbours by
its unacceptable racist policies. There are ways of securing
the discharge of that liability
sine South Africa is still
shown on our books as a Member of the United Nations. In
1

Lesotho. In this context, I should like to mention in
particuIar the assistance we are providing through the
European Community since Lesotho became a party to the
Lome’ agreements.

this regard, those ‘of us who have diplomatic and other
relations with that regime can play a special role.’
11. An expression of international solidarity with Lesotho
is clearly called for, and that expression should take
concrete shape in the form of generous responses to the
appeal for fmancial, technical and material assistance put
forward by the Secretary-General [S/12325].

19. Our co-operation with Lesotho, like all our development aid to Africa, is governed by the principle that we
participate in the implementation of projects only at our
African partners’ special request and only in so far as such
projects have been proposed by them. We are also guided in
this co-operation by the desire to contribute to meeting our
partners’ specific requirements in the use of their OWII
resources and thus to accelerate progress on the road to
complete economic independence,

12. Mr. VON HASSELL (Federal Republic of Germany):
The statements made in this debate and especially the
detailed account given by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Kingdom of Lesotho 12007th meeting] have once
again confirmed the determination with which the courageous people of Lesotho is working for the economic
evolution of its country, A small country with few natural
resources other than the industriousness and skiil of its
people, land-locked and entirely surrounded by the territory of South Africa, Lesotho is facing particular difficulties not only in establishing favourable conditions for
economic growth but also in safeguarding its territorial
integrity and independence.

20. We shall continue this co-operation with our African
partners in a spirit of friendship and mutual respect. But
this vital task cannot be carried out by some countries
alone. It is an obligation to be met by all industrialized
States alike. If we fulfil this obligation, we can rightly claim
to be acting in accordance with the United Nations
fundamental responsibility to maintain international peace
and to promote social progrsss in freedom for all.

13. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
believes that the stability of Lesotho is an essential factor
for achieving progress in our common struggle for the rights
of the peoples in southern Africa. Mindful of this, my
Government initiated years ago its policy of economic
co-operation with the geographically isolated people of
Lesotho.

21. Mr. BAD1 (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): I should like
first of all to state how honoured my delegation feels at the
presence in this Council chamber of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Lesotho.
22. On 22 December last year, the Security Council
adopted resolution 402 (1976), which specifically endorsed
General Assembly resolution 3 1/6A. That General Assembly
resolution, inter alia, calls upon all Governments to deny
any form of recognition to the so-called independent
Transkei or other bantustans and to refrain from having any
dealings with them. At the same time, in its resolution
402 (1976), the Security Council commended the Government of Lesotho for its decision not to recognize the
so-called independence of the Transkei and condemned any
action taken by the racist regime in South Africa intended
to coerce Lesotho into according recognition to the
bantustan Transkei. The Council called upon the Pretoria
regime to take immediately all necessary steps to reopen its
borders with Lesotho in the areas adjacent to the Transkei.
In compliance with paragraphs 6 and 7 of the resolution, a
Special Mission was dispatched to Lesotho for consultations
with the Government regarding the need for assistance to
enable it to overcome the economic and social hardships
and difficulties resulting from the flagrantly hostile act
perpetrated by the racist regime in closing the border posts.

14. Co-operation started soon after Lesotho became independent. Our contributions reached a total of 15 million
Deutschmarks in 1975. That assistance consisted primarily
of the dispatch of medical personnel and equipment to
improve basic health facilities. We also supported the
Lerotholi Technical Institute in Maseru and provided, inter
alia, a 6-million Deutschmark capital aid loan for the
construction of a water-supply system.
15. In view of Lesotho’s growing difficutlties as a result of
its enclosed postion and the continuing influx of refugees,
the Federal Government announced additional pledges in
1976 totalling 13 million Deutschmarks for that year alone.
16. A month ago, my Government pledged an additional
31.5 million Deutschmarks for 1977. Of that sum, 24
million has been made available as financial assistance on
very soft terms. Together with the Lesotho Government,
we are currently working on several project appraisals,
including an important road construction, a basic agricultural services programme, assistance to the Agricultural
Development Bank and the construction of a brick factory.

23. The Security Council has now been convened to
consider the report of the Mission, which has been
circulated in document S/12315. I should like to take this
opportunity to express my delegation’s deep appreciation
to the Mission for its efforts in fulfilment of the tasks
entrusted to it. Our appreciation and sincere gratitude go
also to the Secretary-General, whose efforts greatly contributed to the success of the Mission.

17. At the same time, the Federal Republic of Germany
offered a sum of 7.5 million Deutschmarks for the purpose
of continuing technical assistance. It is envisaged to send
experts and equipment to Lesotho to assist in the development of agricultural services, central planning, housing for
refugee students, technical education, radiology, telecommunications and several other educational and training
programmes.

24. The report of the Mission is self-explanatory. It is
patently evident that, as a result of the apartheid regime’s
illegal and unilateral actions vis-a-vis Lesotho, the situation
in southern Africa as a whole has reached a new level of
gravity.

18. The Federal Republic of Germany ranks among the
major contributors to multilateral
aid programmes for
2

25. I should like to make special reference to paragraph 31
of the report, which illustrates, in an unambiguous manner,
the South African racist regime’s continued defiance of and
disrespect for the resolutions of the United Nations and for
international public opinion. That paragraph indicates that
the racist regime has restricted the passage of Lesotho
citizens into South Africa to two border posts which are
distant from the Lesotho-South African border. This
measure taken by the racist regime was deliberately
designed to further its policy of bantustanization and to
obstruct the traditional routes of the Basotho into the
neighbouring areas of South Africa. These restrictions have
been imposed to inflict great hardships and apply extortion
and coercion against Lesotho and to endanger its citizens in
the normal pursuit of their livelihoods.

international community. Steps must be taken to assist and
enable the Government of Lesotho to overcome the
hardships and difficulties resulting from the border closure
and to maintain its courageous defiance and non-recog
nition of the up+heid
and bantustan policies of the
Pretoria regime. My delegation urges all members of the
Council to endorse the programme of assistance contained
in the report of the Mission, On this occasion my delegation
would like to reaffirm the continued support and solidarity
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya with the Government and
people of Lesotho.
30. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): Last December, the Security
Council examined the serious and urgent problems created
for Lesotho as a consequence of South Africa’s arbitrary
and unilateral action in closing three border outposts
between the two countries. Resolution 402 (1976),
adopted on 22 December, apart from condemning South
Africa for its transparent attempt to coerce Lesotho into
recognizing its creation of the Transkei baritustan, also
requested the Secretary-General to organize financial, technical and material assistance to Lesotho to enable it to
overcome its economic difficulties, and to report to the
Council on the outcome of his efforts.

26. It is necessary that the Security Council pay particular
attention to paragraphs 31 to 35 of the report if it is to
ascertain the full extent and complete picture of the
persistent defiance by the racist regime of the resolutions of
both the General Assembly and the Council. It should in
particular be noted that the acts perpetrated by the
apartheid regime in order to exert coercive pressures upon
Lesotho not only are in contravention of resolution 31/6A
and resolution 402 (1976) but also are a further breach of
international law, which stipulates safe passage of transit
goods to and from Iand-locked countries.

31. We now have before us the report [see S/12315] of
the Mission appointed by the Secretary-General. The
delegation of Pakistan would like to place on record its
appreciation for the work done by the Mission, and
especially its chief, Mr. AbduIrahim Abby Farah, Assistant
Secretary-General for Special Political Questions. The Mission has submitted a lucid and objective assessment of
Lesotho’s requirements.

27. It must be emphasized that these acts of coercion and
blackmail are deliberate acts of the racist regime in South
Africa designed to implement the bantustan policy. The
international community has log since realized that bantustanization is a corner-stone of the entire apartheid
structure and policies, q”he racist r&me is using this policy
to maintain its power over the indigenous people of South
Africa and to continue to inflict apartheid and racist
practices upon thse people. Bentustanization has been
forcefully condemned by the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity and by the non-aligned
movement. It should be obvious that the closure of the
border is an act of blackmail and coercion, calculated to
compel Lesotho to accord recognition to the bantustan
Transkei, which is no more than an appendage of the racist
policies of the Pretoria regime.

32. We note that Lesotho would require fmancial assistance amounting to approximately $66 million under the
emergency programme and that the outlay of the accelerated development programme would be in the neighbourhood of $47 million. It is obvious that Lesotho, which
is land-locked and among the 18 least developed countries
of Africa and which is engaged in the all-important task of
making vigorous and sustained efforts for economic progress and prosperity, cannot shoulder on its own its heavy
and unexpected burden.

28. The Security Council cannot be indifferent to those
coercive acts, nor can it fail to take positive measures to
conteract those actions of the apartheid regime. The just
decision of the Government of Lesotho to refuse to
recognize the independence of the Transkei is based not
only upon its deep abhorrence of the cruel and inhuman
policies of apartheid but also upon its respect for and
compliancce with the will of the international community
as expressed in the United Nations, the Organization of
African Unity and the non-aligned movement. In particular,
Lesotho has justly and courageously decided fully to
observe resolution 3 1/6A, rejecting the bogus declaration of
independence of the Transkei.

33. Moreover, the report has catalogued the various
pressures to which Lesotho has been and is being subjected
by South Africa since its refusal, in compliance with
General Assembly resolution 31/6A, to recognize the
Transkei bantustan. Those pressures, as the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Lesotho informed us yesterday [2007th
meeting]-and
we were privileged to hear his statementshow no sign of abating. South Africa has once again
chosen to defy the will of the international community and
continues to persist in its attempts to harass and coerce
Lesotho by creating unbearable economic hardships for it.
34. In steadfastly refusing to bow to such pressures, the
people and Government of Lesotho deserve in full measure
the admiration and help of the international community. In
extending material assistance to Lesotho, the international
community will once again convey to South Africa its firm
opposition to its racist policies. In enabling Lesotho to
stand up to South Africa’s coercion, the Council will be

29. It is incumbent upon the Security Council to take all
appropriate measures against the racist minority regime in
South Africa in order to put an end to its contemptuous
defiance of United Nations resolutions. We must ensure
that the Pretoria regime is completely isolated in the
3

reiterating its commitment to the principles of international
law and conduct enshrined in the Charter.

difficulties
bantustan.

35. We fully endorse the recommendations contained in
the report of the Mission and we hope that the international community will respond to the Secretary-General’s
appeal and contribute generously to provide succour to
Lesotho in its hour of need. The Secretary-General deserves
our gratitude for continuing his efforts to secure assistance
for Lesotho and for entrusting to Mr. Farah the task of
co-ordinating action by the United Nations system.

41. Apart from taking those emergency measures, we are
continuing to assist Lesotho in the development of its
agricultural, mining and secondary industry sectors, with
the principal purpose of trying to increase employment
opportunities in those areas. We are the principal supporter
of and .a major contributor to such programmes as the
‘I’haba Tseka Rural Development Project, the Basotho
Enterprises Development Corporation, which assists smallscale local entrepreneurs, an aeromagnetic survey of Lesotho’s potential mineral resources, the Lesotho National
Development Corporation, and the National University.

36. The difficulties faced by Lesotho, and in varying
degrees by other small African States bordering on South
Africa, are, in our view, both a reflection and a manifestation of South Africa’s discredited and morally bankrupt
policies. Not content with denying the majority of its own
population even the most elementary rights and freedoms,
South Africa is now trying to create hardships for its weak
and struggling neighbours. Such actions are certain further
to exacerbate tensions in that region.

arising from

the creation of the Transkei

42. Thus we welcome the report which the Secretary
General has so promptly provided and we shall certainly be
guided by its findings and suggestions in further developing
our assistance efforts with Lesotho. We wish also to
associate ourselves fully with the draft resolution submitted
by the representative of Mauritius [ibid],
and it is our
hope that through our modest efforts we will be able to
alleviate some of Lesotho’s difficulties in this difficult
period of its history.

37, The Council has before it a draft resolution [S/1233.5]
of which my country had the honour to be a sponsor along
with a number of other countries. We hope that this draft
will be adopted unanimously and, more important, that it
will result in a prompt and steady inflow to Lesotho of the
financial and material assistancethat it so well deserves.

43. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (translation from Chinese): We
have listened to the statements made by Mr. Molapo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Lesotho,
and by the representatives of other African States.

38. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Canada was not a member of
the Security Council when resolution 402 (1976) was
adopted in 1976 in connexion with the complaint made by
the Government of Lesotho. Nevertheless, we fully support
that resolution, as it sought to devise ways and means to
overcome the serious economic difficulties faced at that
time by Lesotho-difficulties
which, unfortunately, continue to exist today because of the situation which has been
created on its borders.

44. When the Security Council was considering the question of the South African racist regime’s closing its border
adjacent to the Kingdom of Lesotho in December 1976, the
Chinese delegation already expounded its position on the
matter [1981st meetingI.
4.5. The Chinese delegation once again strongly condemns
the South African racist regime for engineering the sham
independence of the Transkei and for its criminal acts of
exerting gross pressure on Lesotho and other African
States, and we firmly support the peoples of Lesotho and
other States of southern Africa in their just struggle against
colonialism and racism.

39. It is well known that the major factor contributing to
Lesotho’s present predicament is the presence in its
immediate vicinity of a bantustan, the Transkei, which the
entire international community has refused to recognize.
The fact that Lesotho has refused to be coerced into
recognizing such a sham institution must be held to its
credit, and its attachment to moral principles in the midst
of heavy economic pressures must be commended.

46. The Chinese delegation has studied the report [see
S/12315/ on assistance to Lesotho submitted by the
Secretary-General in pursuance of the relevant Security
Council resolution, and we hold that the United Nations
should support the just struggle of the people of Lesotho
by every possible means and provide substantial assistance
to it. On the basis of the foregoing position, the Chinese
delegation supports the draft resolution sponsored by Benin
and seven other countries, contained in document S/1233.5.

40. Our direct response to this need to increase international assistance to Lesotho to enable it to meet its
development goals in the face of the difficulties resulting
from the establishment of the co-called independent
Transkei was to increase the indicative planning figure for
Canadian assistance to Lesotho for the period 1978-1983
from $22.6 million to $30 million. Within that allocation,
and following recent consultations with the Lesotho
Government, $17 million has been tentatively assigned to
assisting Lesotho in the construction of a road through the
mountains of the southern portion of Lesotho between
Thaba Tseka and Qacha’s Nek. A further $2.4 million has
tentatively been allocated towards the purchase of Canadian Twin Otter aircraft, which will in part be used to
facilitate delivery of food and other critically needed
supplies to those regions which have been affected by the

47. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation
from
French): On 22 December 1976, the French delegation
gladly joined in the consensus by which the Council
adopted resolution 402 (1976). It thought at that time that
the international community should not ignore the difficult
situation in which one of the States Members of the
Organization found itself unjustly placed,
48. It was thus with interest that my delegation studied
the report [ibid J of the Mission led by Mr. Farah, to whom
4

I wish to renew my congratulations for the way in which he
carried out his task.
49. I also listened with closest attention to the statement
made yesterday by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Lesotho [.2007th meeting/. I wish to thank him for the
clarity with which he described the difficulties facing his
countsy.
50. Aware of responsibilities incumbent on the international community when a country suffers in this way for
having respected the Organization’s resolutions, the countries of the European Community, since December 1976,
following the closing of Lesotho’s frontier with the
Transkei, have provided emergency assistance totalling $1.2
million-and
France has contributed its share. That assistance was destined for the reconstruction of an access
road. The European Community is also earmarking almost
$27 million for development projects in Lesotho during the
period 19751980. This sum will be distributed to the
agricultural and rural sector, the economic infrastructure
and, in particular, to the equipment of a medium-range
airport, as well as to assistance and training.
51. In associating itself fully with that action of the
Community, my country wishes to express its solidarity
with the Government and people of Lesotho in the difficult
circumstances they are experiencing.
52. We voice the wish that the unanimous position of the
international community in this matter will prompt those
responsible for the situation which has been imposed on
Lesotho to face up to reality. The common attitude of the
Security Council should help them to understand that it is
an illusion for them to hope to obtain international
recognition for any of the entities which they might set up
artificially.
53. In conclusion, my delegation gladly supports the draft
resolution which is before the Council at present
[S/12335].
54. Mr. BYATT (United Kingdom): My delegation has
studied the very comprehensive report of the visiting
Mission [see S/1231.5]. We listened most carefully to the
thoughtful statement made yesterday by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Lesotho [2007th meeting1 and we
welcome his presence to address the Council on behalf of
his Government. The report of the Mission is being studied
by the appropriate experts in London so that my Govemment may determine how best it should respond.
55. As Ambassador Murray commented on 22 December
(1982nd meeting], the problems faced by Lesotho are
neither a novelty nor a surprise. The United Kingdom has a
very old and close relationship with the Kingdom of
Lesotho. We are fully aware of the special geopolitical
diffcultires faced by Lesotho, and have long made efforts
to alleviate them. Ambassador Murray gave details of our
substantial aid programme. The main objective of the
British aid programme, arrived at in consultation with the
Government of Lesotho, is to reduce Lesotho’s
dependence on South Africa. As old friends of Lesotho, we
would endorse the appeal to the international community
to provide assistance to that end.

56. In his statement yesterday, Mr. Molapo -gave an account of certain incidents which suggest that tension may
‘3, growing on the border between Lesotho and South
Africa. We assume that the fifth preambular paragraph of
the draft resolution before the Council [S/12335]
is
intended to refer to such incidents. The United Kingdom
believes that it is in the interest of all that such incidents
should not recur and we express the hope that they will
not. We are ready to join other members of the Council in
adopting the draft resolution by consensus.
57. I cannot conclude without congratulating Mr. Farah
and his team of experts for the competence with which
they have produced the excelIent report before the Council,
58. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President,
I should like
to commence my
statement by telling you how gratified we are with the
effective way that the Council, under your guidance, is
discharging its duties.
59. The present discussion is merely the logical follow-up
of the debate that was begun at the end of last December at
the request of the Kingdom of Lesotho, Mr. Charles
Molapo, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho, as well
as other African representatives gave us the facts of the case
in December last and yesterday and I do not wish to repeat
them. The illegal measures of economic and political
coercion taken by the racist authorities of Pretoria against
Lesotho so as to compel it to recognize the so-called
independence of the Transkei have caused economic problems of considerable scope to Lesotho.
60. We have condemned and resolutely continue to
condetin the coercive measures taken by the authorities of
Pretoria against independent States of Africa, as well as its
racist policy of apartheid. It is high time that the
Organization adopted firm measures against South Africa,
which persists in violating the provisions of the Charter and
defying resolutions of the United Nations.,
61. The measures put forward in the draft resolution
[ibid.] submitted by eight delegations, including my own,
are of capital importance because what is involved here is
the granting of material aid to an independent African
country, Lesotho, which is attempting to implement
courageously and with dignity decisions taken by the
United Nations aginst apartheid. We hope that this draft
resolution will be adopted unanimously. To be sure, we are
still far from adopting measures that could extirpate that
outdated policy of apartheid, but we believe that it is the
duty of the United Nations to support, by all means
possible, the Iegitimate aspirations to freedom of’all peoples
in southern Africa, as well as the independence of African
States that are contributing to the implementation
of
decisions designed to eliminate racial discrimination and
colonial oppression.
62. The international measures proposed in the report of
the Secretary-General would be such as to aid Lesotho and
its people to overcome ,the difficulties created for them by
South Africa and to overcome their economic and political
problems. In order that a case such as this of Lesotho wiIl
not recur and in order to establish conditions that will

make it possible for all peoples of southern Africa to
achieve their hope for independence and liberty and for
development without threats from abroad, the Organization
must also give priority attention to the adoption of firm
measures to eliminate the vestiges of colonialism and the
policy of racial discrimination in southern Africa because
they constitute a permanent source of tension and aggression and jeopardize international peace and security.

70. The Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist
community are, for the young African States, a powerful
support in their struggle against imperialism, neo-colonialism and racism. The Soviet Union has consistently
supported the lawful demands of the liberated States, their
determination to end completely the exploitation to which
they are subjected and their just intention to control their
own natural resources for the benefit of their national
development.

63. Mr. RHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian):
Despite all the
different aspects of the questions that the Security Council
has been considering, both this morning and this afternoon,
it is impossible not to see that the main basis for the
approach to the solution of those two questions remains
the same: the existence in southern Africa of racist t6gimes
which constitute a serious source of tension threatening the
peace and security of the peoples in Africa and elsewhere.

71. The delegation of the Soviet Union supported resolution 402 (1976), adopted last December. In that resolution, the Council appeals for assistance to Lesotho to
enable it to implement its programme of economic development and increase its capacity for the full implementation
of the United Nations resolutions on apartheid and bantustans.
72. In this connexion, we cannot fail to note that, at the
source of the damage caused to African States by the racist
rigimes, are the evil policies and practices of such r&imes,
which must bear full responsibility for that damage, Their
responsibility is shared by those Powers which support the
racist rigimes.

64. Peace and stability in that part of the world can be
guaranteed only as a result of the full implementation
of
the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, the rejection by the ruling circles of South Africa
of the policy of apartheid and racism, the immediate
withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia and the unconditional transfer by the racist Ian Smith rbgime of all power
to the people of Zimbabwe.

73. We are firmly convinced that only the final elimination of those inhuman rkgimes, and consequently the
elimination of the policies and practices that they pursue,
will make it possible to save African States from the
constant threat hanging over them, the threat of aggression
and arbitrary action, and will enable them duly to use their
natural resources and international assistance in the interests of their own progress.

6.5. Together with the African countries, the Soviet Union
roundly condemns the acts of aggression of the racist
regimes directed against the sovereignty of the independent
States of the continent of Africa, including the State of
Lesotho.

74. The position of the Soviet Union was published today
in the Soviet press in a tribute to the African countries. I
shall read out a small excerpt:

66. ?he participation of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Lesotho gives the Security Council a basis for working out
useful decisions.

“The position of the Soviet Union in regard to the
struggle of the peoples of Africa for their freedom and
independence is well known. Since the first days of its
existence, the Soviet State, whose sixtieth anniversary is
being celebrated this year, has been in favour of the
liberation of oppressed peoples. As was $ated by the
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Urlion, Mr. Leonid
Brezhnev, at the twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union has given and
will continue to give support to the people fighting for
their freedom. In this, the Soviet Union is seeking no
advantage or concessions for itself, nor is it seeking
political domination or military bases.”

67, We all know that intergovernmental relations, if they
are ,to be normal, must be based on such principles as the
rejection of the use or the threat of the use of force, respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the
inviolability of State frontiers, non-interference in internal
affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
68. Those progressive democratic principles of international
relations cannot be confirmed and strengthened in southern
Africa so long as aggressive, belligerent racist &imes exist
there. Those r&imes are constantly exacerbating tensions in
that part of the world. They are indulging in all kinds of
provocation and belligerent actions against the independent
countries of Africa in their desire to delay the full and final
liberation of the peoples of the African continent.

75. My delegation supports the draft resolution before us
but it seems to us that, in addition to what the
draft states-and I repeat that we support it-, the Security
Council could adopt a more effective decision which would
not only categorically condemn the racist policies and
practices of South Africa and the other colonialists in
southern Africa but also create a situation which would
make it possible to put an end to such policies and
practices.

[S/12335],

69. The Soviet Union has given and is giving all kinds of
assistance to the national liberation movements in southern
Africa, and this is fully in conformity with the United
Nations decisions. Our country is on the side of the just
cause of the oppressed peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia,
South Africa and elsewhere, Our country has supported and
will continue to support their just claims against the racist
regimes of southern Africa.

76. The actions of the racists and colonialists and their
protectors, who are trying to undermine the process of the
6

establishment of yourig African States, in this case the State
of Lesotho, must be opposed not by calls for politeness and
decent behaviour but by Security Council measures which
would put an end to the aggresion and other hostile
activities of the racists against independent African States,
speed up the erimination of the racist colonialist r&mes ifi
Africa and guarantee the peoples of African an opportunity
for peaceful development in conditions of security.

84. The international community ricommended that its
members abstain from recognizing the Transkei. Lesotho
has faithfully discharged that duty but, in so doing, has
caused itself serious economic difficulties. Logically, that
means that Member States have contracted a moral obligation with regard to Lesotho which they cannot elude in any
way whatsoever. To aid Lesotho is a necessary requirement.
In this connexion, the thorough study submitted by the
Secretary-General leaves no room for doubt.

77. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): We are
pleased to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Lesotho, Mr. Molapo. His presence here and the clear and
deeply felt statement he delivered yesterday /2007th
meeting] have been very helpful to the Council.

85. Since it achieved its independence, the Kingdom of
Lesotho has carried out a policy based on the principles of
the Charter. This peace-loving people, without weapons and
without aggressive intentions, desires only to live in peace
and be in a position to carry out its development
programmes.

78. The United States will join the consensus on the draft
resolution [S/1233.5] in support of Lesotho, since my
Government shares the concern of the other members of
the Council at the pressures to which Lesotho is being
subjected. It is our firmly held conviction that the policies
of the South African Government out of which this
situation arises are wrong. We have no doubt that fundamental social change must come to southern Africa.

86. The Council must adopt measures to put an end to the
hostile and aggressive policy practised by South Africa with
regard to that defenceless country which it is suffocating
both geographically and economically. The draft resolution
in document S]12335 contains, in my view, the indispensable elements for helping Lesotho at this difficult time.
We hope that it will be adopted unanimously.

79. We express our admiration for the efforts of the
Mission to Lesotho and for its excellent report on the need
for assistance to that country. The report, we believe,
brings out with commendable clarity the particular problems Lesotho faces as a small, newly independent State
located in the forefront of the struggle during this difficult
stage in the history of southern Africa. We also note with
approval the letter of 18 April (S/12325]
from the
Secretary-General, calling on Member States to render aid
to Lesotho.

87. I should like to take this opportunity to convey the
congratulations of the delegation of Panama to the Organization of African Unity as that body is today celebrating
another anniversary of its creation. We wish it good health
and long life.
88. Miss

LOPEZ (Venezuela) (interpretation
from
The question of Lesotho which is before us for
our consideration has arisen in a similar way to that of
Botswana, where we see the economic problem mixed with
the political and humanitarian problems. Its geographically
disadvantageous position places it in a situation of dependence on the neighbouring racist rdgime, but its courage in
facing up to its international responsibilities elicits our
admiration and appreciation.

Spanish):

80. As a result of our own study of the situation in
Lesotho,
we too have concluded that assistance is indeed
necessary. Consequently, my Government is taking steps,
subject to the successful completion of the Congressional
process, to make additional as&stance funds available to
Lesotho. My Government urges other nations to view
conditions in Lesotho with compassion and to join in
rendering appropriate financial assistance.

89. Our support for the draft resolution which is before
the Council and of which we are one of the sponsors
/S/12335]
demonstrates our well-known position that
peoples suffering as a consequence of colonialism and
racism must be supported. In Lesotho’s case, we must unite
our efforts to help a ‘people which is suffering the
consequences of racism and which aspires to a dignified life
and development. This draft resolution, which we hope will
be adopted unanimously, is merely an additional denunciation of the policies in southern Africa. We hope that it will
lighten Lesotho’s problems and mark an additional advance
in the struggle that we are waging against racism in this
forum.

81. Mr. RIOS (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish]: My
delegation would like to begin by extending our greetings
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho, and to
express the hope that the mission which brings him to the
United Nations will have a most successful outcome for the
welfare of his Government and his people.
82. Lesotho is complying with a mandate laid down by
the General Assembly at its thirty-first session and, as could
be foreseen, this has caused it serious difficulties with the
racist r&ime of Pretoria.

90. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): As
there are no other names on the list of speakers, I should
now like to speak in my capacity as representative of
BENIN.

83. The world community is the only source of support to
which Lesotho can turn when confronted with the
violence of South Africa. Lesotho is practically a prisoner
of the apartheid r&me, but its courageous people have
risen decisively to defend its borders, its territorial integrity
and the commitments it has accepted as a Member of the
United Nations.

91. The case of Lesotho, which we are at present
considering, is typical from all standpoints of the web of
dependence woven by the colonialists in Africa and other
parts of the third world in order to perpetuate their
domination and the exploitation of man by man.
7

‘k.
\

92. The people of Lesotho is a courageous people which
deserves our warmest admiration. Despite its geo-political
situation, which makes necessaryan uncomfortable coexistence, that people has chosen the way of liberty. independence and sovereignty.
93. The people of Lesotho has so far rejected the
assimilation or the pure and simple loss of its own identity;
it has refused to become a slave of the blood-thirsty
torturers and racists of the illegal minority rdgime of South
Africa.
94. The shameless hardly disguised blackmail to which the
people of Lesotho has been subjected is typical of the
diabolical plan prepared to perpetuate apartheid and to
carry out the bantustanization which the whole-,of the
international community has categorically rejected.
95. The Secretary-General’s report circulated in document
S/l23 15 gives us an objective picture of the painful
problems that Member States must help to solve. The
solutions provided in that report are acceptable to my
delegation, which wishes to congratulate the Mission for the
work it performed in such a short time. In all honesty and
sincerity, all nations of goodwill must help Lesotho to solve
quickly and effectively all those problems.
96. Lesotho’s complaint is legitimate. All those who are
ready to work for peace must give consideration to the
assistance that Lesotho needs if it is to survive, remain firm
and reject the blackmail practised by the racists of South
Africa.
97. My delegation sincerely believes that, in helping
Lesotho to face up to the difficult conditions which its
gee-political situation imposes on it, the Governments of
the world will honestly be working for peace in that part of
Africa. Any kind of pressure that South Africa uses to get
Lesotho to recognize the so-called independent Transkei is
contrary to the noble ideals of the Charter of the United
Nations and thus dangerous for international peace and
security.
98. I shall now revert to my capacity as PRESIDENT. If
no representative wishes to speak at this stage, may I take it
that the Council is prepared to take a decision on the draft
resolution in document S/12335, submitted by Benin,
India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania and Venezuela? It seems that members
of the Council can take a decision without a vote. If that is
the case and if there are no objections, I shall take it that
the draft resolution is adopted unanimously without a vote.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.1

99. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): The primary duty of the
Security Council is to maintain international peace and
security, I may perhaps add that peace and security are not
threatened or disturbed only when the tanks start rolling or
the guns start firing. They can be threatened or disturbed in
so many other ways, for example, by coercion, intimidation, harassment or economic pressure, not to mention
1 See resolution 407 (1977).

blatant blackmail. Unfortunately, those methods have been
used by the racist regimes of Salisbury and Pretoria against
Botswana and Lesotho.
100. On behalf of the sponsors of the draft resolution
concerning Botswana and the draft concerning Lesotho,
adopted unanimously -without a vote this morning and this
afternoon respectively, I wish to thank the other members
of the Council for helping us in taking prompt and effective
action and coming to the assistance of these two countries
in a most practical manner.
101. Let these two resolutions be yet another waning to
the illegal rdgime of Pretoria and the rebel regime of
Salisbury that the international community will not stand
by idly while they commit their insane acts against their
defenceless neighbours. The Governments and the courageous peoples of Botswana and Lesotho deserve our praise
for their determination not to bend to the whims of the
mad racist bullies.
102. The prompt and thorough investigation and assessment carried out by the Secretary-General’s Missions to
Botswana and Lesotho-Missions headed by the indefatigable and devoted Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Farah,
the most experienced United Nations diplomat, committed
to the causes of internationalism, justice and peace-will go
a long way towards reassuring. small and defenceless
countries that they are not standing alone and that
internationalists of goodwill will always be on their side.
103. Contrary to what is sometimes said in the corridors
of the United Nations, Africans have not come to regard
the Security Council as a social security council for raising
funds. I categorically reject such irresponsible statements.
The Security Council has a responsibility under the Charter
and I am proud that it has discharged this responsibility.
104. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho has expressed a
wish to address the Council. I now call on him.
105. Mr. C. D. MOLAPO(Lesotho): OnceagainIshouldlike
to express my delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, and through you to the members of the Council for
having adopted this important resolution unanimously. I
feel it is proper that I should express our felicitations to the
representative of Mauritius, who so ably and eloquently
introuduced the draft resolution which the Council has just
adopted. Without the hard work and dedication of the
sponsors of that draft, the Council would have had nothing
to adopt. To all of them we say: thank you.
106. The Secretary-General summarized the report yesterday, in his usually brilliant manner. The many speakers who
addressed the Council before me did justice to that report. I
shall therefore refrain from boring the Council with any
analysis of the report, which the Council has just adopted. I
would, however, beg the Council’s indulgence if I express
our sincere hope that, now that it has been adopted,
Members of the United Nations and other international
organizations will come to our assistance and translate the
report into reality. The people of Lesotho will feel
encouraged. They will be grateful. They will realize that, in

this struggle, they have the whole international community
with them. As the Secretary-General stated yesterday, on
6 June 1977 he will convene a pledging conference. We can
only express our hope that the States Members of the
United Nations and the other international organizations
concerned will respond generously to the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal.

107. In conclusion, I would express special thanks to the
Secretary-General and through him, to Mr. Farah and h.k
team for a job well done. We are grateful that Mr. Farah
will be in charge of the special account, and we assure him
of our support and co-operation in his work.
The meeting rose at 5 pm.

9

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
th,e world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your
bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondo entier. Informez-vous
aupr&
de votre libraire
ou adresses-vous
h : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAK

HOJIY’IZiTb

H3AAHHR

OPI’AHH

3AU;ZIH

OB16ZAMHEHHbIX

HAQHH

Hoga~wrr
Opranusanwu
06~e~nnennbrx
HaquR
MO)KHO xynrrrh
B xrimiu-n.ix
MaraJWN&X H arenTcTa&x
ao scex panonax
mipa.
HasoAwTe
cnpaarca
06 waAanwsx
B
aamehf
mi~mHor4
Mara3mie
Hnki nrmnrre
no anpecy:
Opranusanris
06’begtfneaahrx
HaqnR,
CeKqurr
no nponame
H3AaHHfi,
Ham-Hoprc
Hnw )KeHeBa.
COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidss,
Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

New

in other

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

77-70001-March

1978-2,200
