64

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

veloped and developing countries, particularly the least
developed among them,
l. W e/comes the unanimous adoption by the Intergovernmental Group on Transfer of Technology of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development-at its first session, devoted to organizational
matters-of a comprehensive programme
work, in
the field of the transfer of operative technology to the
developing countries, to be pursued on a continuing
basis;
2. Reiterates the request made in its resolution
2726 (XXV) that the States members of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development give
their fullest support to the lntergovemmental Group
on Transfer of Technology, and expresses the hope that
the three remaining vacancies in the Group will be
filled from among States given in list B of the annex to
General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964 befare it holds its first substantive session;
3. Recommends that the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its third session should
seek agreement on action, to be carried out as an
integral part of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
contained in General Assembly resolution 2626 (XXV)
of 24 October 1970, within its field of competence, to
!acilitate the adequate transfer of technology to developmg countries on reasonable terms and conditions and
to create the necessary infrastructure for the technological development of developing countries, including
the transfer of specifications of the raw materials and
technological processes utilized in production;
4. Urges international financing organizations and
programmes, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the Intcrnational Bank for Reconstruction and Development and regional development
banks, to give high priority to economic assistance,
according to the priorities estab1ished by developing countries, to meet their needs in the field of technology. particularly in connexion with the development
of a basic infrastructure, including the training of
personnel and the establishment or strengthening of
extension services for the application of technology
to production units, and taking into consideration the
need to reduce the effective cost involved in the transfer
of operative technology to developing countries;
5. Recommends that in ali action related to the
transfer of operative technology referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 above special consideration shall be
given to the stage of development and special position
of the least developed countries.

of

2021 st plenary meeting,
16 December 197J.
2822 (XXVI). Question of the establishment of
an international university

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2691 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1653 (LI) of 23 November 1971,
Emphasizing the importance of adequate consideration by appropriate intergovemmental bodies of the
United Nations system of ali factors relating to the
question of the establishment of an international university,

l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General, 34 containing the report and comments of the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on
the results of the feasibility study concerning the international university, the decision adopted by the Executive Board of that organization on 18 October 1971,
the recommendations of the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research and the report of the Panel
of Experts on the Establishment of an International
University;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
studies, in consultation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other
interested bodies, taking into account the views expressed in the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth
session, and to submit any additional information to
the Economic and Social Council at its fifty-third
session;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to call on the
assistance of the Panel of Experts on the Establishment of an International University, set up in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2691 (XXV),
the membership of which should be increased to not
more than twenty to allow for the designation of five
additional experts by the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in consultation with the Secretary-General and
interested agencies and programmes;35
4. Invites the Executive Board of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to
submit to the Economic and Social Council at its fiftythird session such further observations and recommendations on the subject as it may consider appropriate;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
give detailed consideration, in conformity with its resolution 1653 (LI), to reports and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, the
further report of the Secretary-General and the views
of the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and to
submit to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session a report, together with any recommendations
it may make on the question of the establishment of
an international university;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
take into account also the views expressed in the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session;
7. Invites the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its seventeenth session to submit to the General
Assembly at its twenty-seventh session such comments
and ob~ervations on the subject as it may consider
appropnate;
8. Decides to consider the matter fully at its twentyseventh session.
2021 st plenary meeting,
16 December 1971.
3 4 A/8510

and Add.1/Rev.1.
Panel of Experts on the Establishment of an International University is composed of the fo1!owing persons:
Mr. Tsao Amagi, Mr. Andrew W. Cordier, Mr. Mohammed H.
El-Zayyat, Mr. Gyula Eorsi, Mr. Jacques Freymond, Mr. R.
Gaudry, Mr. Eduardo Hardoy, Mr. Felipe Herrera, Mr. Abdul
8:azza~ _Kaddoura, Mr. Joseph Ki-Zerbo, Mr. S. P. Lopez,
Sir W1lham Mansfield Cooper, Mr. Davidson S. H. W. Nícol,
Rev. Benjamín Núñez, Mr. G. Parthasarathi, Mr. Víctor
Sahini, Mr. Abdus Salam, Mr. Jean Sirinelli, Mr. Saydou
Madani Sy and Mr. S. Verosta.
35 The
