A/61/PV.81

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

81

st plenary meeting
Tuesday, 19 December 2006, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Reports of the Third Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Third Committee on agenda
items 41, 60, 61, 63 to 68, 98, 99, 110 and 118.
I request Ms. Elena Molaroni of San Marino,
Rapporteur of the Third Committee, to introduce, in
one intervention, the reports of the Third Committee.
Ms. Molaroni (San Marino), Rapporteur of the
Third Committee: I have the great honour to present
for consideration the following reports of the Third
Committee on the agenda items allocated to it by the
General Assembly.
Under agenda item 41, entitled “Report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons and humanitarian questions”, the Third
Committee recommends in paragraph 21 of its report
(A/61/436) the adoption of four draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 60, entitled “Social
development”, including sub-items (a) to (d), the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 22 of document
A/61/437, the adoption of three draft resolutions. I
should like to make two small corrections to that
document. In paragraph 6, Monaco should be listed
among the sponsors of draft resolution A/C.3/61/L.4,
entitled “United Nations Literacy Decade: education
for all”; and, in paragraph 18, Slovenia should be
included among the sponsors of draft resolution

A/C.3/61/L.6, entitled “Follow-up to the Second World
Assembly on Ageing”.
Under agenda item 61, entitled “Advancement of
women”, including sub-items (a) and (b), the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 27 of document
A/61/438, the adoption of three draft resolutions. In
paragraph 28 of the same document, the Third
Committee recommends the adoption a draft decision. I
would like to draw the attention of the Assembly to a
correction to paragraph 3 of that report. Document
A/C.3/61/4, which contains a letter dated 11 October
2006 from the Permanent Representative of
Turkmenistan addressed to the Secretary-General,
should have been included in the list of documents for
consideration under agenda item 61.
Under agenda item 63, entitled “Promotion and
protection of the rights of children”, including subitems (a) and (b), the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 20 of document A/61/439, the adoption of
one draft resolution. In paragraph 21 of the same
document, the Third Committee recommends the
adoption a draft decision.
Under agenda item 64, entitled “Indigenous
issues”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 7 of document A/61/440, the adoption of one
draft decision. I would like to draw the attention of the
Assembly to a correction to paragraph 3 (a) of that
report. In that regard, paragraph 3 (a) should read as
follows: “Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the status of the United

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-66966 (E)

*0666966*

A/61/PV.81

Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations
(A/61/376)”.
Under agenda item 65, entitled “Elimination of
racism and racial discrimination”, including sub-items
(a) and (b), the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 23 of document A/61/441, the adoption of
three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 66, entitled “Right of peoples
to
self-determination”,
the
Third
Committee
recommends, in paragraph 21 of document A/61/442,
the adoption of three draft resolutions. In paragraph 22
of the same document, the Third Committee
recommends the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 67, entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 5 of document A/61/443,
the adoption of one draft decision.
Under sub-item (a) of agenda item 67, entitled
“Implementation of human rights instruments”, the
Third Committee recommends, in paragraph 10 of
document A/61/443/Add.1, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 67, entitled
“Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 123 of document
A/61/443/Add.2, the adoption of 20 draft resolutions. I
would like to make two corrections to that document.
In paragraph 25, which deals with draft resolution
A/C.3/61/L.19,
entitled
“Missing
persons”,
Liechtenstein should be added to the list of sponsors.
In paragraph 74, which deals with draft resolution
A/C.3/61/L.29/Rev.1, entitled “Protection of migrants”,
Tajikistan and Uruguay should be added to the list of
sponsors.
Under sub-item (c) of agenda item 67, entitled
“Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 70 of document
A/61/443/Add.3, the adoption of four draft resolutions.
With regard to draft resolution A/C.3/61/L.41, Bulgaria
should be listed as a sponsor.
No proposals were submitted in connection with
sub-item (d) of agenda item 67, entitled
“Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action”.

2

Under agenda item 68, entitled “Report of the
Human Rights Council”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 28 of document A/61/448,
the adoption of two draft resolutions. In paragraph 29
of the same document, the Committee recommends, the
adoption of one draft decision. In addition, two
corrigenda have been issued in connection with
document A/61/448: corrigendum 1, which has been
issued only in Arabic, and corrigendum 2, which has
been issued in connection with the English text.
Under agenda item 98, entitled “Crime
prevention and criminal justice”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 25 of document A/61/444,
the adoption of four draft resolutions. In paragraph 26
of the same document, the Committee recommends the
adoption of one draft decision. I would like to draw the
attention of the Assembly to a correction to be made to
paragraph 3 of that report. Document A/61/368, which
contains a letter dated 18 September 2006 from the
Permanent Representative of Spain to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, should
have been included in the list of documents for
consideration under agenda item 98.
Under agenda item 99, entitled “International
drug control”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 12 of document A/61/445, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 110, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 5 of document
A/61/446, the adoption of one draft decision.
Finally, under agenda item 118, entitled
“Programme planning”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 6 of document A/61/447,
the adoption of one draft decision.
Before I conclude, I should like to thank my
fellow members of the Bureau of the Third Committee
for their support and help in ensuring the successful
completion of the work of the Committee. Having said
that, I respectfully commend the reports of the Third
Committee to the General Assembly for its
consideration.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Third Committee that are before the Assembly
today.

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the
Third Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records. May I remind members that, under paragraph
7 of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee”.
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Third
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Third Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. That
means that, where separate or recorded votes were
taken, we will do the same. I should also hope that we
may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Third Committee.
I remind the Assembly that we will shortly be
taking action on draft resolutions recommended for
adoption by the Third Committee. As such, those draft
resolutions can no longer be additionally sponsored in
plenary meeting by Member States. Any corrections
that delegations may have concerning the reports of the
Third Committee, including the listing of sponsors of
draft resolutions contained in the Committee’s reports,
should be submitted to the Secretary of the Third
Committee for the issuance of corrigenda.
Before we proceed further, I would like to draw
the attention of members to a note distributed desk to
desk by the secretariat. That note will serve as a
reference guide for action on draft resolutions and
decisions recommended by the Third Committee in its
reports. In that connection, members will find, in
column 3 of the note, the numbers of the draft

06-66966

resolutions or decisions on which action is to be taken
in plenary meeting, with the corresponding Third
Committee document numbers of the draft resolutions
or decisions in column 4.
Agenda item 41 (continued)
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees
and displaced persons and humanitarian questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/436)
The President: The Assembly has before it four
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 21 of its report. We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I to IV.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 136).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees”. The Third Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/137).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“New international humanitarian order”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
61/138).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Assistance for refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in Africa”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
61/139).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
who wishes to speak in explanation of position
following the adoption of the draft resolutions.

3

A/61/PV.81

Mr. Cabello Guerra (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): With regard to the adoption of resolution
61/137, entitled “Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees”, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to reaffirm its commitment to
the protection of refugees in accordance with the 1967
Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees to the
Convention on that subject, of which we have been a
party since 2 July 1986. The Government of Venezuela
would also like to reaffirm its political will to continue
to implement concrete measures to provide ongoing
and immediate attention to asylum seekers without any
discrimination, as well as to prevent social exclusion
and facilitate the integration and participation of
refugees in community life, given the massive flows of
individuals who have come to Venezuela in the past
four years.
Our country is pleased at the return of more than
6 million refugees to their homes since 2002. We are
also pleased at the impressive decrease in the number
of asylum applications worldwide, as noted in the
report (A/61/12) of the High Commissioner.
We also share the concern at the spread of the
problem of sexual and gender-based exploitation and
violence, as well as the alarming phenomenon of the
forcible recruitment of children. In that regard, we
commend the Office of the High Commissioner for the
efforts made to address those problems, especially its
awareness-raising campaigns involving all stakeholders
concerned and its work with other organizations and
programmes with relevant mandates, such as the World
Food Programme and Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS, among others. Our country also agrees
with some of the conclusions of the Executive
Committee.
Our country would also like to express its great
concern about the fact that — although the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) has acknowledged that repatriation and
voluntary return constitute the lasting solution with the
most positive impact upon refugees and internally
displaced persons throughout the years — the
resolution and its predecessors have weakened the
obligations and responsibilities of States to address the
underlying causes of the phenomenon of refugees and
internally displaced persons. That has been made even
worse this year by the elimination, in paragraph 6, of
reference to the need for political will on the part of
Governments so that, in cooperation with UNHCR, the

4

problem of internally displaced persons and refugees
could be addressed more effectively. The same applies
to paragraph 8. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
would like to recall that, in accordance with article 2 of
the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees, it is the
obligation of States parties to cooperate with UNHCR
in the exercise of its functions. As established in
paragraph 23 of part I of the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, such cooperation requires the
development of strategies to address the root causes
and effects of movements of refugees and other
displaced persons.
We would also like to point out that clear
violations of human rights — especially those
committed in the course of armed conflict — are one of
the manifold complex factors that lead to the
displacement of people. Given that repatriation and
voluntary return provide for the most beneficial and
lasting solution, it is difficult for the Office to achieve
its objectives without the commitment of States and
Governments to address the root causes of the
phenomenon so that, once refugees have returned
home, they can enjoy a life of dignity free from the
dangers that led to their displacement in the first place.
The reference in paragraph 9 of the resolution to the
catalytic role of UNHCR to mobilize assistance from
the international community to address the root causes
of the refugee phenomenon has thus been diluted, for it
is not balanced by obligations on the part of States
concerned and places an undue burden on the
international community.
Furthermore, with regard to the phenomenon of
mixed migratory flows, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela wishes to express its concern at the confused
language in paragraph 21 of draft resolution II,
concerning mixed migratory flows. The mandate of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees is very clearly established in the Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees and in the
corresponding 1967 Protocol, so it is surprising that
there should continue to be doubts in that regard.
Once again, our country urges that the problem of
the forcible displacement of persons be addressed from
a perspective that enables us to find the lasting
solutions we seek — solutions that will give displaced
persons a real chance to return to their homes in safety
and dignity. That is why we must eradicate the causes
of this phenomenon, which produce so much suffering

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

and endanger so many human beings throughout the
world.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
41?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 60
Social development
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/437)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 22 of its report. We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I, II and II.
Draft resolution I is entitled “United Nations
Literacy Decade: education for all”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
61/140).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit
for Social Development and of the twenty-fourth
special session of the General Assembly”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/141).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
61/142).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 60?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 61
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/438)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 27 of its report and one draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 28 of the
same report. We will now take a decision on draft
resolutions I, II and III and on the draft decision.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms of
violence against women”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
61/143).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Trafficking in women and girls”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/144).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women
and full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
61/145).
The President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Documents considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the question of
the advancement of women”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision
recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda 61?
It was so decided.

06-66966

5

A/61/PV.81

Agenda item 63
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/439)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 20 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 21 of the
same report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution entitled “Rights of the child”.
I call on the representative of Uruguay, who
wishes to speak on a point of order.
Mr. Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
believe that a procedural problem has arisen. Two
paragraphs of the draft resolution contained in
document A/61/439 are different from those that were
adopted in the Third Committee.
In
the
Committee,
draft
resolution
A/C.3/61/L.16/Rev.1 was adopted, but with different
content from the draft resolution that appears in the
Committee’s report. First, there is an editorial error in
operative paragraph 12 (e), which must have occurred
when the paragraph was included. The first line of this
paragraph differs from that of the corresponding
paragraph in the text of draft resolution
A/C.3/61/L.16/Rev.1. There is also an error in
operative paragraph 17 (a), in which the phrases appear
in a different order. That is the responsibility of those
who edited the text and could have consequences with
regard to the text before us for adoption.
At the same time, we could proceed if there were
agreement that the text on which we are taking action
is as it appears in document A/C.3/61/L.16/Rev.1: the
draft resolution as adopted by the Third Committee.
The President: In the absence of objection, we
shall proceed to take action on the draft resolution as it
was adopted in Third Committee, that is, as it appears
in document A/C.3/61/L.16/Rev.1. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,

6

Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

The draft resolution was adopted by 185 votes
to 1 (resolution 61/146).
The President: We turn now to the draft decision
entitled “Report of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 21 of its report (A/61/439)?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic for an
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Ali (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
The Assembly has just adopted resolution 61/146, on
the rights of the child. My delegation voted in favour.
The Syrian Arab Republic is working on the
ground, within its legislative and legal frameworks, to
defend and strengthen childhood and the rights of the
child. My country has acceded to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its two Optional Protocols.
We have no objection whatsoever to the substance of
the resolution just adopted, and we appreciate the
efforts made by the countries that presented it.
However, we reserve the right to interpret
operative paragraphs 8, 10, 11 and 28 of the resolution
in the light of our national legislation, because our
views on those matters were not taken into account
during the informal consultations.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 64
Indigenous issues
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/440)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. The draft decision is entitled
“Documents considered by the General Assembly in
connection with indigenous issues”. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to adopt it?
The draft decision was adopted.

06-66966

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 64?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 65
Elimination of racism and racial discrimination
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/441)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 23 of its report. We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I, II and III.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Inadmissibility of
certain practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji,
Gabon,
Gambia,
Ghana,
Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,

7

A/61/PV.81

Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Japan, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Israel,
Italy,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu
Draft resolution I was adopted by 121 votes to 4,
with 60 abstentions (resolution 61/147).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/148).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Global efforts for the total elimination of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of
and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,

8

Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

Abstaining:
Australia, Canada, Marshall Islands, Palau
Draft resolution III was adopted by 179 votes to
2, with 4 abstentions (resolution 61/149).
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Finland, who wishes to make a
statement in explanation of vote after the voting.
Mr. Jokinen (Finland): It was our intention to
explain our vote before the voting, but, with your
indulgence, Madam President, I will do so now.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and
Romania, the candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia and the European Free Trade
Association
(EFTA)
countries
Iceland
and
Liechtenstein members of the European Economic
Area, as well as Ukraine and Moldova, align
themselves with this declaration.
As a result of developments that have taken place
since the Third Committee ended its session, it has
become necessary for the European Union to speak in
explanation of vote regarding the draft resolution
entitled “Global efforts for the total elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of
and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action”.
The European Union attaches the highest
importance to combating all forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
Over the years we have set up a number of institutions
and policies to meet this important goal. To mention
just one recent example, the year 2007 has been
designated by the European Union as the European
year for equal opportunities for all — a year devoted to
combating all types of discrimination.
The European Union is firmly committed to the
implementation of the Declaration and Programme and
Action of the Durban World Conference. In accordance
with our policies of combating racism and promoting
human rights and multilateral, we have made a
concrete, realistic and constructive follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action. We
have repeatedly stressed that, in the light of the gravity

06-66966

of the subject, the follow-up must be agreed by
consensus and has to be carried out as a joint effort of
the whole international community. Attempts to
politicize the issue should be utterly rejected by all
those who are genuinely committed to moving forward
together on this crucial issue.
Less than three weeks ago, the Third Committee
of the General Assembly adopted draft resolution III
contained in report A/61/441 on global efforts for the
total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
presented by the Russian Federation and South Africa
on behalf of the member States of the Group of 77 and
the People’s Republic of China.
The European Union had a number of serious
concerns regarding the proposals put forward in the
negotiations. However, we resolved to negotiate in
good faith and sought actively to engage all
delegations, including the main sponsors, so as to
overcome differences and reach a conclusion that could
be supported by all delegations and would make a
genuine
contribution
to
the
comprehensive
implementation and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action.
The European Union was able to vote in favour
of the draft resolution, as we have done in previous
years, on the basis of the following understanding,
which the main sponsors of the draft resolution assured
us was the framework within which it would be put to
effect.
First, the review of the implementation of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action would
be conducted in the framework of the General
Assembly. Secondly, the review would focus on the
implementation of what was agreed at Durban and
would not involve any reopening of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action. Thirdly, any
preparatory work done by the Human Rights Council
would not entail the creation of new mechanisms.
Fourthly, the Human Rights Council would use for that
end its relevant existing follow-up mechanisms,
especially the intergovernmental working group on the
effective implementation of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action. Fifthly, the further study of
the content and scope of substantive and procedural
gaps for combating racism, as identified by the

9

A/61/PV.81

Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, would be carried out by a group
of five experts, who would produce a base document
containing concrete recommendations on the means by
which such gaps could be bridged, including, but not
limited to, the possible drafting of an additional
protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination or the adoption of new
instruments.
It was with profound dismay and surprise that the
European Union, having participated in good faith in
the negotiations in the General Assembly, learned a
few days later of two texts, contained in documents
A/HRC/3/L.2 and A/HRC/3/L.3, which had been
submitted at the third session of the Human Rights
Council by some of the main sponsors of the draft
resolution just adopted by the Third Committee, with
the support of 174 States Members of the United
Nations. These texts completely contradicted both the
spirit and the letter of draft resolution III in report
A/61/441 and the agreed understanding explained
earlier, as well as the consensus reached in Geneva at
the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action. Such a breach of trust casts
doubt on the commitment of those States to pursue a
consensus approach on this issue.
We note once again that the most effective way
forward is one in which all members of the
international community can participate equally.
In Geneva, the European Union sought to engage
the sponsors of the Human Rights Council draft
resolutions in negotiations with the objective of
bringing the text into agreement with the draft
resolution adopted by the Third Committee. To our
deep regret, our efforts met with inexplicable
indifference. For obvious reasons, neither text managed
to reach anything close to consensus at the Human
Rights Council. We were compelled to join other
delegations in voting against them.
The European Union would like to draw the
attention of delegations to the fact that operative
paragraphs 33 and 36 of the present resolution reflect
the agreement that was reached among delegations to
the Third Committee on the review of the
implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, and on the process through

10

which the framework for combating racism is to be
further developed.
It is the understanding of the European Union
that this review and this process will take place
transparently and by consensus, in accordance with the
provisions of operative paragraphs 33 and 36,
respectively, of the present resolution. Those
paragraphs form the basis on which the European
Union was able to vote in favour of the draft resolution
in the Third Committee. Any reinterpretation of this
understanding is unacceptable.
We call on the sponsors of draft resolution III to
take the necessary steps in Geneva to restore the agreed
course of action and ensure that the resolution just
adopted by the General Assembly is properly
implemented so that the Human Rights Council and the
Third Committee may continue to work towards the
same goal in a cohesive and coherent manner.
As we stated in the beginning of this explanation,
the European Union attaches great importance to
combating racism in all its forms. We intend to take an
active part in the implementation of the present
resolution. In doing so, we will firmly resist any effort
to exploit this issue for political gain. Let us be clear.
The fact that the assurances made to us by some
delegations in New York were broken in Geneva is
unacceptable. Negotiations cannot prosper in an
atmosphere of bad faith. For its part, the European
Union will continue to negotiate in good faith. We
expect the same from others.
It was on that basis that the European Union was
able to vote in favour of draft resolution III, just
adopted by the General Assembly.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 65?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 66
Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/442)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 21 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 22 of the

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

same report. We will now take a decision on draft
resolutions I, II and III, and on the draft decision.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Universal
realization
of
the
right
of
peoples
to
self-determination”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
61/150).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human
rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,

06-66966

Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Fiji, Liechtenstein, New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea, Switzerland, Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution II was adopted by 127 votes to
51, with 7 abstentions (resolution 61/151).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“The
right
of
the
Palestinian
people
to
self-determination”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,

11

A/61/PV.81

Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Canada, Central African Republic,
Nauru, Vanuatu
Draft resolution III was adopted by 176 votes to
5, with 5 abstentions (resolution 61/152).
[Subsequently the delegation of the Central
African Republic advised the Secretariat that it
had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: We turn now to the draft decision
entitled, “Report of the Secretary-General on the
universal realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination”. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft decision recommended by the
Third Committee?

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 66?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 67 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
Report of the Third Committee (A/61/443)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 5 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision. The draft decision is entitled
“Reports considered by the General Assembly in
connection with the promotion and protection of
human rights”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to adopt the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
67.
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee
(A/61/443/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The draft resolution is
entitled “Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/153).
The President: May I take it that it is wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 67?
It was so decided.

The draft decision was adopted.

12

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Report of the Third Committee
(A/61/443/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it
20 draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 123 of its report.
In connection with draft resolution VI, I give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Kelley (Director, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs Division): I
would like to inform members that, in connection with
draft resolution VI, entitled “Composition of the staff
of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights”, under the terms of
subparagraph (b) of operative paragraph 1 of the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would decide
“To allow, in the effort to redress the specific
geographic imbalance of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the establishment of a temporary mechanism
whereby recruitment of staff in the Office at the
P-2 level would not be restricted to successful
candidates from the national competitive
examination”.
This provision would be significantly at variance
with the principle that recruitment at the P-2 level is
exclusively through competitive examination, which
has been affirmed repeatedly by the General Assembly,
including in paragraph 15 of section III B of resolution
51/226, paragraph 17 of section V of resolution 53/221,
paragraph 13 of section IV of resolution 55/258 and
paragraph 7 of section II of resolution 57/305, which
reaffirms the provisions of section IV of resolution
55/258.
As explained in paragraph 16 of the SecretaryGeneral’s comments on the recommendation of the
Joint Inspection Unit in its report on the follow-up to
the management review of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(A/61/115/Add.1), matters relating to competitive
examination are under the authority of the Office of
Human Resources Management, rather than the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. The Office of Human Resource Management

06-66966

organized, in 2005, a specialized examination in human
rights, as a result of which 29 candidates were placed
on the roster. Requesting the High Commissioner for
Human Rights to take measures to implement the draft
resolution would allow the recruitment of candidates
for P-2 positions outside the roster, and could therefore
prolong the time during which successful candidates
would remain on the roster.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Belarus, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting.
Ms. Petkevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of the Republic of Belarus would like to
take this opportunity to express its sincere gratitude to
those States that voted in the Third Committee in
favour of the draft resolution entitled “Promotion of
equitable and mutually respectful dialogue on human
rights” and to those that voted against the draft
resolution entitled “Situation of human rights in
Belarus” under agenda item 67 (c).
We believe that the prestige of the United Nations
cannot and should not be used as a means of political
pressure on sovereign States under the outlandish
pretext of human rights violations. That runs counter to
the very nature of our Organization. Unfortunately, we
note that it is precisely those methods that are being
used with regard to the Republic of Belarus.
Confrontation between States and mutual
accusations have never been an effective means of
resolving important international problems. It is
impossible to ensure the implementation of the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights by adopting
politically motivated resolutions. As is well known, a
stick can kill, but it will never cure.
Draft resolution XIII, entitled “Promotion of
equitable and mutually respectful dialogue on human
rights”, takes a fundamentally different approach. The
draft resolution encourages respect for the principles of
equality and self-determination and the political,
economic and cultural diversity of States, and
underlines the importance of promoting mutual
understanding among civilizations, cultures and
religions through dialogue. Such an approach will
facilitate the true promotion of human rights in every
country.
The Republic of Belarus believes in an equitable
and mutually respectful dialogue on human rights

13

A/61/PV.81

based on an unbiased analysis of objective data on the
human rights situation in a particular country.
We firmly believe that the Human Rights Council
will become an authoritative body able to ensure
constructive cooperation on human rights under the
auspices of the United Nations. Draft resolution XIII,
entitled “Promotion of equitable and mutually
respectful dialogue on human rights”, seeks to achieve
that important goal. The draft resolution could, in fact,
have been submitted under the agenda item on the
reform of the United Nations.
We call on members to support draft resolution
XIII. Its adoption would lay the foundation for the
qualitative renewal of a major area of United Nations
activities: the protection and promotion of human
rights.
The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I to XX, one by one. After all
decisions have been taken, representatives will again
have the opportunity to explain their votes.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “The
human rights situation arising from the recent Israeli
military operations in Lebanon”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the

14

Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kenya,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco,
Montenegro,
Netherlands,
New
Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution I was adopted by 112 votes to 7,
with 64 abstentions (resolution 61/154).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Central
African Republic advised the Secretariat that it
had intended to vote in favour; the delegation of
Nauru had intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Missing persons”.
I give
Azerbaijan.

the

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Adjalova (Azerbaijan): My delegation, as a
main sponsor of draft resolution II, entitled “Missing
persons”, would like to point out that for technical
reasons one of the final amendments to draft resolution
A/C.3/61/L.19, which was agreed upon by all

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

delegations in the course of informal consultations in
the Third Committee and appears in the final text of
the draft resolution, was not included in the oral
amendments made to the text when action was taken on
the draft. I will therefore read out that amendment now.
The words “existing laws, practices,” in operative
paragraph 6 of draft resolution II should be replaced by
the words “international and national legal”.
This is not a new amendment; it was agreed to in
the Third Committee. I am introducing it today
because, for technical reasons, it was not included
among the final oral amendments that were made when
the draft resolution was adopted in the Third
Committee. We thank all delegations for their
understanding and hope that the amendment will be
adopted.
The President: The representative of Azerbaijan
has submitted an oral amendment to operative
paragraph 6 of draft resolution II.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of
procedure, the Assembly shall first take a decision on
the amendment submitted by the representative of
Azerbaijan.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
the oral amendment to operative paragraph 6 of draft
resolution II submitted by the representative of
Azerbaijan?
The oral amendment was adopted.
The President: Since the oral amendment to
operative paragraph 6 of draft resolution II submitted
by the representative of Azerbaijan has been adopted,
we shall proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
II, as orally amended.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution II, as orally amended?
Draft resolution II, as orally amended, was
adopted (resolution 61/155).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of
all human rights”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

06-66966

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former

15

A/61/PV.81

Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Brazil, Chile, Singapore
Draft resolution III was adopted by 130 votes to
54, with 3 abstentions (resolution 61/156).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Human rights and extreme poverty”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
61/157).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
in Central Africa”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
61/158).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Composition of the staff of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji,
Gabon,
Gambia,
Ghana,
Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,

16

Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Japan, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 118 votes to
7, with 55 abstentions (resolution 61/159).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Promotion of a democratic and equitable international
order”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji,
Gabon,
Gambia,
Ghana,
Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Mexico, Peru
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 124 votes to
56, with 4 abstentions (resolution 61/160).

06-66966

The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled
“Elimination of all forms of intolerance and of
discrimination based on religion or belief”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution
61/161).
The President: Draft resolution IX is entitled
“Respect for the right to universal freedom of travel
and the vital importance of family reunification”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin,
Bhutan,
Bolivia,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji,
Gabon,
Gambia,
Ghana,
Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

17

A/61/PV.81

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution IX was adopted by 122 votes to
4, with 58 abstentions (resolution 61/162).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Brunei
Darussalam informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution X is entitled
“The right to food”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,

18

Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Draft resolution X was adopted by 185 votes to 1
(resolution 61/163).
The President: Draft resolution XI is entitled
“Combating defamation of religions”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chile, China, Comoros,

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Armenia, Bolivia, Botswana, Cape Verde,
Colombia, Fiji, Haiti, India, Kenya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Nepal, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea,
Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, United Republic of
Tanzania, Vanuatu
Draft resolution XI was adopted by 111 votes to
54, with 18 abstentions (resolution 61/164).

06-66966

The President: Draft resolution XII is entitled
“Protection of migrants”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution XII without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XII was adopted (resolution
61/165).
The President: Draft resolution XIII is entitled
“Promotion of equitable and mutually respectful
dialogue on human rights”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria,
Angola,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia,
Botswana,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Gabon, Gambia,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal,

19

A/61/PV.81

Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Bahamas,
Barbados, Brazil, Burundi, Costa Rica, Djibouti,
Dominica, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guyana,
Jamaica, Jordan, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania, Vanuatu
Draft resolution XIII was adopted by 86 votes to
64, with 26 abstentions (resolution 61/166).
The President: Draft resolution XIV is entitled
“Regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XIV was adopted (resolution
61/167).
The President: Draft resolution XV is entitled
“Enhancement of international cooperation in the field
of human rights”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution XV was adopted (resolution
61/168).
The President: Draft resolution XVI is entitled
“The right to development”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,

20

Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji,
Gabon,
Gambia,
Ghana,
Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Draft resolution XVI was adopted by 134 votes to
53 (resolution 61/169).
The President: Draft resolution XVII is entitled
“Human rights and unilateral coercive measures”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji,
Gabon,
Gambia,
Ghana,
Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,

06-66966

Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Draft resolution XVII was adopted by 131 votes
to 54 (resolution 61/170).
The President: Draft resolution XVIII is entitled
“Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XVIII was adopted (resolution
61/171).
The President: Draft resolution XIX is entitled
“Hostage-taking”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution XIX was adopted (resolution
61/172).
The President: Draft resolution XX is entitled
“Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions”.
Separate votes have been requested on operative
paragraph 4 and operative paragraph 5 (b).
If there are no objections to those requests, I shall
first put to the vote operative paragraph 4. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and

21

A/61/PV.81

Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian
Republic of)
Against:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, China, Dominica,
Egypt, El Salvador, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kuwait, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Sudan, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Belarus, Congo, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, GuineaBissau, India, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Liberia,
Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Morocco,
Niger, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Thailand, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Zambia
Operative paragraph 4 was retained by 104 votes
to 31, with 29 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of El Salvador
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour; the delegations of Brunei Darussalam,
Jamaica and the Syrian Arab Republic had
intended to vote against; the delegation of Tunisia
had intended to abstain.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 5 (b) of draft resolution XX. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican

22

Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of),
Moldova,
Montenegro,
Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian
Republic of)
Against:
Afghanistan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, China,
Djibouti, Egypt, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Marshall Islands, Niger, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
United Arab Emirates, United States of America,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Burundi, Congo, Dominica,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Liberia, Mauritania, Mongolia,
Morocco, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra
Leone, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia
Operative paragraph 5 (b) of draft resolution XX
was retained by 105 votes to 30, with 30
abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of the United States
of America informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of
Brunei Darussalam had intended to vote against;
the delegation of Niger had intended to abstain;

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

and the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic had intended not to
participate in the voting.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote draft
resolution XX as a whole, as amended.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None

06-66966

Abstaining:
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Brunei
Darussalam,
China,
Democratic
People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Marshall Islands, Myanmar, Niger, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft resolution XX as a whole, was adopted by
137 votes to none, with 43 abstentions (resolution
61/173).
The President: I now call on the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic for an explanation of vote.
Mr. Elji (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I should like to explain Syria’s vote on
resolution 61/161 on the elimination of all forms of
intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or
belief.
The Syrian Arab Republic rejects all forms of
extremism and discrimination on the basis of religion
or belief, given the long history of tolerance of our
people, who have been blessed in receiving the three
monotheistic religions. In view of its faith and belief in
the need to condemn all forms of discrimination and to
promote dialogue to increase mutual respect and
understanding, my delegation joined the consensus on
the resolution, which emphasizes the need to avoid
equating any religion with terrorism and calls on the
United Nations to play a pioneering role in addressing
extremism.
However, we express our strong reservations
concerning operative paragraph 4 (a), which runs
counter to the tenets and holy teachings of the Islamic
faith.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 67?
It was so decided.

23

A/61/PV.81

(c) Human rights situations and reports of
special rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee
(A/61/443/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it four
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 70 of its report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution II, entitled
“Situation of human rights in Myanmar”, is postponed
to a later date to allow time for the review of its
programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on draft
resolution II as soon as the report of the Fifth
Committee on its programme budget implications is
available.
I now call on the representative of Belarus, who
wishes to speak in explanation of vote before the
voting.
Ms. Petkevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): In
the Third Committee, a representative of the United
States once rightly noted that there should be
substantial reasons to initiate a country-specific draft
resolution. There are absolutely no such reasons for the
draft resolution entitled “Situation of human rights in
Belarus”.
Belarus is a party to all universal human rights
instruments and participates actively in international
cooperation aimed at promoting and protecting human
rights in all countries. The Government of Belarus
fulfils in good faith its commitments related to the
promotion and protection of human rights, as set out in
its constitution, in international treaties to which it is a
party and in its national legislation.
It is absolutely absurd to raise the issue of human
rights abuses in relation to a country with a socially
oriented economy — a country whose entire State
policy is aimed at the social and legal protection of its
people. One should not disregard the concrete and
undeniable achievements of Belarus. Our poverty rate
has decreased to one fourth of what it was five years
ago; it is now the lowest among all countries of the
Commonwealth
of
Independent
States.
Our
unemployment rate is a mere 1.2 per cent, while the
disparity in personal incomes is maintained within
socially acceptable limits. Our civil society is
constantly developing. In Belarus, there are 17 political

24

parties, with more than 1,000 organizational branches;
37 trade unions, with nearly 23,000 local
organizations; and nearly 2,300 civic organizations,
with more than 11,000 local branches.
One often hears criticism of Belarus for alleged
restrictions on freedom of speech and freedom of the
press. But how can there be talk about monopolization
and restrictions on the freedom of the mass media
when in Belarus the number of independent
publications is three times larger than the number of
State-owned publications and when the number of
foreign mass media publications has grown to more
than 6,000? In our country, which is not very large in
terms of territory and population, there are 3,090
religious organizations, representing 25 religious faiths
and denominations.
All of that shows that in Belarus an effective
State system has been established that guarantees the
enjoyment of civil, political, social and economic
rights by Belarusian citizens and by our guests from
other countries. To fail to take that into account when
we are considering this draft anti-Belarus resolution is
not right.
We have no reason to hide anything from the
international community. We reaffirm once again our
interest and our readiness to engage in an open,
equitable and mutually respectful dialogue with all our
international partners in order to find mutually
acceptable solutions to existing disagreements.
Belarus cooperates with the human rights treaty
bodies and with the thematic special procedures of the
Human Rights Council, and we intend to intensify that
cooperation. The unfounded accusations that the
initiators of the draft resolution entitled “Situation of
human rights in Belarus” are attempting to present as
an opinion of the world community will only increase
mutual misunderstanding and mistrust. We will
consider any votes cast in favour of the draft resolution
on the situation of human rights in Belarus as an
unfriendly act of gross and illegitimate interference in
the internal affairs of Belarus.
In the General Assembly, we would like to
remind the United States of America and the United
Kingdom — the sponsors of this draft resolution —
about their commitments to the Republic of Belarus,
assumed in accordance with the Memorandum on
Security Assurances in connection with the Republic of
Belarus’ accession
to
the
Treaty
on
the

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, signed in
Budapest on 5 December 1994. Paragraph 3 of the
Memorandum states:
“The United States of America, the Russian
Federation and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland reaffirm their
commitment to the Republic of Belarus, in
accordance with the principles of the CSCE Final
Act, to refrain from economic coercion designed
to subordinate to their own interest the exercise
by the Republic of Belarus of the rights inherent
in its sovereignty and thus to secure advantages
of any kind.”
And what do we have in reality? The United
States Congress adopts the so-called “Belarus
Democracy Act”, which authorizes the allocation of
funds for, in effect, changing the constitutional order of
a sovereign State. The European Union is considering
economic sanctions against Belarus, which would
inevitably undermine the standard of living of the
Belarussian people — the very people whose rights are
supposedly being defended. The United States and the
European Union are making an unprecedented effort to
push through the United Nations an anti-Belarussian
draft resolution with no objective basis.
All of that should serve as a useful lesson to those
countries that are being promised political and
economic guarantees in exchange for meeting the
demands levelled at them. How much are such
guarantees worth? Belarus has learned their true cost at
first hand.
There can be no universal model of State
development designed by any one person. Blueprints
are unacceptable in that regard, since the issue is the
destiny of an entire nation and the status of a sovereign
State — and I emphasize “sovereign”.
Belarus consistently and successfully fulfils the
recommendations put forward by the United Nations
and its specialized agencies. Our accomplishments in
that respect are perfectly evident. In their desire to
move forward, the leaders of Belarus are disoriented
when such successes are ignored. It would seem that,
regardless of whether or not we make progress, the
assessment will always be negative. Progress should be
stimulated, not repudiated. We appeal to all States to
act on principle and to vote in favour of the no action
motion on the draft resolution on the situation of

06-66966

human rights in Belarus, or against the draft resolution
should it come to a vote.
The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I, III and IV.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Comoros,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu
Against:
Algeria,
Belarus,
China,
Congo,
Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt,
Guinea, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bolivia,

25

A/61/PV.81

Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Guyana, India,
Jamaica,
Kenya,
Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Qatar, Rwanda, Sao Tome
and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Yemen, Zambia
Draft resolution I was adopted by 99 votes to 21,
with 56 abstentions (resolution 61/174).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Pakistan advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Situation of human rights in Belarus”.
I call on the representative of the Russian
Federation on a point of order.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Under the terms of rule 74 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, the Russian
Federation proposes that no action be taken on draft
resolution III on the situation of human rights in
Belarus. The procedural proposal is based primarily on
the lack of a problem as a focus of substantive
discussion. It is also based on Russia’s principled
position aimed at depoliticizing the work of the United
Nations human rights system.
We view the draft resolution on the human rights
situation in Belarus as an extremely politicized
measure dictated by self-serving considerations that are
irrelevant to the genuine defence of human rights. Our
assessment was borne out by the unacceptable actions
in the Security Council by the draft resolution’s
sponsors, which seek to exploit the rostrum of any
United Nations body to exert pressure on sovereign
States of which they disapprove.
On that basis, the Russian Federation asks
delegations to vote in favour of the no-action motion
concerning draft resolution III on the situation of
human rights in Belarus.

the rules of procedure, that no action be taken on draft
resolution III. Rule 74 reads as follows:
“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition
to the proposer of the motion, two representatives
may speak in favour of, and two against, the
motion, after which the motion shall be
immediately put to the vote. The President may
limit the time to be allowed to speakers under this
rule.”
Two speakers have asked to speak in favour of
the motion, and I give them the floor.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to express its support
for the no action motion put forward by the Russian
Federation concerning draft resolution III.
It has been the Chinese delegation’s consistent
view that countries should promote human rights
through equitable and mutually respectful dialogue. We
oppose the practice of submitting country-specific draft
resolutions on human rights. We believe that such draft
resolutions only exacerbate mistrust and confrontation
among countries, and in no way contribute to
improving and promoting human rights in various
countries.
We therefore support the no action motion
proposed by the Russian delegation, and appeal to
other delegations to follow suit.
Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba wishes in turn to support the
motion made by the Russian Federation. We believe
that the draft resolution submitted by the United States
is not based on a genuine interest in cooperation on
human rights issues. In our opinion, it exploits the
issue of human rights for political purposes on the
basis of selectivity and double standards, as evidenced
by the selective treatment of this matter. It runs counter
to the new spirit of cooperation that we have allegedly
promoted with the establishment of the Human Rights
Council and its new mechanisms, such as the universal
periodic review. The United States has no right to
encourage initiatives like this, which are diametrically
opposed to genuine cooperation in relation to human
rights.

The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has moved, within the terms of rule 74 of

26

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

Cuba therefore reiterates its support for the
motion and requests all Member States to vote in its
favour.
The President: Two representatives have asked
to speak against the motion, and I give them the floor.
Mr. Miller (United States of America): I am
pleased to be delivering this statement on behalf of the
United States, Andorra, Australia, Canada, Japan,
Israel, Liechtenstein and San Marino.
We regret that a procedural no action motion has
been requested in the plenary of the General Assembly.
We submit that the spirit of this deliberative institution
calls for draft resolutions to be considered on their
merits. It would be a disservice to our mission as a
universal body with responsibility for promoting
human rights to prevent open discussions and decisions
with procedural motions.
On 22 November, the Third Committee of the
General Assembly — the only universal body
responsible for human rights issues — debated and
soundly adopted the draft resolution on the situation of
human rights in Belarus by a margin of 39 votes. It
also reaffirmed its authority and responsibility to
promote and protect human rights, and defeated a
similar no action motion initiative.
We urge all Member States to vote against the
procedural motion because the use of such a procedural
motion in the General Assembly will undermine the
work, authority and responsibility of the only — I
repeat, only — universal body of the United Nations
responsible for the promotion and protection of human
rights. A no action motion in the General Assembly
after the Committee has recommended the draft
resolution to the Assembly for adoption signifies a
complete disregard for the Third Committee and its
decision-making process.
We therefore strongly urge all Member States to
vote against the motion.
Mr. Jokinen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Bulgaria and Romania; the candidate
countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Montenegro and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Iceland, member of the European

06-66966

Economic Area; as well as Ukraine and Moldova align
themselves with this declaration.
There should be no question about the General
Assembly’s mandate to look into human rights
situations in order to promote and encourage respect
for human rights, one of the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter. The General Assembly has
adopted resolutions expressing its concern about the
worst human rights situations for decades.
The call of a motion now to adjourn debate
represents an attempt to prevent the consideration of a
draft resolution on procedural grounds. The calling of
such a motion aims at denying the States Members of
the United Nations their sovereign right to bring before
the General Assembly any concern that they
themselves deem to merit its attention, and at limiting
the agenda of the General Assembly.
Furthermore, the Third Committee has already
voted on the same motion and decided not to adopt it.
Accordingly, the Third Committee has already
considered, on its merits, the draft resolution on the
situation of human rights in Belarus and deemed it
worthy of adoption. A no action motion on the draft
resolution in a plenary meeting of the General
Assembly is therefore a vote of no confidence in the
Third Committee. It undermines that body.
It is an important matter of principle for the
European Union to vote against any motion to close the
debate on an item under discussion, even more so in a
plenary meeting of the General Assembly. The calling
of the motion is clearly aimed at preventing the United
Nations from dealing with the situation of human
rights in Belarus. No country large or small can be
regarded as being beyond or above consideration by
international human rights forums. That would run
counter to the principles of universality and
interdependence of all human rights.
The Third Committee of the General Assembly
has already addressed the situation of human rights in
Belarus, based on the gravity of the situation on the
ground. By choosing not to address the situation, we
would show callous disregard for the very people
whose human rights and fundamental freedoms we
have committed ourselves to protecting.
If successful, the motion to adjourn the debate
would prevent us from even considering the issues
covered in the draft resolution and already adopted by

27

A/61/PV.81

the Third Committee. That runs contrary not only to
the good practice of the General Assembly, but also to
the spirit of dialogue to which we are all attached. The
General Assembly would undermine its own credibility
if it remained silent on grave and widespread violations
of human rights in situations where the country
concerned refuses to cooperate in any meaningful
manner with the United Nations human rights system.
The European Union strongly urges delegations
to vote against the motion to adjourn the debate for
reasons of principle, regardless of their voting
intentions on the draft resolution on the situation of
human rights in Belarus.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
motion submitted by the representative of the Russian
Federation that no action be taken on draft
resolution III.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Central African Republic, China, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, India,
Indonesia,
Iran
(Islamic
Republic
of),
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,

28

Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Abstaining:
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Burundi,
Cape Verde, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Djibouti,
Ghana,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Mozambique, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Sao
Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda
The motion was rejected by 67 votes to 79, with
32 abstentions.
The President: Since the motion for no action
was not adopted, the Assembly will proceed to take a
decision on draft resolution III. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga,

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu

no action be taken on that draft resolution. I would also
like to briefly bring to the attention of members the
following points.

Against:
Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt,
Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco,
Myanmar, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation,
South Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe

Resolution 61/166, entitled “Promotion of
equitable and mutually respectful dialogue on human
rights”, just adopted by this body, stresses, inter alia,
stressed the need to avoid politically motivated and
biased country-specific resolutions on the situation of
human rights, confrontational approaches, exploitation
of human rights for political purposes, selective
targeting of individual countries for extraneous
considerations and double standards in the work of the
United Nations on human rights issues.

Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ecuador, Eritrea,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mali,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia
Draft resolution III was adopted by 72 votes to
32, with 69 abstentions (resolution 61/175).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran”.
I call on the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, who wishes to speak on a point of
order.
Mr. Rezvani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Thank
you very much, Madam President, for giving me the
floor before the consideration of draft resolution IV,
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran”. I wish to invoke rule 74 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly and request that

06-66966

Last September, the heads of State and
Government of the Non-Aligned Movement, during
their fourteenth Summit, held in Havana, emphasized
that the exploitation of human rights for political
purposes, including the selective targeting of individual
countries for extraneous considerations, which is
contrary to the founding principles of the Movement
and the United Nations Charter, should be prohibited.
Furthermore, it should be noted that the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and the African Union have
adopted virtually the same position.
In view of the explicit and widespread support for
opposing country-specific resolutions, I wish, as I said,
to invoke rule 74 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly. By voting in favour of this
no-action motion, delegations would remove a serious
obstacle to dialogue and would enable all of us,
including my delegation, to cooperate further to
promote and protect human rights, rather than insisting
on the adoption of country-specific draft resolutions.
The President: The representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran has moved, within the terms of rule 74
of the rules of procedure, that no action be taken on
draft resolution IV. Rule 74 reads as follows.
“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition
to the proposer of the motion, two representatives
may speak in favour of, and two against, the
motion, after which the motion shall be
immediately put to the vote.”
Two speakers have asked to speak in favour of
the motion, and I give them the floor.

29

A/61/PV.81

Mr. Hayee (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
supports the motion introduced by the delegation of
Iran that no action be taken on draft resolution IV,
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran”. The Pakistan delegation requests all
delegations to support the motion.
Mr. Kitchen (Zimbabwe): My delegation
supports the proposal by the Islamic Republic of Iran
that no action be taken on draft resolution IV. We
believe that such draft resolutions are a departure from
the approach to human rights that was agreed in
resolution 60/251. We therefore urge all Member States
to support the motion.
The President: Two speakers have asked to
speak against the motion, and I give them the floor.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I am pleased to speak
today on behalf of Canada, Australia, Liechtenstein,
Norway, the United States, San Marino and Andorra.
We very much regret that a no-action motion has been
introduced in the plenary of the General Assembly.
That is an extraordinary initiative to stifle debate and
to undermine the jurisdiction and the responsibilities of
the Assembly.
On 21 November 2006, the Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution on the situation of human
rights in Iran by a very clear margin after a no-action
motion had been introduced and had failed. Let me
repeat: this draft resolution was adopted in the Third
Committee after a similar no-action motion had been
rejected. The draft resolution was then recommended
by the Third Committee to the General Assembly for
its consideration today.
As I said at the time in the Third Committee, any
country-specific draft resolution in the field of human
rights should be considered on its individual merits,
but preventing debate on certain country situations
would presume that certain countries are beyond or
above consideration by international human rights
forums.
It is for that reason that we are firmly opposed to
procedural motions whose primary purpose is to stifle
debate on situations of serious human rights concern.
Indeed, I should like to recall that it is for that reason
that Canada, as a matter of principle, did not bring
forward a no-action motion in the Third Committee on
the draft resolution proposed by Iran on the situation of
indigenous people and immigrants in Canada, despite

30

our firm belief that that draft resolution did not stand
up to scrutiny on its merits.
The use of a procedural device in the General
Assembly is even more egregious, however. A
no-action motion in the Assembly after the same
no-action motion has been attempted and has failed in
Committee, and after the Committee has recommended
the draft resolution to the Assembly for adoption,
undermines the Third Committee and is dismissive of
its decision-making. Such a motion seeks to prevent
the General Assembly from acting upon the
recommendation of the Third Committee. That would
have the effect of undermining the work of the Third
Committee, the only United Nations body responsible
for human rights with universal membership, as well as
undermining the work of the General Assembly itself.
We therefore strongly urge all Member States to vote
against this motion.
Mr. Jokinen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Bulgaria and Romania, the candidate
countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, and
the European Free Trade Association country Iceland,
member of the European Economic Area, as well as
Ukraine and Moldova, align themselves with this
declaration.
The European Union regrets that it is necessary
for us once again to take the floor in a plenary meeting
of the General Assembly against a motion of no action.
There should be no question about the General
Assembly’s mandate to look into human rights
situations in order to promote and encourage respect
for human rights, one of the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter. The General Assembly has
passed resolutions expressing its concern about the
worst human rights situations for decades.
The call of a motion now to adjourn debate
represents an attempt to prevent the consideration of a
draft resolution on procedural grounds. The calling of
such a motion aims at denying the States Members of
the United Nations their sovereign right to bring before
the General Assembly any concern that they
themselves deem to merit its attention, and at limiting
the agenda of the General Assembly.

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

Furthermore, the Third Committee has already
voted upon the same motion and decided not to adopt
it. Accordingly, the Third Committee has already
considered, on its merits, the draft resolution on the
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran and deemed it worthy of adoption. A no action
motion on the draft resolution in a plenary meeting of
the General Assembly is therefore a vote of no
confidence in the Third Committee. It undermines that
body.
It is an important matter of principle for the
European Union to vote against any motion to close the
debate on an item under discussion, even more so in a
plenary meeting of the General Assembly. The calling
of the motion is clearly aimed at preventing the United
Nations from dealing with the situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran. No country large
or small can be regarded as being beyond or above
consideration by international human rights forums.
That would run counter to the principles of universality
and interdependence of all human rights.
The Third Committee of the General Assembly
has already addressed the situation of human rights in
the Islamic Republic of Iran based on the gravity of the
situation on the ground. By choosing not to address the
situation, we would show callous disregard for the very
people whose human rights and fundamental freedoms
we have committed ourselves to protecting.
If successful, the motion to adjourn the debate
would prevent us from even considering the issues
covered in the draft resolution and already adopted by
the Third Committee. That runs contrary not only to
the good practice of the General Assembly but also to
the spirit of dialogue to which we are all attached. The
General Assembly would undermine its own credibility
if it remained silent on grave and widespread violations
of human rights in situations where the country
concerned refuses to cooperate in any meaningful
manner with the United Nations human rights system.
The European Union strongly urges delegations
to vote against the motion to adjourn the debate for
reasons of principle, regardless of their voting
intentions on the draft resolution on the situation of
human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
motion submitted by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran that no action be taken on draft
resolution IV.

06-66966

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Bhutan,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Central African Republic, China, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan,
Thailand,
Togo,
Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu

31

A/61/PV.81

Abstaining:
Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Cape Verde,
Colombia, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guyana, Jamaica,
Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea,
Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone,
Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda
The motion was rejected by 75 votes to 81, with
24 abstentions.
The President: Since the motion for no action
was not adopted, the Assembly will proceed to take a
decision on draft resolution IV. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Brunei
Darussalam, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Guinea, India,
Indonesia,
Iran
(Islamic
Republic
of),
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Niger, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan,

32

Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Georgia, Ghana, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lesotho,
Liberia,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia,
Mozambique,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nigeria,
Panama,
Papua
New
Guinea,
Philippines, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Sao
Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Zambia
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 72 votes to
50, with 55 abstentions (resolution 61/176).
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Shinyo (Japan): As my delegation has
already made a statement on the adoption of the
resolution on the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the Third
Committee, we will not repeat what was said.
I should like first, however, of course to say
“thank you very much” to all countries that supported
the resolution. This time, so many countries — nearly
100 — voted in favour of the resolution, and we
appreciate that very much. It is a sign of the resolve of
the majority of the General Assembly to support the
resolution.
We should like, however, to state that Japan
strongly urges that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea take seriously the fact that the General
Assembly has adopted the resolution. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea should fully cooperate with
the United Nations system, including with Special
Rapporteur Vitit Muntarbhorn. In particular, we
strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to respond honestly to inquiries into the
abductions matter, admit that its actions violated
human rights, allow the abducted survivors to return to

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

Japan or other countries of origin without delay, and,
finally, immediately conduct a thorough investigation
and surrender the perpetrators who were responsible
for the abductions.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Albania, Andorra,
Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, the Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Nepal, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Ukraine, Uruguay, Vanuatu and Venezuela.
The right of everyone to life was universally
affirmed in article 3 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and reaffirmed in other international
instruments, such as article 6 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and articles 6
and 37 (a) of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Over the past decade, the Commission on
Human Rights adopted in all consecutive sessions a
resolution on the question of the death penalty,
expressing deep concern at its continuing use around
the world and calling upon States that still maintain the
death penalty to abolish it completely and, in the
meantime, to establish a moratorium on executions.
We firmly believe that the abolition of the death
penalty contributes to the enhancement of human
dignity and the progressive development of human
rights. The death penalty provides no added value in
terms of deterrence. Any miscarriage or failure of
justice is irreversible when, in a cruel and inhumane
way, the punishment deprives one of his or her right to
life. The signatories of this statement are pleased to
note that the trend towards the worldwide abolition of
the death penalty continues, and they welcome the

06-66966

abolition of capital punishment in three States over the
past year, together with positive developments towards
its complete abolition in many other countries.
However, despite these developments, there is
still cause for great alarm. The signatories of this
statement remain deeply concerned about the resort to
the death penalty all over the world.
The signatories of this statement commit
themselves to working towards the abolition of the
death penalty and, where the death penalty still exists,
call for its use to be progressively restricted, insist that
it be carried out according to minimum standards such
as those set out in Economic and Social Council
resolution 1984/50, and, in the meantime, call for the
establishment of a moratorium on executions.
The signatories call upon the General Assembly
to be seized of this matter in the future.
Mr. Cheok (Singapore): It is indeed unfortunate
that we once again find ourselves exchanging words on
the death penalty at this very strange point in time. We
had almost made it through the main part of this
session of the General Assembly without resorting to
such a repetitive exchange. But it seems that old habits
die hard. Some delegations have consistently tried to
portray this as a human rights issue. They claim that
this is a matter of cruelty and inhumane treatment.
They have repeatedly tried to impose upon all Member
States their views on the death penalty.
The reality is that there is no international
consensus on whether the death penalty is a violation
of human rights. We do not think that it is. Indeed, a
large group of countries have always dissociated
themselves from resolutions on the abolition of the
death penalty. For a large number of countries, the
death penalty is a criminal justice issue. It is imposed
for the most serious crimes and serves as a deterrent to
would-be offenders. Every citizen also has a right to
live in a safe environment, free from criminal threat to
their lives and personal safety.
Singapore’s position is very simple. Every
country has the sovereign right to decide on its own
criminal justice system. Whether to maintain or to
abolish the death penalty is a question of national
choice. Each society has to judge what is best for its
people, according to its unique circumstances. Respect
for human rights must include respect for differences
in systems and practices. Tolerance of diversity cannot

33

A/61/PV.81

be restricted only to positions with which one agrees.
In the absence of international consensus, countries on
either side of the argument have no right to impose
their opinions. Opinions are not self-evident truths that
brook no dissent. A little modesty would go a long way
towards promoting genuine dialogue — assuming, of
course, that there is a desire for genuine dialogue.
My delegation respects the right of others to
decide on their own systems. If this means the
abolition of the death penalty in their respective
societies, then we respect that decision. We do not seek
to impose our views. All we ask is that the same
treatment — the same basic courtesy — be extended to
us.
Mr. Suárez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia, a country that has suffered from the scourge
of kidnapping but that has decisively confronted the
actions of the criminal groups responsible for those
terrible crimes in our country, thereby considerably
reducing the number of kidnappings, would like to
express its solidarity with the victims of kidnapping
and their families in all nations. We call on all States to
take actions and decisions to effectively deal with that
reprehensible crime and demand the unconditional
release of all those have been kidnapped, regardless of
the nature or the claimed motives of those responsible.
Mr. Khammanichanh (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): My delegation would like to explain its vote
on resolution 61/174, entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”.
States Members of the United Nations that are
party to international conventions on human rights
have been consistently meeting their obligations. My
delegation is of the view that the promotion of human
rights should be addressed on the basis of each
country’s specific reality and historical evolution.
Regrettably, however, the contents of the resolution are
not in line with those principles. Our delegation
therefore voted against the resolution.
We understand the concerns of the international
community regarding the issue of abduction and
express our sympathy to the victims of such acts. My
delegation hopes that whenever they occur, they will be
resolved in a constructive and peaceful manner.
Mr. Pekarchuk (Ukraine): Upon instructions
from my capital, I am to deliver the following
statement in explanation of vote on draft resolution III.

34

The delegation of Ukraine supported draft
resolution III, entitled “Situation of human rights in
Belarus”. Ukraine is interested in the democratic
development of the Republic of Belarus on the basis of
respect for human rights and the rule of law. We
consider actions that could isolate the Republic of
Belarus — an important neighbour — to have a
counterproductive effect. Ukraine supports the
establishment of an effective dialogue and cooperation
between the Republic of Belarus and international
human rights mechanisms, including the Human Rights
Council, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the Council of Europe, as well as the
human rights treaty bodies.
Mr. Outlule (Botswana): My delegation would
like to explain its vote on draft resolution I, “Situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea”.
Although the delegation of Botswana abstained in
the voting on the draft resolution, we would like to
place it on record that, had paragraph 1 (b) (v) been put
to the vote, we would have voted in favour of it. In
paragraph 1 (b) (v), the General Assembly expresses its
very serious concern at
“Unresolved questions of international
concern relating to the abduction of foreigners in
the form of enforced disappearance, which
violates the human rights of the nationals of other
sovereign countries”.
We wish to place on record that this is a matter
that we consider to be very serious and that it needs to
be addressed immediately. Thus, we would have voted
in favour of paragraph 1 (b) (v) had it been put to a
vote.
Mr. Sin Song Chol (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): It was not the intention of my
delegation to take the floor at this stage, but, owing to
the lack of factual content in the statement made by the
delegation of Japan, my delegation is obliged to
explain its position regarding the issue raised by the
Japanese delegation.
First of all, the Japanese delegation stated that the
vote has demonstrated that a majority of United
Nations Member States support the resolution on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. However, I
would like to remind the Japanese delegation that if its
members had a good sense of mathematical

06-66966

A/61/PV.81

calculation, they could also see that another majority of
Member States voted against the resolution.
That said, my delegation wishes to make the
following comments regarding the issue that was raised
in the statement by the Japanese delegation.
The Korean people have a deep-seated grudge
towards Japan, which has to be paid with blood. Japan,
during the 40-odd years of its occupation of Korea,
forcibly drafted and abducted 8.4 million Koreans and
forced military sexual slavery on 200,000 women and
girls — I repeat, 200,000 women and girls. Even today,
after more than half a century, we do not know the
whereabouts of most of those victims. The Japanese
authorities who make a fuss about human rights and
the rule of law are not giving a sincere and coherent
response concerning the fate of those victims, and they
have neither apologized nor honestly compensated for
Japan’s past crimes against humanity.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
maintains high vigilance against the threats posed by
Japan in cooperation with the United States. Fully
aware of its responsibility for the history and destiny of
its people, as well as for peace and security on the
Korean peninsula and in the Asia-Pacific region, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is accelerating
its efforts to be fully prepared to resolutely counter any
threats coming from Japan.
My delegation would like to conclude by urging
the Japanese delegation to fully implement the
Pyongyang Declaration, which is a real, historic
document setting forth the road map for the
development of bilateral relations between our two
countries, instead of using it as an excuse for Japan to
evade its responsibility and historical accountability
for its wrongdoing. We urge the Japanese authorities to
respect and fully implement the Declaration instead of
debasing it.
Mr. Muhumuza (Uganda): As this is the first
time I have taken the floor, I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on the way in which you are
conducting our deliberations.
My delegation has observed a disproportionate
number of delegations voting in a manner in which
they had not intended to vote. I would urge that the
causes of that phenomenon be examined with a view to
rectification.

06-66966

The President: I now call on the representative
of Belarus, who wishes to speak in exercise of the right
of reply. May I remind members that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, statements in
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second, and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Ms. Petkevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus deeply regrets the adoption of resolution
61/175, entitled “The situation of human rights in
Belarus”. That resolution has nothing to do with human
rights; it represents nothing more than the sponsors’
imposition on the international community of their
unilateral negative assessment of the internal and
external policies of Belarus. The content of this
document is based on humiliating, unfounded
accusations, and the process of its adoption was based
on unwillingness and lack of interest with regard to
hearing the Belarusian side.
The accusations contained in the resolution are
not new. Our opponents constantly use them in the
context
of
bilateral
relations
and
regional
organizations. Now they are attempting to drag the
General Assembly into this aggressive propaganda
campaign to discredit the Government and the people
of Belarus.
In our view, the resolution entitled “The situation
of human rights in Belarus” creates no political or
other kind of commitments for Belarus. The result of
the voting shows that the opinion of the document’s
authors does not reflect the position of the international
community. The majority of United Nations Member
States did not vote in favour of the resolution. They did
not believe its spurious allegations and did not endorse
its unfounded and inappropriate demands.
At the same time, we would note that the
adoption of this resolution will in no way have a
negative impact on the cooperation of Belarus with
United Nations human rights bodies. Belarus will
continue, as before, to intensify that cooperation and to
make our utmost contribution to the work of the
General Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the
Economic and Social Council and other United Nations
bodies to promote and protect human rights in all
countries.

35

A/61/PV.81

In conclusion, I would like to sincerely thank our
friends and all those who share our position for their
support in opposing the adoption of this destructive
document aimed against the Republic of Belarus.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 67.
Programme of work
The President: Before adjourning this meeting, I
would like to consult representatives regarding an
extension of the work of the Fifth Committee.
Members will recall that, at its 72nd plenary meeting,
on 11 December 2006, the General Assembly decided
to extend the work of the Fifth Committee until
Tuesday, 19 December. However, as the Fifth
Committee has not yet completed its work, I propose

36

that the Assembly further extend the work of the Fifth
Committee until Thursday, 21 December.
In the absence of objection, may I take it that the
General Assembly agrees to that proposal?
It was so decided.
The President: I would like to inform members
that, owing to the lateness of the hour, we shall take up
the remaining items tomorrow morning after the
Assembly has taken action on draft resolution I,
entitled “International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance”, contained
in the report of the Third Committee (A/61/448), under
agenda item 68, entitled Report of the Human Rights
Council.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

06-66966
