IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

15. States should also promote bilateral and regional co-operation
as one of the importan! means to enhance the effectiveness of the principie of refraining from the threat or use of force in intemational relations.
16. States shall abide by their commitment to the principie of
peaceful settlement of disputes, which is inseparable from the principie
of refraining from the threat or use of force in their international relations.
17. States parties to international disputes shall settle their disputes exclusively by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security, and justice, are not endangered. Por this
purpose they shall utilize such means as negotiation, inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlemenl, resort lo regional
agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own choice,
including good offices.
18. States shall take effective measures which, by their scope and
by their nature, constitute steps towards the ultimate achievemenl of
general and complete disarmament under stricl and effective intemational control.
19. States should take effective measures in order to preven! the
danger of any armed confticts, including those in which nuclear weapons could be used, to prevent an arms race in outer space and to halt
and reverse it on Earth, to lower the leve! of military confrontation and
to enhance global stability.
20. States should co-operate in order to undertake active efforts
aimed at ensuring the relaxation of international tensions, the consolidation of the international legal order and the respect of the system of
international security established by the Charter of the United Nations.
21. States should establish appropriate confidence-building measures aimed at preventing and reducing tensions and at creating a better climate among them.
22. States reaffirm that the respect for effective exercise of ali human rights and fundamental freedoms and protection thereof are essential factors for international peace and security, as well as for justice and the development offriendly relations and co-operation among
ali States. Consequently, they should promote and encourage respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, in ter alia, by strictly complying with their international obligations and considering, as appropriate, becoming parties to the principal international instruments in this
field.
23. States shall co-operate at the bilateral, regional and international levels in order to:
(a)

Prevent and combat international terrorism;

Contribute actively to the elimination ofthe causes underlying
intemational terrorism.
(b)

24. States shall endeavour to take concrete measures and promote
favourable conditions in the intemational economic environment in
order to achieve intemational peace, security and justice; they will
take into account the interest of ali in the narrowing of the differences
in the levels of economic development, and in particular the interest of
developing countries throughout the world.

289

accept and carry out the decisions of the Council in accordance with
the Charter.
28. States should give the Security Coundl every possible type of
assistance in ali actions taken by it for the just settlement of crisis situations and regional confticts. They should strengthen the par! the Council can play in preventing disputes and situations the continuation of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance ofinternational peace and
security. They should facilitate the task of the Council in reviewing
situations of potential danger for international peace and security al as
early a stage as possible.
29. The fact-finding capacity ofthe Security Council should be enhanced ,m an ad hoc basis in accordance with the Charter.
30. States should give full effect to the importan! role conferred by
the Charter on the General Assembly in the area ofpeaceful settlement
of disputes and the maintenance of intemational peace and security.
31. States should encourage the Secretary-General to exercise
fully his functions with regard to the maintenance of international
peace and security and the peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with the Charter, including those under Articles 98 and 99, and
fully co-operate with him in this respect.
32. States should take into consideration that legal disputes
should, as a general rule, be referred by the parties to the lntemational
Court of J ustice in accordance with the provisions of the Sta tute of the
Court asan important factor for strengthening the maintenance of international peace and security. The General Assembly and the
Security Council should consider making use of the provisions of the
Charter concerning the possibility of requesting the Court to give an
advisory opinion on any legal question.
33. States parties to regional arrangements or agencies should consider making greater use of such arrangements and agencies for dealing with such matters relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security as are appropriate, pursuant to Article 52 of the
Charter;
2. Declares that nothing in the presenl Declaration shall be construed as:
(a) Enlarging or diminishing in any way the scope of the provisions
of the Charter concerning cases in which the use of force is lawful;
(b) Prejudicing in any manner the relevan! provisions ofthe Charter
or the rights and duties of Member States or the scope of the functions
and powers of the United Nations organs under the Charter, in particular those relating to the threat or use of force;
3. Declares that nothing in the present Declaration could in any way
prejudice the right to self-determination, freedom and independence, as
derived from the Charter, of peoples forcibly deprived of that right and
referred to in the Declaration on Principies of lnternational Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter ofthe United Nations, particularly peoples under
colonial and racist régimes or other forms of alien domination; nor the
right of these peoples to struggle to that end and to seek and receive support, in accordance with the principies of the Charter and in conformity
with the above-mentioned Declaration;
4. Confirms that, in the event of a conftict between the obligations of
Members of the United Nations under the Charter and their obligations
under any other international agreement, their obligations under the
Charter will prevail in accordance with Article 103 of the Charter.

III
25. The competent United Nations organs should make full use of
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations in the field of the
maintenance of international peace and security with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of the principie of refraining from the threat
or use of force in international relations.
26. States should co-operate fully with the organs of the United
Nations in supporting their action relating to the maintenance of international peace and security and to the peaceful settlement of international disputes in accordance with the Charter. In particular, they
should enhance the role of the Security Council so that it can fully and
etfectively discharge its duties. In this regard, the permanent members
of the Council have a special responsibility under the Charter.
27. States should strive to enhance the effectiveness of the collective security system through the etfective implementation of the provisions of the Charter, particularly those relating to the special responsibilities of the Security Council in this regard. They should also fully
discharge their obligations to support United Nations peace-keeping
operations decided upon in accordance with the Charter. States shall

42/148.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law

The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law 6 and the recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral and adopted by the Advisory Committee on the
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in that report,
6 A/42/718.

290

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

Considering that international law should occupy an appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines at ali
universities,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States at the
bilateral leve! to provide assistance in the teaching and
study of international law,
Convinced, nevertheless, that States and international
organizations and institutions should be encouraged to
give further support to the Programme and to increase
their activities to promote the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, in particular those activities which are of special benefit to persons from developing countries,
Recalling its resolutions 2464 (XXIII) of 20 December
1968, 2550 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969, 2838 (XXVI)
of 18 December 1971, 3106 (XXVIII) of 12 December
1973, 3502 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, 32/146 of
16 December 1977, 36/108 of 10 December 1981 and
38/129 of 19 December 1983, in which it stated that in the
conduct of the Programme it was desirable to use as far as
possible the resources and facilities made available by
Member States, international organizations and others, as
well as its resolutions 34/ 144 of 17 December 1979 and
40/66 of 11 December 1985, in which it also expressed the
hope that, in appointing lecturers for the seminars to be
held within the framework of the fellowship programme
in international law sponsored jointly by the United Nations and the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research, account would be taken of the need to secure
representation of major legal systems and balance among
various geographical regions,
l. Approves the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral contained in section 111 of his report, on the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation oflnternational Law, in particular those designed to achieve the best possible results in the administration of the Programme within a policy of maximum financial restraint;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in
1988 and 1989 the activities specified in his report, including the provision of:
(a) A mínimum offifteen fellowships each in 1988 and
1989, at the request of Governments of developing countries;
(b) A mínimum of one scholarship each in 1988 and
1989 under the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial
Fellowship on the Law of the Sea, subject to the availability ofnew voluntary contributions made specifically to the
fellowship fund;
. (~) Assistance in the form of a travel grant for one partlc1pant from each developing country who will be invited
to the regional courses to be organized in 1988 and 1989;

and to finance the above activities from provisions in the
regular budget, when appropriate, as well as from voluntary financia) contributions earmarked for each of the activities concerned, which would be received as a result of
the requests set out in paragraphs 10, 11 and 12 below;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his constructive efforts to promote training and assistance in international law within the framework of the
Programme in 1986 and 1987, in particular for the organization ofthe twenty-second 7 and twenty-third8 sessions of
7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-first Session,
Su¡plement No. 10 (A/41/10), chap. VIII, sect. F.
lbid., Forty-second Session, Supplement No. JO(A/42/10), chap. VI,
sect. H.

the International Law Seminar, held at Geneva from
20 May to 6 June 1986 and from l to 19 June 1987, respectively, and for the participation of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and its Codification Division in the
conduct ofthe fellowship programme in international law
sponsored jointly by the United Nations and the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, as well as for
the activities related to the award of the Hamilton Shirlcy
Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the Law of the Sea;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Institute for Training and Research for its participation in
the Programme, particularly for its efforts in the organization of regional courses and in the administration and organization of the fellowship programme in international
law jointly sponsored and conducted by the United Nations and the Institute;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the Programme, in particular for the efforts it has made to support the teaching of international
law;
6. A/so expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Thailand for its willingness to co-sponsor the regional
training and refresher course for Asian and Pacific countries, held at Bangkok from 24 November to 4 December
1986, and to the Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific for providing facilities for the course;
7. Further expresses its appreciation to the Bague
Academy of International Law for the valuable contributions it has made to the Programme by enabling international law fellows under the sponsorship ofthe United Nations and the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research to attend its annual international law courses
and by providing facilities for seminars organized under
the fellowship programme in international law in conjunction with the Academy courses, and for its constructive efforts in organizing the regional training and refresher
courses held at Buenos Aires in 1986 and at Beijing in
1987;
8. Notes with appreciation the contributions made hy
the Hague Academy of International Law to the teaching,
study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, and calls upon Member States and interested
organizations to give favourable consideration to the appeal of the Academy for a continuation of, and, if possible,
an increase in their financia! contributions in order to enable the Academy to carry on with the above-mentioned
activities;
9. Urges ali Governments to encourage the inclusion
of courses on international law in the programmes of legal
studies offered at institutions of higher learning;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to publicize the Programme and periodically to invite Member
States, universities, philanthropic foundations and other
interested national and international institutions and organizations, as well as individuals, to make voluntary contributions towards the financing ofthe Programme or otherwise to assist in its implementation and possible
expansion;
11. Reiterates its request to Member States and to interested organizations and individuals to make voluntary
contributions towards the financing of the Programme, in
particular for the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe
Memorial Fellowship on the Law ofthe Sea and for the International Law Seminar, and expresses its appreciation to
those Member States, institutions and individuals that
have made voluntary contrihutions for this purpose;

IX.

-------------

12. Urges in particular all Governments to make
voluntary contributions with a view to covering the
amount needed for the financing of the daily subsistence
allowance for up to twenty-five participants in each regional course organized by the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research, thus alleviating the burden on
prospective host countries and making it possible for the
lnstitute to continue to organize the regional courses;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the implementation of the Programme during 1988 and 1989
and, following consultations with the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation
oflnternational Law, to submit recommendations regarding the execution of the Programme in subsequent years;
14. Decides to appoint the following thirteen Member
States as members of the Advisory Committee for a period
of four years beginning on 1 January 1988: Bangladesh,
Cyprus, France, Ghana, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, the Netherlands, Romania, Turkey, the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Venezuela and Zaire;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of lnternational
Law".

94th plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/149.

291

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committce

Progressive development of the principies and
norms of international law relating to the new
international economic order

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, the General Assembly is called upon
to initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New lnternational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation and
35/56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to which contains
the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 34/ 150 of 17 December
1979 and 35/166 of 15 December 1980, entitled "Consolidation and progressive development of the principies and
norms of international economic law relating in particular
to the legal aspects of the new international economic order", and its resolutions 36/ 107 of 10 December 1981,
37/103 of 16 December 1982, 38/128 of 19 December
1983, 39/75 of 13 December 1984, 40/67 of 11 December
1985 and 41/73 of3 December 1986, entitled "Progressive
development of the principies and norms of international
law relating to the new international economic order",
Bearing in mind the urgent need to adopt measures to
reactivate the process of international economic cooperation and the negotiations undertaken for that purpose, particularly in view of the economic difficulties encountered by the developing countries,

Considering the close link between the establishment of
a just and equitable international economic order and the
existence of an appropriate legal framework,
Recognizing the need for the codification and progressive development of the principies and norms of international law relating to the new international economic order,
Recalling the analytical study 9 submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-ninth session by the United Nations
lnstitute for Training and Research,
1. Notes with appreciation the views and comments
submitted by Governments pursuant to resolutions 40/67
and 41/73; 10
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to seek proposals of Member States
concerning the most appropriate procedures to be adopted
with regard to the consideration ofthe analytical study, as
well as the codification and progressive development of
the principies and norms of international law relating to
the new international economic order;
(b) To include the proposals received in accordance
with subparagraph (a) above in a report to be submitted to
the General Assembly at its forty-third session;
3. Recommends that the task of completing the elaboration of the process of codification and progressive development of the principies and norms of international law
relating to the new international economic order should be
undertaken in an appropriate forum within the framework
of the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Progressive development of the principies and norms of international law
relating to the new international economic order".
94th p/enary meeting
7 December 1987

42/150.

Peaceful settlement of disputes between States

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States",
Recalling its resolution 37/10 of 15 November 1982, by
which it approved the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, annexed thereto,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 38/131 of 19 December
1983, 39/79 of 13 December 1984, 40/68 of 11 December
1985 and 41/74 of 3 December 1986,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of conflict situations and the emergence of new sources of disputes and
tension in international life, and especially at the growing
tendency to resort to force or the threat of the use of force
and to intervention in interna) affairs, and at the escalation
of the arms race, which gravely endanger the independence and security of States as well as international peace
and security,
Taking into account the need to exert the utmost effort in
order to settle any situations and disputes between States
on the basis of sovereign equality and exclusively by peaceful means, in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations, and to avoid any military actions and hostilities
against other States, which can only make more difficult
the solution of existing problems,
9 A/39/504/ Add. l, annex Ill.

'° A/41/536 and A/42/483 and Add. l and 2.
