TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 24 AUGUST 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1445) . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . t . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives of Canada, Denmark,
France, Paraguay, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America addressed to the President of the Security
Council(S/8758)
. +, . . . . . . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1

S/PV. 1445

:
/
:
1

NOTE
.,,

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday, 24 August 1968, at 11.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Jolo August0 DE ARAUJO CASTRO
(Brazil).

4. Mr. KUTAKOV (Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Security Council Affairs) (translated from Russian):
The letter reads as follows:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

‘The Permanent Mission of the USSR to the United
Nations presents its compliments to the President of the
Security Council and, referring to the letter of the United
Nations Secretariat of 23 August 1968 forwarding the
text of the telegram from the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the German Democratic Republic, Otto Winzer, of 23
August 1968 which contains his communication to the
President of the Security Council, has the honour to draw
attention to the fact that this important and urgent
communication has so far not been distributed as an
official document of the Security Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l445)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives
of Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America addressed to the President of
the Security Council, (S/8758).

“The Permanent Mission of the USSR expects that this
telegram of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the German
Democratic Republic to the President of the Security
Council will be distributed without delay as an official
document of the United Nations Security Council.”

Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT: In this connexion I wish to state that
the procedure adopted by the President follows some
precedents adopted in the past, since in this case the
President failed to receive any guidance from the rules of
procedure, which are silent in this regard. Anyhow, the
President was bound to acquaint the members of the
Security Council with the contents of the communication,
and this has been done. The President, however, does not
make claim to any infallibility, and will gladly comply with
any other course which may be agreeable to the Security
Council.

The agenda wasadopted.
letter dated 21 August 1968 from the representatives of
Canada, Denmark, France, Paraguay, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8758)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Security Council, I now propose, if
there is no objection, to invite the representatives of
Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Poland and Yugoslavia to take
seats at the Council table.

6. I call on the representative of the USSR.
7. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, I am very grateful
to you for having decided to acquaint the Security Council
with the letter which the Soviet delegation sent to you late
last night in connexion with a letter it received from the
Secretariat of the United Nations forwarding the telegram
from the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the German
Democratic Republic, Comrade Winzer.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Hajek (&echoSlovakia), Mr. M. Tarabanov (Bulgaria), Mr. B. Tomorowicz
(Poland) and Mr. A. Vratusa (Yugoslavia) took places at the
Council tab le.
-2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the question before it, and I
wish to acquaint the members of the Security Council with
the contents of an official note from the Permanent Mission
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

8. The fact is that, despite the arrival of this telegram
during the day, it was sent to the members of the Security
Council so late at night that, asbecame apparent today, not
all the members of the Security Council even learned its
contents. I shall therefore take the liberty of reading it here

3. I request the Under-Secretary-General kindly to read
this letter to the members of the Security Council.
1

Security Council with some unidentified
stating:

at this meeting of the Security Council for the information
of the Council members. The telegram reads as follows:

covering letter

[The speaker continued in English. J

“Berlin, 23 August 1968

“Please find attached a photocopy of a cablegram,
dated 23 August 1968, addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

“To the President of the Security Council
of the United Nations,
“United Nations Headquarters, New York

“In accordance with the instructions given by the
President of the Security Council, copies of this cablegram are being sent to all members of the Security
Council for their information.

“Excellency,
“The Security Council of the United Nations, acting in
a way which is inadmissible, has inscribed on its agenda
the debate on the measures taken by the socialist States
for the protection of the building of socialism and
guaranteeing the national independence and sovereignty
of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.

“23 August 1968”
[The speaker resumed in Russian. J

13. Is there any way of knowing who signed this piece of
paper? It is unsigned, and a photocopy of Mr, Winzer’s
telegram is attached to it. Therefore the first question that
comes to my mind, naturally, is: why has the telegram of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the German Democratic
Republic not been distributed as an official document of
the Security Council?

“The Government of the German Democratic Republic
most emphatically stressesthat the defence and strengthening of socialism in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
serve the cause of peace and security in Europe. For these
reasons the Government of the- German- Democratic
Republic must insist on participating in the discussion of
these questions by sending an authorized representative.

14. The PRESIDENT: Well, first of all I should like to
clarify a point. The text of this telegram reached me at a
very late moment in yesterday’s meeting; according to the
note by the United Nations Telegraph Unit, it wasreceived
by that Unit on 23 August at 6.58 p.m. That is a point of
fact. On the other hand, I think there is no doubt that the
Secretariat’s note was in accordance with instructions given
by the President of the Security Council that copies of the
telegram were to be sent to all members of the Security
Council for their information. So there is no doubt that
copies of the telegram were distributed according to
instructions given by the President of the Security Council,
Those are two points of fact.

“The authorized representative of the German Democratic Republic is ready to leave at any time.
“Kindly reply immediately.
“(Signed) Otto WINZER
“Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
German Democratic Republic”

9. In conformity with the accepted procedure and practice, this kind of communication from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of a State-whether a Member of the United
Nations or not-must be published as an official document
of the Security Council insofar as this communication has a
direct and immediate bearing on the matter before the
Council.

15. As I said, the President followed some of the
precedents of the past, but the President does not lay claim
to infallibility, and he is agreeable to complying with any
course agreeable to the members of the Security Council.

10. I am not dealing now with that aspect of the matter
which shows, beyond any doubt, that the question has been
dragged into the Security Council by those who are
interested in aggravating the international situation and in
distracting attention from current problems connected with
aggressive acts (in the full sense of the word) being
committed in other places. We have had the opportunity to
speak of that in detail.

16. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): I
should like to say a few words concerning the contents of
the telegram of which our colleague from the Soviet Union
has just spoken.
17. Our colleague, Ambassador Malik, will not be SUTprised that our attitude on the question of hearing this
person is contrary to his own; as he well knows, his
Government and mine have always held opposing points of
view on this subject.

11. But, apart from that, since this question is being
discussed in the Security Council, and since the German
Democratic Republic is being mentioned by those who
irrtroduced this question for debate, it is wholly logical that
the representative of the German Democratic Republic be
heard, that he be allowed to be present here at the meeting.

18. Pursuant to the communication
addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the Pankow authorities, it is necessary to recall the position of France on this
matter. This position has been expressed by us many times,
particularly in documents addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

12. As for the telegram of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of that State, well, God himself, as they say, demands that
it be published as an official document of the Security
Council. Meanwhile, however, this telegram has been
circulated to the permanent mission of the members of the

19. France does not acknowledge the right of the authorities of East Germany to speak on behalf of the German
2

people in international affairs. Therefore, their representatives can not be permitted to take part in our debates. That
is all I have to say.

Soviet manoeuvre will be all too clear. That purpose is to
provide an issue in the Council which may, for.a moment at
least, distract our attention from the development of events
in Czechoslovakia. While it is true that the regime established by the Soviet Union in the zone of Germany which it
has occupied since the close of the Second World War is an
accomplice in the crime now before the Council, Ambassador Malik is under no illusions about the usefulness to
him or even the novelty of testimony before the Council
from still another of the occupiers of Czechoslovakia,

20. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): I think that, as far as the
definition of statehood is concerned, there are certain
criteria such as territory, population and government, de
facto or de jure in the territory. As far as the German
Democratic Republic is concerned, it is a State and all three
criteria accord with that definition. Whether a certain State
recognizes it or not is another question.

28. The request which is now before us from the Soviet
representative has therefore a quality of effrontery. What is
shocking in the extreme is that the Czechoslovak peoples,
who suffered the brutal occupation of their country by
Hitler’s armies in 1938, should again have been subjected to
the indignity of invasion and occupation by German troops,
this time under despotic leaders sponsored and kept in
power by the Soviet Union.

21. A third problem is whether, because certain members
of this body do not recognize the German Democratic
Republic, the President is obliged not to publish as an
official document of the Council anything coming from its
Government-just because some members of the Council do
not recognize the German Democratic Republic.
22. Mr. President, you distributed that cablegram to the
members of the Council as an unofficial document, and I
appreciate it. It was an act which took into consideration
the late arrival of the telegram, and it was therefore the best
way to distribute it in an unofficial way. But I think that
nothing prevents you from distributing this cablegram later
as an official document. Indeed, it would be interesting to
know what the precedents are regarding a document
concerning an issue before the Security Council not
distributed as a Security Council document just because it
came from a State not a Member of the United Nations.

29. All we could expect from listening to a representative
of the so-called German Democratic Republic would be a
lengthening of that long chain of incoherences, irrelevancies
and redundancies with which we have already been presented by the Soviet Union and its client States.
30. Ambassador Malik knows that anything that might be
said by a representative of the regime in the eastern zone of
Germany can authoritatively be said only by those who are,
in fact, in charge of that zone, the Government of the
Soviet Union. In sum, such an individual could not provide
any information that is either authoritative or not already
available from the Government which can best inform us,
the Government which engineered and directed the invasion
and occupation of Czechoslovakia. Such an individual
would be nothing more than a proxy for the Government
of the Soviet Union which is already quite adequately and
permanently represented on this Council.

23. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I should like to
say at once that I fully support what has been said to us by
the representative of France. The United Kingdom does not
recognize that there exists a State or a Government other
than that of the Federal Republic of Germany entitled to
speak on behalf of the German people in international
affairs.
24. Consequently, we consider that to hear the person
who asked to be heard would add nothing new to our
proceedings, would only serve to delay and confuse our
proceedings, which indeed doubtless is the object of the
application. The objection to the document is clear, the
objection to the document is that it is not a communication
from a State and it purports to be so.

31. There is no ambiguity about the situation under the
Charter or the rules. Both Article 32 of the Charter and
rule 6 are applicable only to States and the regime in the
Soviet Zone of Germany is neither a State nor entitled in
any way to speak for the German people.
32. I need hardly remind the members of this Council that
the territory over which the so-called German Democratic
Republic purports to exercise authority is, in fact, only an
occupation zone of Germany under the control of the
Soviet Union and an inseparable part of the Germany State.

25. I would also perhaps say that we consider that the
action taken by our President has been sound and correct;
we fully support his decision. Our President has said to us
that he may not be infallible; it is scarcely necessary for us
to say that we all have the highest regard both for his
impartiality and his integrity.

33. The so-called German Democratic Republic r&me
was created by the Soviet Union, and was imposed on its
zone of occupation for the simple reason that the Soviet
Union was unable to dominate all of Germany. It thus
hoped that by establishing what it called a second Gemm
State in its zone it could assure communist domination of
at least a part of Germany and perpetuate the division of
Germany into the indefinite future.

26. Mr. BALL (United States of America): The statements
that have been made by the representative of France and
the representative of the United Kingdom represent also the
views of my Government with regard to this problem. I
think it may be worth taking a very brief moment,
however, to examine why this problem has come before us.

34. In the specific matter of handling this document, let
me only say that my Government expresses the fullest
confidence in the decisions that you have made, Mr. President, and in the manner in which you have sought to

27. To anyone who had the great misfortune to have to
endure the filibuster by the Soviet representative Thursday
night [1443rd meeting], the primary purpose of this latest
3

socialist countries for giving it fraternal assistance which has
proved effective and therefore arouses the particular annoyance and irritation of those who are betting their money on
counter-revolution and reaction in any socialist country,
including Czechoslovakia.

dispose of this matter. In that I am sure I express only the
sentiments that are felt by the great majority of this
Council.
35. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): It is the policy of my
Government that only the Federal Republic of Germany is
entitled to speak on behalf of the German people in
international affairs. We are, moreover, satisfied that the
hearing of the person who applied to be heard would serve
no constructive purpose. We shall therefore oppose the
request for a hearing, and may I add that we should let no
doubt arise that the action of invasion. by itself can be no
passport to this Council.

40. When it turned out they had lost their bet, they
organized a clamorous world-wide slander campaign against
the socialist countries. Naturally, the sociahst countries
expressed the desire to present the events in their true light,
and they have every reason to do so. They have a right to
take advantage of the Charter of the United Nations and of
the rules of procedure of the Security Council. It is the
United Nations Charter and the rules of procedure of the
Security Council which ensure the possibility and right of
each State and its official representatives to participate in
the work of the Council during the discussion of a matter
affecting the honour, dignity, interests, policy and acts of
that State. They have a full right to present the substance
of the problems under discussion and to declare their
attitude to the matter being discussed. They have a full
right at a meeting of the Security Council to unmask the
hostile statements, insinuations, misrepresentation of facts
and all the other inventions of the representatives of the
aggressiveimperialist blocs.

36. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): First, I would indeed,
welcome, the information concerning the precedents when
a document from a non-member State was not distributed
as an official document of the Security Council. Second, it
seems to me that from the procedural point of view we
have jumped a step, because some of the members of the
Security Council jumped to a conclusion and expressed
their opinion in substance, but I think there are two steps:
first, an official document of the Security Council should
be issued concerning the invitation and, then, the Council
can express itself and, in a democratic vote, can decide to
invite or not to invite to the Council table a delegation of a
State or someone. Therefore, to make a decision without
even having an official document seems to me a little bit
strange. So from a procedural point of view I think that the
members of the Council can only express themselves over
an official document of the Council that is before the
Council. This is my point.

41. Of course, the representatives of the NATO countries,
and above all of the United States and the United Kingdom,
find the true presentation of the facts and events taking
place in Czechoslovakia by those whom they accuse
undesirable. It does not enter into their calculations. They
want only one thing: to exploit the events in Czechoslovakia for wholesale slander, to make political capitd out
of these events, to distort their nature and distract the
attention of all peoples from the aggressive policy of the
imperialist Powers.

37. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
The representatives of the
NATO countries, which at a certain point created a Bonn
State in order to include it in the military aggressiveNATO
bloc and turn it into their weapon against the socialist
countries, are coming out in harmonious chorus against the
invitation of the official representative of a sovereign State,
the German Democratic Republic, to take part in the
debate on the question inscribed on the agenda. This is not
new; it is not original, and it is not the first time we have
heard such hostile and slanderous statements concerning
the German Democratic Republic.
(translated

ffom

Russian):

42. We were able to see with our own eyes what active
attempts the United States representative made at one of
the previous meetings of the Security Council through
procedural tricks and manipulations to deprive even the
representative of a Member State of the United Nations, the
representative of Bulgaria, of the normal right to speak
before this Council. Raising his voice, losing his temper, he
tried practically to forbid the Bulgarian representative from
taking the floor before the vote on the draft resolution
tabled in the Security Council by the United States
delegation and others. The members of the Security
Council remember that he even tried to deprive the
representative of a member State of the Council of the right
to ask for consecutive interpretation, although the representative of that State had not insisted on this interpretation.
HOW far can the United States representative’s cynicism go
when he decides to break the rules of procedure with his
own hand, to destroy one of its legitimate rules affording a
representative of a Member State of the United Nations the
right to insist on consecutive interpretation of his speech
into the working languages? This case of the representative
of the United States demanding a vote in order to change
this right is unprecedented in the history of the Security
Council. That right is constitutional, and you, Mr. Ball,
have no right, no grounds, for bred&g the constitution
without the consent of the Members of the United Nations
Organization and of the Security Council. That’s how far

38. The NATO member States, and first and foremost
their main leaders, grossly and cynically misrepresenting the
true nature of the events in Czechoslovakia have, illegally,
and in contravention of the Charter, imposed on the
Security Council a debate on this question which concerns
events in a socialist country, openly aiming-by whatever
means, by whatever methods-at hindering a normal development of the events in Czechoslovakia and of exploiting
this issue which they have imposed on the Security Council
to distract its attention and that of the world community
from the acts of imperialist aggression in Viet-Nam and the
Middle East.
39. Finally, the Security Council is being used by the
representatives of these countries, particularly the United
States and the United Kingdom, for unbridled slander of
socialism, of communism, of the community of socialist
countries, of Socialist Czechoslovakia, of all the other
4

matters have gone during the debate on this question here.
Mr. Ball mentioned the English word “filibuster” here.
There is no such word in the Russian language, there is
nothing like it because the Russians do not engage in
filibustering. That is an Anglo-Saxon practice. Lord
Caradon is shaking his head, but he agrees. So do not
attribute something of your own to us.

Not all Members of the United Nations Organization-and
thank God, as the saying goes, there are 124 of themrecognize each other and not all of them have diplomatic
relations with each other. But what has that to do with the
United Nations? When a question concerning their interests
is discussed, each of them has the right to participate.
Moreover, the Charter of the United Nations is so flexible
and just that, on the basis of Article 32, it grants even
non-member States of the United Nations the right to
participate in the discussion of questions in which they are
directly concerned.

43. And how did matters stand at previous meetings? The
Council was convened for 5 o’clock, but then the AngloSaxon filibusterers postponed it until 9 o’clock. But what
has that to do with us? The discussion became protracted.
We had to meet at night, and that is why the American
delegate so nervously insisted on a quick vote. Apparently
he wanted to go to bed. So if you want to talk about
filibustering, say it to yourselves, not to us.

47. So on what basis in international law are the United
States and the United Kingdom trying to prevent the
presence of the representative of the German Democratic
Republic, and his participation in the discussion? On the
basis of their own imperialist concepts, which have been
applied in Europe since the very end of the Second World
War. But these imperialist concepts are not binding on
anybody, least of all on the United Nations.

44. Every member of the Security Council has a right, in
accordance with the Charter and the rules of procedure, to
express his opinion, to explain his position, and to take as
much time as is necessary for it, and nobody has a
right-not even you, Mr. Ball-to forbid it. Let us just agree
on that. Article 32 of the Charter states:

48. At all the protracted meetings of the Security Council
in the last few days, the German Democratic Republic was
subject, as a State, to a slanderous, hostile campaign on the
part of the representatives of the United States and the
United Kingdom. Why, then, don’t you Anglo-American
gentlemen deign to hear the official representative of the
German Democratic Republic and his reply to your
slanderous, hostile inventions about the German Democratic Republic? On what grounds do you forbid this? One
State after another which considered it appropriate to
participate in the discussion of this question applied to the
Security Council for permission to do so, and their
representatives are present here and participating.

“Any Member of the United Nations which is not a
member of the Security Council or any State which is not
a Member of the United Nations”-1 stress it, any
State-“if it is a party to a dispute under consideration by
the Security Council, shall be invited to participate,
without vote, in the discussion relating to the
dispute . . .“.
Therefore the United Nations Charter, in Article 32,
provides a legitimate basis for the Government of the
German Democratic Republic to request the President of
the Security Council and the Security Council to afford the
official representative of the German Democratic Republic
the opportunity of appearing here, at this table, with an
explanation of the position of his Government which the
Anglo-Saxons are accusing of every conceivable sin.

49. Yesterday yet another socialist State, the German
Democratic Republic, submitted a request to the Security
Council to be admitted to participate in the Council’s work
in conformity with the Charter and the rules of procedure.
Rule 14 of the Provisional Rules of Procedure states:

45. Of course, the official representative of the German
Democratic Republic will participate in the discussion
without right of vote. But no. The representatives of the
United States and the United Kingdom, with their natural
tendency towards filibustering and dictatorship, towards
supressing the will of others and to imposing their own
desires, are taking every conceivable measure to prevent the
official representative of the German Democratic Republic
from participating in the discussion of this question here.
On what grounds? They are advancing several arguments,
none of which can withstand criticism.

“Any Member of the United Nations not a member of
the Security Council and any State not a Member of the
United Nations, if invited to participate in a meeting or
meetings of the Security Council, shall submit credentials
for the representative appointed by it for this
purpose . . .“,
Therefore, the rules of procedure of the Council provide for
the participation of representatives of States, even if they
are not Members of the United Nations. And there are
absolutely no grounds for the representatives of the United
States, the United Kingdom and others to object to the
invitation of the representative of the German Democratic
Republic.

46. You see, the United Kingdom, the United States, and
France-which unfortunately has also joined this chorusdo not recognize the German Democratic Republic. But
what has this to do with the United Natibns? There are
plenty of people who don’t recognize each other. But that
does not mean that the United Nations must follow the
whims of the United Kingdom, the United States and the
other NATO members, or be guided by their inhumane
imperialist principles and rules. It certainly does not. The
non-recognition of one State by another is in no way
binding on the United Nations and the Security Council.

50. The campaign to prevent his admittance to the
Security Council began yesterday, inasmuch as the official
telegram of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the German
Democratic Republic was not published as an official
document of the Security Council. Today this campaign is
being continued more actively with the direct participation
of the representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom.
5

Nations, its representative was invited to participate in tlte
work of the Security Council. And who insisted on tbst
invitation? The representative of the United States. Oa
what grounds? On the grounds that South Viet-Nam had
been accused of aggression, and therefore the statetnents of
an official representative of South Viet-Nam should bc
heard at a meeting of the Security Council.

51. Such a request on the part of the German Democratic
Republic is entirely natural, in view of the fact that its
participation in the assistancegiven jointly to the fraternal
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic by the Soviet Union, the
Polish People’s Republic, the Hungarian People’s Republic
and the Bulgarian People’s Republic has been acknowledged
and repeatedly mentioned in the Security Council in the
statements of the United States representative, the representative of France, and of other representatives. It is
therefore entirely natural that this resulted in an official
request by Government of the German Democratic Republic that its representative be admitted to the Security
Council and take part in its work on the question under
discussion.

54,. That is how matters stood then. But now the United
States representative is behaving completely differently in
the Security Council, when the matter concerns the
German Democratic Republic. In every sentence of his
innumerable speeches he has accused the German DemB
cratic Republic of aggression, but he does not want to hear
the German Democratic Republic’s side of the matter. It is
more convenient for him this way. Let the Security Council
record show only his speech; let all those present hear only
his accusation; but so far as the accused is concerned, do
not admit the German Democratic Republic here, do not
let it have the floor at the Security Council table, do not let
it participate in the Security Council’s work. The United
States representative tries to present this as a just, fair and
democratic position, conforming to the United Nations
Charter and the rules of procedure in the Security Council.
It is hard to defend such an untenable position, Mr. Ball,
and you are wasting your eloquence and efforts. What
cannot be demonstrated cannot be proved.

52. You refer to precedents. But there have been precedents when invitations to participate in the work of the
Security Council were issued not only to non-member
States, but also to countries which, formally and officially,
were not States at all. We need only mention the complaint
by Kuwait and Iraq against British aggression. This question
was discussed at the 958th meeting of the Security Council,
held on 5 July 1961. The Secretary of State of Kuwait sent
a letter requesting that a representative of Kuwait be
invited to participate in the debate on this question in the
Security Council.1 Despite objections by the representative
of the United Kingdom, the President announced it had
been agreed that the representative of Kuwait be invited to
take a place at the Security Council table. At the time, the
representative of the United Kingdom flatly objected to
this invitation. Great Britain was being accused of aggression. Obviously, therefore, the United Kingdom representative was most anxious not to hear the truth from the
representative of an Arab country, Kuwait. But despite his
objections, the representative of Kuwait was invited and
participated in the discussion of this question.

55. I have cited these precedents to refute any alleged
precedents for not inviting the parties to a dispute. It is
essential that elementary respect for legal principles and
international law be shown by States which are aot
interested in giving help to the Czechoslovak people, not in
caltn, peaceful, friendly settlement of the events in Czech&
Slovakia, but in exploiting the clear and self-evident
fact-the consolidation and harmonization of society ia
Czechoslovakia-for an irritated, verbose, vociferous, hostile
propaganda campaign through all propaganda media and
through the speeches of the United States and United
Kingdom representatives in the Security Council against the
socialist countries, against the German Democratic Republit, the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia and other countries.

53. I recall a second precedent-there are plenty of them.
On 19 May 1964, in connexion with Cambodia’s complaint
on the aggression committed against it by troops of the
United States and the South Viet-Namese puppet regime, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Viet-Nam submitted a
request2 that the representative of South Viet-Nam be
granted an opportunity to take part in the debate on this
question in the Security Council. Why? Because Cam
bodia’s complaint accused South Viet-Nam of aggression.
NOW the representatives of the United States and the
United Kingdom, in their innumerable statements in the
Security Council, are slanderously accusing the German
Democratic Republic of aggression against the CzechoSlovak Socialist Republic, distorting the substance of the
issue and, in their own interests, presenting matters as
though the fraternal socialist German Democratic Republic
were committing aggression against a friendly socialist
country, Czechoslovakia. Coming as it does from the
representatives of those countries which are really committing aggression against other peoples, this has a hypocritical
ring to it. Although South Viet-Nam was not and, as
everybody knows, is still not a Member of the United

56. Every member of the Security Council now has before
him the request of the German Democratic Republic and
the letter of the representative of the Soviet Union on this
question. Ordinarily in such cases measures are taken in a
short time, literally a few minutes, to invite the person who
has sent such a request to the President of the Security
Council asking to be allowed to participate in the discussion
of the question. But this has still not been done, and if it is
not done the error must be rectified.
57. Rule 6 of the Provisional Rules of Procedure clearly
and specifically provides that:

1 Official Records of the Security Council, Sixteenth Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1961, document

“The Secretary-General shall immediately bring to the
attention of all representatives on the Security Council all
communications from States, organs of the United
Nations, or the Security Council concerning any matter
for the consideration of the Security Council in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.”

ZIbid., Nineteenth Year, Supplement for April, May and June
1964, document S/5710.

58. This important request received from the Governmeat
of the German Democratic Republic in connexion with the

S/4851.

6

question tabled for the Security Council’s consideration at
the insistence of the United Kindgom and the United
States, was received-as you ‘announced, Mr. Presidentaround 6 p.m. yesterday. The Council was meeting at that
time. Had steps been taken immediately, that communication would have been brought to the attention of the
members of the Council within an hour, at the most, and
measures could still have been taken yesterday. But this was
not done. Letters were sent which, ashas become apparent
today, did not reach the addressees. In view of this, and in
conformity with the United Nations Charter and the rules
of procedure, the Soviet delegation considers it indispensable that the lawful representative of the German Demo
cratic Republic be invited to participate in the work of the
Security Council on the question under discussion.
59. The PRESIDENT: I think the President, out of respect
for the Council, should forgo entering into polemics with
any member. However, as the representative of the Soviet
Union mentioned procedural tkicks and arbitrary postponement of meetings because of filibustering, I am bound to
state that the President, and no one else, assumes full
responsibility for the conduct of the business of the
Security Council. I feel obliged to repeat what I said at a
previous meeting: that as President of the Security Council
I do not admit pressure from any member-and when I say
“any member”, I mean any member, regardless of whether
he is Anglo-Saxon, Caucasian, or of any other ethnic group;
I really will not stand for pressure from any member.
60. I repeat that in the special case of the decision taken I
do not make claim to any infallibility and I am prepared to
take any course agreeable to the Council, and will gladly
comply with the request made by the representative of the
Soviet Union, provided it is approved or agreed to by the
Security Council.
6 1. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): Mr. President, in my view,
you are perfectly correct in circulating the note dated 23
August to the Secretariat, which was attached to a
communication
from an individual named Mr. Winzer,
purporting to be the Foreign Minister of the so-called
German Democratic Republic. The so-called government of
which Mr. Winzer is a purported member has no right, of
which my Government is aware, to represent any part of
the German people. It would therefore be quite inappropriate to circulate the communication in question as an
official document of the Security Council. Nor would it be
in any way appropriate for this Council to agree to
participation in our discussion by anyone purporting to be
“an authorized representative of the Government of the
German Democratic Republic”.
62: It has been alleged that this application should be
considered in terms of Article 31 of the Charter and Rule
37 of the Provisional Rules of Procedure, but those
texts-that is, of the Article of the Charter and of the rule
of procedure-clearly refer to a Member of the United
Nations not a member of the Security Council. Now, in the
case of the applicant, we know of no such State existing,
although an administration within the Soviet occupied zone
of Germany may have claimed to be such.
63. As to the remarks of the representative of the Soviet
Union, I think it will not have escaped those who listened

to them that it is not strange, though surprising, that there
is this emphasis upon the “aggressive, imperialist NATO
members and spokesmen” at a time when it is an
established and undisputed fact before the Council that it’is
certain members of the Warsaw Pact that have invaded and
occupied a fellow communist country-an aggression which
has already been condemned in this Council.
64. There has also been much talk of “capitalist monop
oly” from the same source. As far as this debate has
revealed, however, it is the representative of the Soviet
Union who has shown himself a master of monopoly, both
of points of order and procedural, questions, all at the
expense of discussion of the substantive issue, which is the
Soviet-led intervention in the affairs of another State which
led to the occupation of Czechoslovakia.
65. As to the arguments raised by my Hungarian colleague, I would say that the only point in his statement
with which I fully agree is that this question which has been
put to you, Mr. President, should be discussed and decided
by the democratic method of a vote.
66. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, as you know, one of the rules my
delegation observes is that of brevity in our statements. In
We light of the question before us at present, I should like
to set forth in a few but unequivocal words the position of
my delegation, a position which has been stated and
reiterated on many occasions and in various assemblies.
67. The Republic of Paraguay does not recognize the
existence of the so-called German Democratic Republic,
which we regard as nothing but a German zone of foreign
military occupation. Therefore, we do not recognize that
it possesses any right to speak on behalf of the German
people as a whole, or for part of it whose only legitimate
sookesman is the Government of the Federal Republic of
Germany. The conduct of my delegation will be guided by
this view.
68. Finally, since it seems that some delegations wish to
raise doubts on the way you, Mr. President, have proceeded
in these circumstances, I wish to inform you that, in the
opinion of my delegation, your behaviour and the measures
you have adopted are set within the bounds of the strictest
propriety.
69. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Bulgaria has
asked to speak, but before calling on him I should like to
have from him a clarification of whether his remarks will
bear on the Czechoslovak issues as such-in which case I
think he could wait until we have disposed of these
procedural points-or whether they will bear on these
procedural points, because, in this connexion, I could say
that I have some doubts about the possibility of invited
representatives engaging in discussions on questions of
Security Council procedure, so I should like to have first a
clarification of his intentions.
70. I call on the representative of Bulgaria.
71. Mr,
French):

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria)
(translated
from
With regard to the discussion which has developed

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
Thank you, Mr. President, and I also thank the
members of the Council.

79. Mr.

here about inviting the German Democratic Republic to
participate in the debate, in which it is accusedof crimes, it
seems to me that we have gone beyond the stage of a
discussion on procedure, particularly in view of certain
statements by speakers who oppose this invitation. At a
certain point the speakers began to accuse the German
Democratic Republic of crimes declaring, however, that
there was no need for it to participate in this discussion.

French):

80. With your permission, I shall make my statement in
Russian, since some of the documents I have are written in
that language.
[The speaker continued in Russian.]

72. That is why I wish to clarify this point and then,
Mr. President, leave it to you to settle the question of
procedure. I repeat that I have no intention of insisting on
the question of procedure.

81. Since the question under discussion has gone beyond
the limits of a procedural matter, we find we are at a stage
where it may perhaps be necessary to say a few words
about what has been said and raised for discussion here.

73. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Bulgaria for his co-operative statement. Does any other
member wish to address the Council?

82. First we must mention the question raised here by the
representatives of those countries which are accusing the
Soviet Union and the other socialist States of aggression
against the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, at the same
time also accusing the German Democratic Republic of it as
well. They accuse it constantly, in all their statements, and
say a great many unpleasant things about the German
Democratic Republic. They accuse it, but at the same time,
they don’t want to listen to it. Where has it ever been seen
or heaid that somebody is accused without being given a
hearing, so that he may answer and have a chance to justify
himself? Is it not strange to hear such accusations in the
Security Council? So why do you accuse? Where is it
customary to accuse somebody without giving him the right
to be heard? The majority of the members of the Council,
or at least a large number of them, are lawyers who know
that nobody can be condemned without a hearing. But they
want to condemn the German Democratic Republic instead
of giving it a hearing. That is why it seems to me,
Mr. President, that this can not be allowed.

74. Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
Since I wished above all to clarify certain points
which have been raised in this debate, don’t you wish,
Mr. President, to take a decision on my request to speak on
this question, since I have only explained what I intend to
say?

French):

75. The PRESIDENT: Maybe I misunderstood the representative of Bulgaria, and I apologize. I would like to state a
ruling on this question but I would like to appeal to him for
his co-operation, to the extent that if he could postpone his
remarks to a later stage of our proceedings we might avoid
another procedural wrangle on the question of whether or
not he should speak at this moment. As I seethe situation,
we are still debating the procedural question arising from
the communication received and from the note that was
addressed to me by the representative of the Soviet Union.
That is the matter now under consideration, and I think the
practice observed here has been that discussion of those
procedural matters should be restricted to the members of
the Security Council. I say this with all due respect to the
representative of Bulgaria, who is, by the way, an old friend
of mine, but I certainly appealed to him in order that he
could forgo his remarks at the present moment.
76. Mr. MALIK

83. The second question advanced here as an argument by
some members of the Council for not wishing to hear the
representative of the German Democratic Republic was that
the German Democratic Republic is, allegedly, not a State
since they do not recognize it. What has their recognition
got to do with it? There are many States which they did
not recognize in the past. The Soviet Union, for instance,
was not recognized by some States for 20 or 30 years;
nevertheless, the Soviet Union continued to exist. Nobody
prevented it from becoming one of the world’s greatest
States and from influencing international policy. Nobody
has prevented it from being a permanent member of the
Security Council, here and now. So what does it have to do
with the matter here if some States do not recognize the
German Democratic Republic? That is no reason for falling
to invite the German Democratic Republic, especially when
it is accused of committing some sort of crime which is in
fact non-existent.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): Mr, President, I should like to

make a correction to my previous statement. I mentioned
Article 32 of the Charter, but I meant Article 31 of the
Charter which says:
“Any Member of the United Nations which is not a
member of the Security Council may participate, without
vote, in the discussion of any question brought before the
Security Council whenever the latter considers that the
interests of that Member are specially affected.”
77. Therefore, we consider it appropriate to give the
representative of Bulgaria the opportunity to express his
opinion of the question under discussion.

84. The German Democratic Republic, in the letter sent to
the President of the Security Council, states:

78. The PRESIDENT: As I said previously, I have not
stated any ruling on that, and I would be prepared to let
the representative of Bulgaria set forth his views, if there is
no objection on the part of the members of the Security
Council. As I hear no objection, I am very glad to recognize
the representative of Bulgaria.

[The speaker read out the telegram the text of which
appears in paragraph 8.1

8.5. Mr. President, we too are being accused of the same
crime. They say the German Democratic Republic and its
representative can tell us nothing new here. Yet perhaps
8

they have much that is new to tell, more than anybody else,
because their representative knows what crimes against the
socialist camp have been prepared in certain countries, and
particularly in West Germany. It has been said here-and
since I have the floor, permit me to mention it, Mr. President-that the German Democratic Republic is not a State;
but, I insist, the German Democratic Republic is indeed a
State, regardless of whether certain Governments and
countries which dislike socialism recognize it or not. That is
another matter. It has been said here that non-States can
not participate in the meetings. The Soviet representative
has mentioned several examples of cases in which even
non-States (not those which are not recognized) have been
allowed to participate.

have today taken no decision and, certainly, created no
precedent.
92. The PRESIDENT: I understand that we have taken no
decision. I told the Council that I shared the doubts that
have now been expressed. The only thing the President did
was to consult the members of the Council as to whether
they had objections to Dr. Tarabanov speaking at this
moment, and as there was no objection I gave him the
floor.
93. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): I should like to draw attention

to the statement made by the representative of the United
Kingdom. He hastened to speak after you, with the assent
of certain members of the Security Council, rightly,
legitimately and in conformity with the Charter gave the
floor to the representative of Bulgaria who had been invited
to take a seat at the table of the meeting of the Security
Council. But I suspect that the representative of the United
Kingdom intends not to allow admittance to the meetings,
or even not to allow those who are admitted and invited to
participate in the work of the Security Council to express
their views on questions which are unacceptable to his
country and his Government. I think such occasions could
arise in the future, and that is why he is putting in his
reservations in advance. But let us not go into this matter in
detail. This statement was post factum. The Bulgarian
representative has presented his views, and this matter may
as well end there.

86. In addition, I should like to remind the Security
Council of another case in which some persons, even private
parties, have been invited to participate in the Security
Council’s debates. For example, when we discussed the
Cyprus question, right at the beginning, the representatives
of the Turkish and Cypriot communities were invited
several times. They participated in the meetings and gave
explanations to the Security Council on these questions.
The representative of Turkey, who is present here, could
remind the Council of this, and so could the representative
of Cyprus. They know who participated, regardless of the
fact that, at the time, one of the parties denied the right of
the Turkish representative in Cyprus to speak before the
Security Council.
87. Under these circumstances it seems to me, Mr. President, that although the Security Council should not be
considering this matter, if it wishes to do SO and since it
does wish to do so, the matter should be presented in the
proper light. As the problems being examined and the way
they should be considered are unclear to the Council, the
representative of the German Democratic Republic should
be invited; he should participate in order to show how
impossible, unjustified and groundless it is to discuss the
matter being examined here by the Security Council on the
initiative of some imperialist States,

94. I should like to make some additional remarks
regarding the question of procedure under discussion in
connexion with those statements made by the representatives of Canada, the United States and the United Kingdom
concerning the German Democratic Republic and the
Federal Republic of Germany. It is essential that light be
shed in connexion with the misrepresentation, lack of
objectivity and distortion of facts shown by these three
members who have spoken against the German Democratic
Republic in relation to the existence of the Federal
Republic of Germany. They have restated here the usual
illegal and unrealistic position of their countries. That
position is expressed in the refusal to recognize objective
reality, the objective fact of the existence of two sovereign
German States. Contrary to logic, common sense, reality,
and the actual situation in Europe, they have perpetrated
gross discriminatory attacks against one of these German
States, the German Democratic Republic. This step can
only be interpreted as yet another manifestation of the
dangerous course of these States, aimed at fostering the
revanchist aggressive tendencies of the ruling circles of the
Federal Republic of Germany.

88. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wish to speak
very briefly, and solely on the question of procedure.
89. An important question for the Council has arisen in
the course of our discussion this morning. It is a question
with which we are all familiar. It is the question whether a
non-member of the Council can be permitted to participate
in discussions on questions of procedure rather than
substance. This is a matter which has been considered from
time to time in the past.
90. All I should like to say now is that, speaking with the
very greatest respect, I thought that you, Mr. President,
dealt with the matter admirably and certainly have given no
ruling in this matter. And I would also like to say that I
understood clearly from my friend the representative of
Bulgaria that he wished to speak not on solely a procedural
matter but on a question of substance.

95. The Soviet Union has always steadfastly come out
against all and any attempts, from whatever side, to
discriminate against the German Democratic Republic,
including attempts made within the United Nations system.
Discrimination against the German Democratic Republic is
continuing within the United Nations for well-known
reasons. Such a practice was established by the AngloSaxons who, at one time, dominated the Secretariat of the
United Nations. Therefore, references to precedents created
by the British and Americans are untenable.

91. I think it is important for’our records that these points
should be noted, and that it should be clear that on the
main matter-the procedural matter to which I refer-we
9

96. The German Democratic Republic is a sovereign
independent State. Consequently, it pursues a policy of
peace, a policy directed towards ensuring peace in Europe
and in the whole world, towards political, economic and
cultural relations with ,other countries. It scrupulously
observes the principles of the United Nations. By its
freedom-loving foreign policy designed to strengthen peace
and security in Europe and throughout the world, by its
steadfast, just support of nations struggling for their
national freedom and independence against the forces of
imperialism, colonialism, violence and exploitation, the
German Democratic Republic has earned widespread respect all over the world and particularly among the
developing States which have only recently acquired their
national independence.
97. Together with other member States of the Warsaw
Treaty, the German Democratic Republic stands guard over
the achievements of socialism, the interests of all peaceloving peoples, the interests of peace in Europe and in the
entire world. For the first time in the history of Europe, in
one part of former Hitlerite Germany a truly peace-loving
State-the German Democratic Republic-has appeared, and
no attempts by the imperialist forces to distort, misinterpret or disregard this historical fact and reality can change
this state of affairs.
98. Recently a new Constitution was adopted by popular
referendum in the German Democratic Republic. This event
extends far beyond the borders of the German Democratic
Republic. It testifies to the great successesof socialism in
the German Democratic Republic. It reflects profound
social and political changes occurring in Europe and the
world. This is a convincing demonstration of the vitality
and strength of the social system chosen by the people of
that country. It refutes the false insinuations of imperialist
propaganda concerning the German Democratic Republic.
This new Constitution of the German Democratic Republic
confirms the devotion of this socialist State to the ideals of
socialism, peace, freedom, and the independence of
peoples. It proclaims that the German Democratic Republic
conducts a foreign policy serving peace and mutual understanding; it supports the struggle of peoples for independence; it develops friendly comoperation with all States on
the basis of equal rights and mutual respect.

aggressors,will become the masters of the fate of the whole
German nation and of the entire world. But Hitler’s Reich,
which unleashed the gravest war in the history ofmankind,
collapsed beneath the weight of its crimes. There is no
going back to it. What was once Hitler’s Reich, from which
the peoples of Russia, France, Great Britain and many
other European States suffered, has now existed for
eighteen and a half years as two independent and equal
German States: the German Democratic Republic and tile
Federal Republic of Germany.
101. The people of the German Democratic Republic
resolutely reject the West German ruling circles’ infringements on the sovereign rights and national dignity of the
German Democratic Republic, attempts at gross interference in its internal affairs. By their vote for the socialist
constitution, the people of the German Democratic Republic have clearly asserted that they will never surrender the
gains acquired at the price of hard work and the struggle
against imperialism and reaction. The Constitution of the
German Democratic Republic, expressing the will of the
nation, firmly declares that the unification of Germany is
possible only on the basis of democracy and socialism. The
ruling circles of West Germany do not wish unification on a
progressive basis, otherwise they would Iong since have
recognized the German Democratic Republic as an equal,
independent partner. They would have renounced their
practice of undermining the international position of the
German Democratic Republic; they would have accepted
the many proposals of the Government of the German
Democratic Republic aimed at the normalization of the
relations between the two German States. Thus, however
we approach the problem of unification-whether from the
social-class or the political standpoint-, no real conditions
for unification exist at present. Therefore, it is essentialand
logical, even for the fiercest opponents of the German
Democratic Republic, to consider the real fact of the
existence of two German States over a long historical
period, and to draw the appropriate conclusions.

99. The Constitution of this State resolutely declares that
the German Democratic Republic will never launch a war of
conquest, will never use its armed forces to infringe upon
the freedom of peoples, The propaganda of war and
revanchism characteristic of West Germany, cultivation of
ideas of racial and national hatred which everybody can see
in West Germany, under the Constitution of the German
Democratic Republic are regarded as a crime.

102. The imperialist propaganda on the part of the
enemies of the German Democratic Republic spreads
versions to the effect that the German Democratic Republic
is not a State since, allegedly, the or-& representative of the
German people is West Germany. The legal untenability of
this thesis has been repeatedly demonstrated by the Soviets
and many other States. The assertion that the Federal
Republic of Germany is the only representative of the
German people and the only successor of the former
German State is an absolutely arbitrary and fantastic
concept. It suits only the organizers of the NATO military
aggressivebloc; it affords them the possibility of maintain
ing West Germany among their main partners and military
strike force in Western Europe.

100. The popular referendum held in the German Democratic Republic showed that 94 per cent of this country’s
population voted in favour of this new Constitution. This
popular vote has shown the whole world how groundless,
hostile, slanderous and arbitrary is the West German
Government’s claim to speak on behalf of all Germans.
Those who make this kind of claim evidently think it may
still be possible to resurrect the 1,000 year German Reich
proclaimed by Hitler and that they, the revanchists and

103. The fact is that two new independent, sovereign
States have arisen on the territory of the former German
State: the German Democratic Republic and the Federal
Republic of Germany. They have absolutely equal rights
and represent their respective parts of the German people.
To question this would be tantamount to, denying the
multiplication table or Newton’s law. Naturally, that can be
done, but those who do it place themselves in amore than
ridiculous position, all the more so when they claim, at a
10

existence of two sovereign and equal German States: the
German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of
Germany. This is apparent in the very active contacts of the
German Democratic Republic with a number of developing
countries at governmental and parliamentary levels. The
economic, scientific and technical co-operation of many
countries with the German Democratic Republic is constantly being strengthened and expanded, In the German
Democratic Republic’s capital, Berlin, new official consular
and trade missions are continuously being established.

meeting of the Security Council, that if they do not
recognize the German Democratic Republic, the rest of the
world should not recognize it either. Well, that is something
that lies beyond their power, no matter how much they
may shout about it here.
,
104. The Security Council must not let itself be carried
away’by such absurd reasoning, since the Security Council
is a serious, responsible body and fulfils serious, responsible
functions. It can not become like that unfortunately
renowned court in the United States which still quite
recently ruled that man did not descend from the apes and
forbade the teaching of Darwin’s theory on those grounds.

109. Who, except the representatives of the United States
and the United Kingdom, will deny that in the heart of
Europe there have been two German States for a long
time-the German Democratic Republic and the Federal
Republic of Germany-, each with its own constitution,
parliament, government, central and regional administrative
organs? How can anyone deny such objective facts? The
whole world knows that for sixteen years the United States
denied the effective existence of the Soviet Union, but
finally recognized this fact and established diplomatic
relations with the Soviet Union which they still maintain to
this day and will, I hope, continue to maintain. As far as we
are concerned, we are prepared to continue to maintain
these relations.

105. The absurdity of the reasoning by which the Federal
Republic of Germany is the only representative of the
German people is also borne out by the fact that the
Federal Republic of Germany maintains certain specific
relations with the German Democratic Republic, including
trade, economic, cultural and other relations. Just recently
both sides have been taking steps to raise the level of these
relations at the proposal of the Government of the German
Democratic Republic.
106. The representatives of the United States and the
United Kingdom openly support the intentions of the
ruling circles of the Federal Republic of Germany to
continue to cling to the obsolete, rotten and archaic lines of
the major power neo-colonialist policy of Germany imperialism. They support the ruling circles of the Federal
Republic of Germany as NATO allies on this matter. They
create all and any obstacles to prevent the German
Democratic Republic from taking its rightful place on the
international scene. But the Government of the Federal
Republic of Germany has demonstrated by its own actions
the untenability of the outdated Hallstein doctrine. The
Federal Republic of Germany declares its readiness to
exchange diplomatic representatives with the European
socialist States which not only recognized the German
Democratic Republic long ago, but are also linked to it by
the Warsaw Treaty organization system, as well as by
treaties of Friendship, collaboration and mutual aid, that is,
by close bonds of a.Uiance.

110. The United States has not recognized the Chinese
People’s Republic for more than sixteen years. But does
that change the facts? The Chinese People’s Republic
exists: that’s an objective fact. Of course, it exists despite
the will and wishes of the United States. But this in no
measure diminishes the fact. The position of the United
States, Great Britain, and some other NATO countries
towards the German Democratic Republic is an equally
unrealistic and fantastic policy.
111. Lord &radon, Mr. Ball, it really does exist, and you
feel it daily. So why do you deny its presence and make
every effort to prevent its official representative from
coming here to prosent the position of his Government?
The existence of two German States is an irrefutable fact
and, of course, needs no approval either by the United
States, the United Kingdom, nor, particularly, by West
Germany. Witb all the differences in their social and
economic systems, as well as in the direction of their
foreign policies, each of these two German States is subject
to international law and a lawful heir of former Germany.
The German Democratic Republic considers the prevention
of the outbreak of war from German soil the highest
requirement of its foreign policy. The German Democratic
Republic has become a powerful stronghold of peace in the
heart of Europe and, under the present conditions, not a
single Government, not a single country participating in
international relations can fail to disregard the German
Democratic Republic’s new role as an independent,
sovereign State in world politics in the cause of the
stabilization and strengthening of peace on the European
continent. We are speaking of a State which, by the volume
of its industrial output, is among the ten most highly
economically developed countries in the world. Yet the
representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom consider that it does not exist on the face of the
earth. Is this blindness, or imperialism? Obviously, the
latter. The German Democratic Republic has conscien-

107. Consequently,‘in Bonn, with the complicity of the
Anglo-American allies and pro,tectors, some new kinds of
modifications in the norms of international law are being
concocted-modifications
which have been discarded by
facts themselves-, and demands are being made that the
majority of States act according to these modifications and
use them as a basis for their conduct in international affairs.
This means that the ruling circles in the Federal Kepublic of
Gemlany, along with those of the United Kingdom and the
United States, arbitrarily divide States into two categories,
so to speak: European socialist States, which Bonn
approaches with one criterion; and the developing ‘countries, towards whi& the Government of the Fetieral
Republic of Gennany considers it can use the language of
dictators, ordering them not to have relations with the
German Democratic Republic. This is nothing else but
neo~colonialism in practice.
108. Many countries of the world are guided in their
policy by a recognition of the objective fact of the
1

113. This is the difference, Mr. Ball, in approach and
policy between the German ‘Democratic Republic and the
Federal Republic of Germany, between the two sovereign,
independent States of Germany. The first is in favour of the
policy of peace and international co-operation; the second
is in favour of ideas of revenge and preparation for
recarving the borders of Europe, and your active support of
this State is fraught with grave dangers and consequences
not only to the cause of peace in Europe but for the whole
world, because the experience of the first two world wars
has shown that the outbreak of war on German territory
then spreads over the whole world and the peoples of the
whole world suffer by it.

present, it is impossible to conceive of present-day Europe
without the German Democratic Republic. The proposals
of the German Democratic Republic aim at strengthening
peace and security in Europe;‘they are of a constructive
nature. The position of the German Democratic Republic
on all such basic problems as disarmament, the liquidation
of colonialism, non-interference in the internal affairs of
States, international collaboration, and others have earned
it the well-deserved respect of many Member States of the
United Nations. It is therefore natural that discussions of
the alleged right of the Federal Republic of Germany to
represent not only the population of West Germany, but
also that of the German Democratic Republic, can not
encounter understanding on the part of these Member
States of the United Nations which firmly adhere to the
positions of the Charter and defend the interests of peace.
Such claims are absurd and groundless. Not a single State in
the world has represented or can represent a people outside
that particular State’s jurisdiction.
115. It may be said, in passing, that the Constitution of
the Federal Republic of Germany itself contains articles
under which its Government organs represent only the
Federal Republic of Germany in international affairs, and
nobody else. I draw the attention of the American and
British representatives, who have taken such a hostile stand
against the German Democratic Republic, to this. In the
Paris Agreements signed in 1954 by your countries, Mr. Ball
and Lord Caradon, and by France (I request that this be.
made known to Mr. Berard) on one hand, and by the
Federal Republic of Germany on the other, it was openly
and specifically stated that the State authority of the
Federal Republic of Germany is exercised only on its own
federal territory. It is absolutely obvious that the Government of that country has not the slightest right to any
claims on the territory and people of the German Democratic Republic. It is perfectly obvious that the Governments of States which maintain relations with the German
States would never think they are dealing through Bonn not
only with the Federal Republic of Germany, but also with
the German Democratic Republic. The German Democratic
Republic has its own international agreements, including
those which speak clearly and specifically of the inviolability and stability of its national borders. When some
State or other makes claims in the United Nations to
represent other countries as welI, then, no matter who
makes them, they can only be regarded as a direct violation
of the basic principles of the United Nations. And in this
case, the representatives of the United States and the
United Kingdom are making just such an attempt. It can be
interpreted only as an attempt to satisfy in some way or, as
they say, to assist the revenge-seeking ambitions of certain
most aggressive circles of the Federal Republic, to help
their NATO ally make these dreams come true.

114. The German Democratic Republic has never been for
the use Of force against the sovereign rights or territorial
integrity Of other States. On the contrary, it has often made
peaceful proposals designed to ensure security in the centre
of Europe and the normalization of relations between the
two German States. The policy of the German Democratic
Republic is aimed at the creation of a healthier political
climate in Europe, and the establishment of mutually
advantageous collaboration among all European States, At

116. The Soviet Union’s attitude towards such attempts
can only be negative. The Soviet Union considers it harmful
and dangerous to support such illegitimate claims by the
ruling circles of the Federal Republic of Germany. Wilfully
or involuntarily-but
in this case wilfully on the part of the
representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom-this would mean to collaborate in raising international tension and encourage just such aggressive forces in
West Germany as advocate forced recarving of the existing
borders in Europe.

tiously and consistently fulfilled its obligations under the
Potsdam Agreement. It has removed the influence of fascist
and militarist forces from its society and has carried out a
democratic reorganization of the country’s entire political
and cultural life. Since the earliest days of its existence the
German Democratic Republic has pursued a foreign policy
which is in strict conformity with the principles of the
United Nations Charter.
112. The constructive attitude of the Government of the
German Democratic Republic to the main world problems
has again been demonstrated by the fact that the German
Democratic Republic, unlike the Federal Republic of
Germany, was among the first States to sign the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and is a fullfledged partner in it. It is particularly important for you to
note this, Mr. Ball, because we worked on the preparations
for the conclusion of this Treaty in collaboration with your
distinguished predecessor, Mr. Goldberg. So far as the
Government of the Soviet Union is concerned, we consider
this Treaty as an important step forward towards achieving
the main goal of modern mankind: universal disarmament
and the banning of nuclear weapons. And it seems, if I have
understood correctly, that the positions of our countries
coincided on this matter, But when it came to signing, the
German Democratic Republic signed the Treaty, while your
ally and friend the Federal Republic of Germany, on
various pretexts, did not sign it. Judging from reports in
your own press, there is reason to suppose that your friend
and ally, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of West Germany,
Mr. Brandt, is trying to exploit the forthcoming Conference
of Non-Nuclear States in Geneva for aggressiverevahchist
purposes, this Conference which was convened by its
sponsors to create better international conditions for the
reduction of international tension, for banning atomic
weapons, halting the testing of these weapons, destruction
of all stockpiles of such weapons, and for the use of the
greatest discovery in the history of mankind-atomic
energy-for peaceful purposes on the basis of broad
international collaboration.

12

117. As for the most recent events in Czechoslovakia, the
aggressive forces of West Germany are showing their hand
completely. In this connexion I’must take some of the
Council’s time and present some facts. The revenge-seeking
elements in Bonn do not conceal their plans regarding
Czechoslovakia, which aim at a restoration of capitalism
there or, as the British newspaper !i%e Observer put it
“creeping capitalism”. They want a repetition of
owk
Munich and a violation of the territorial borders and
integrity of sovereign socialist Czechoslovakia. Here is what
8 leaflet put out by one of the organizations of the Sudeten
Germans in West Germany says:

mentioned, particularly the extremely frank statements of
West German newspapers. For example, the Frankfurter
Allgemeine ZeinCng wrote :
“In its policy, the Federal Republic can only play the
role of passive observer, even though it is alarmed and
understands that any turn of events may indirectly affect
it. Everything which might go beyond such passive
observation or give rise to an impression of active
participation on our part is fraught with fatal consequences.”
120. The article goes on to say that it is essential to give
aid to those forces in Czechoslovakia which are useful to
the West German revanchists. The same newspaper has
openly acclaimed victory, and its comments have been
presented on West German television asfollows:

“The Sudeten provinces are a legitimate component
part of the German Reich, just like Silesia, Bavaria and
the Rhineland. The Sudeten Germans are full-fledged
citizens of the German Reich, just like the Silesians,
Bavarians and the Rhinelanders. This unambiguous legal
status-the pamphIet contipues-was in no way altered by
the Postdam Agreement of the victorious Powers in 1945
since, according to the declaration of the allied Powers on
5 July 1945, the assumption of power by the victorious
forces was not to result in the annexation of German
areas. Therefore, since 1945 the Sudeten provinces
represent the Czechoslovak occupied zone in the same
way as the areas east of the Oder and the Neiss represent
the Polish occupied zone. The people expelled from these
territories are expelled citizens of the German Reich
whose possessions the occupiers have unlawfully confiscated.

“If Czechoslovakia is moving on the way to social
democracy, then it is perfectly clear that it will be much
easier for us to talk to a social-democratic, although still
formally communist, Czechoslovakia.”
121. That is what the West German revanchists are betting
on. Recognizing that West Germany’s role in the subversive
and hostile acts performed against the socialist countries,
including socialism in Czechoslovakia, is too obvious, the
West German press has recommended caution in carrying
out such acts of subversion and provocation. On 22 July
the Niirnberger Nachrichten wrote:

“The Government of the Federal Republic of
Germany-the leaflet continues-is the legitimate heir of
the German Reich, and, as such, is not empowered to
declare, either overtly or covertly, any renunciation of
claims to German areas whether they be in Silesia, East
Prussia, Pomerania or the Sudeten provinces, and thus
prejudice the position of the pan-German representation
at any general international peace conference.”

“Just as the President of the Federal Bank, Blessing,
recently sounded out the situation in Ottawa, so all
similar contacts should be carried on entirely unobtrusively and quietly.”
122. The Frankfurter
Allgemeine advised the West German revanchists as follows, and I quote: “Where effective
aid is needed, it should be given in the most inconspicuous
way.”

Such are the revanchist objectives stated by the hostile
elements in West Germany under the sponsorship and
protection of the West German revanchists.

123. These are the directives published in the West
German press. The kind of aid from the West German
revanchists to the socialist countries, referred to here, is
described quite frankly in the Deutsche National Zeitung,
which wrote :

118. Equally cynically aggressive plans for recarving the
borders of Western Europe have been just as openly
announced by official personalities of the Federal Republic
of Germany. Some time ago the Minister of Finance of the
Federal Republic of Germany, Mr. Strauss, stated in an
interview with the newspaper Sudeten Deutsche Zeitung:

“The Czechoslovaks will also be unable to benefit
forever from the expulsion of the Sudeten Germans.
Sooner or later a change will come, and it is preferable
that this change be made voluntarily, with mutual
respect, rather than later under the pressure of international political conditions.”

“Abrogation of the Munich Agreement would be
tantamount to acknowledging as non-existent a document
which is absolutely valid in fact and accepted on the basis
of international law. We shall never agree to such an
interpretation. The Munich Agreement was concluded on
the basis of a valid international treaty which remains
legally valid.”

124. This is an outright demand for revenge, a claim for
revision of borders and a direct hint at threats. The
imperialist pohcy of West Germany has often been condemned in the United Nations. Everybody knows its special
role in the aggravation of international tension, in support
of the colonial regimes of Salisbury, Pretoria and Lisbon,
and its support of all the criminal actions being perpetrated
by the South African racists in South West Africa. The
United Nations has repeatedly condemned West Germany
for its participation in the colonial wars conducted by the

119. That is how a West German revanchist puts the
problem, demanding and making claims to the lawful
territories of neighbouring States, the socialist countries.
And these claims of the ruling circles receive the support of
their NATO allies. A whole series of other facts could be
13

129. On the other hand, I should say that one of the main
elements that guided me in my decision of yesterday was
the contents of document S/7891, which refers to a note
verbale dated 2 May 1967, from the Secretary-General
addressed to the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations. I understand that the question referred to the point of the
handling of communications from non-members of the
United Nations regarding the implementation
of Security
Council resolution 232 (1966) of 16 December 1966 on the
question of Southern Rhodesia. The note of the Soviet
Union had been circulated in document S/7882. I think it
might be of interest if I were to read out the note verbale of
the Secretary-General:

regime of Salisbury, Pretoria and Lisbon against the African
peoples.
125. Facts are stubborn things: neither the hypocritical
oratory nor hostile attacks by the NATO country representatives against the German Democratic Republic can cover
up the participation of the West German revanchists and
their highly placed protectors in the attempt to overthrow
socialism in Czechoslovakia. and bring the world to the
brink of catastrophe. Having failed to achieve their objectives in one of the socialist countries, they now attempt, in
violation of the United Nations Charter, to deprive one of
the parties concerned-which they have so antagonistically,
slanderously and cynically accused of aggression, intervention, breach of international law, and so forth-of its right
to appear before the Security Council to present the real
situation and unmask the slanderous falsifications of the
British and American representatives. We categorically
reject these provocatory attempts which reek of the cold
war. No matter how often these representatives repeat their
statements, and no matter what their attitude towards the
German Democratic Republic, the German Democratic
Republic is an independent sovereign State and fulfills ils
function in international affairs independently. And sooner
or later the United States, the United Kingdom, France and
Canada will be obliged to recognize and accept it, just as
the United States accepted the fact of the Soviet Union’s
existence in the world, although it took them sixteen years
to do so.

“The Secretary-General, in interpreting
resolution
232 (1966), both with respect to the information he is to
collect and to include in his report on the implementation
of the resolution, has had full regard to operative
paragraph 8 of that resolution, in which the Security
Council: ‘calls upon States Members of the United
Nations or of the specialized agencies to report to the
Secretary-General the measures each has taken in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of the present
resolution’. In accordance with the Council’s instructions,
the information circulated by the Secretary-General and
included in his report /S/7781 and Add.1 and 2/ is
therefore from those States from which the Council has
required such information. Nevertheless, it should be
noted that, in addition, at the request of the Permanent
Representative of Bulgaria, the Secretary-General circulated ‘a statement of the Government of the German
Democratic Republic on the implementation
of resolution 232 (1966) adopted by the Security Council on 16
December 1966, concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia’ /S/7794/. The Secretary-General drew attention to this statement in an addendum to his report issued
on 9 March 1967 /S/778I/Add.2/
containing information received after the issue of his original report.

126. Our request that the German Democratic Republic
be admitted to participate in the debates of the Security
Council as an interested party is legitimate and just. We
fully support the appeal of the Government of the German
Democratic Republic contained in the telegram of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, of that country, Comrade
Winzer. Our support of this appeal is based on the United
Nations Charter and on histcrical facts. And therefore (any
attempts to deprive the German Democratic Republic of its
legitimate right by all kinds of tricks, intrigues and
slanderous statements, and counting on the automatic
majority in a vote, only unmasks the United States and its
allies once more as enemies of the establishment of a lasting
peace in Europe and the world, and as partisans to the
aggravation of international tension.

“So far as the general question of the circulation of
communications is concerned, the policy of the Secreta.
riat in this regard has been explained on numerous
occasions in the past. The Secretary-General believes that
it is beyond his competence, in the absence of explicit
d.irectives from the deliberative organ concerned, to
determine the highly political and controversial question
whether or not certain areas, the status of which is in
dispute among Members of the United Nations, are States
within the meaning of the ‘all States’ or ‘States not
Members of the United Nations’ formulae which on
occasion appear in IJnited Nations resolutions. The
Permanent Representative will recall, in this respect, the
statenient made by the Secretary-General at the 1258th
plenary meeting of the General Assembly on 18 Novem.
ber 1963,s where he said, inter a&a, that:

127. In conclusion, Mr. President, the Soviet delegation
insists once again that the representative of the German
Democratic Republic be invited to the Security Council to
take part in the debate on the question inscribed on the
agenda.
128. The PRESIDENT: Since the point of precedents has
been raised by the representative of Hungary, I wish to
recall that on 9 June 1967, Dr. Winzer sent a cable to the
President of the Security Council on the subject of the
Middle East question, asking that it be distributed to the
members of the Security Council. It was circulated as a
third-person note, exactly as the President did yesterday, at
the directive of the President of the Council on 14 June
1967. To the best of my knowledge, the Security Council
did not in that case modify or revoke the decision that had
been taken by the President; and to the best of my
knowledge-and I beg to be corrected if I am wrong-the
decision has stood,

“ ‘In COnChSiOn,
1 mUSt therefore State that if tiJ.7
ccanyState” formula were to be adop,ted, I would 1.
able to implement it only if the General Assembly
provided me with the complete list of the States coming
within that formula, other than those which are
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, E~hteenth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 125 8th meeting, paa. 10 1,

4

Members of the United Nations or the specialized
agencies, or parties to the Statute of the International
Court of Justice.’
‘While these remarks were made within the context of
an agenda item on the question of extended participation
in general multilateral
treaties concluded under the
auspices of the United Nations, they were intended to
define the general rules applicable in other casessuch as
tl re present.
“As the Secretary-General believes it is outside his
competence to interpret formulae of the nature referred
to above, he has no alternative but to continue the
existing practice until the Security Council or the General
Assembly direct to the contrary.” [S/789114
130. That is the note verbale of the Secretary-General and,
as I said before, it was one of the main elements that guided
me in my decision yesterday. Again, I repeat that I do not
claim infallibility, and I am prepared to follow any course
which is agreeable to and approved by the Security Council.
These remarks of mine, of course, refer only to the
procedural point of the question of the distribution of the
telegram-the way it should be distributed. In no way has it
any bearing on the ultimate question of the invitation of
any given State, because it is my understanding that only
the Security Council can take a decision on that. But, even
on the question of the distribution of the telegram, I do not
insist on the practice that has been followed but I am
willing to take any course of action which may be approved
by the Security Council.
13 1. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): Mr. President, first I should
like to express my thanks and appreciation for the answer
you gave to my request.

emphasize the fact that the Secretariat supplied you with
the example of only one case in Security Council history
when a document from a non-member State had not been
distributed. That was in June 1967, and again that
document came from the German Democratic Republic.
Indirectly, this seems to suggest that all the documents
coming from other non-member States, when some issue is
at stake on which they feel it necessaryto communicate in
one way or another with the Security Council and request
participation in its deliberations, have been distributed as
official documents of the Security Council. I would
therefore venture to say that this constitutes discrimination
against the German Democratic Republic. And let me add
that there is another difference between this case and the
case that you mentioned which took place in June 1967. It
is that during the present debate reference has on a number
of occasions been made to the German Democratic &public, and to a certain extent the German Democratic
Republic is a party to the issue. The 1967 statement
therefore was quite of a different nature from the one you
distributed unofficially on this occasion. I think that these
two points should be taken into consideration by you in
regard to the distribution-I
emphasize that, the distribution-as an official document of the cablegram you have
received.
136. The PRESIDENT: I am flattered by the fact that the
representative of Hungary appears to overrate the powers of
the President of the Security Council. He said very clearly
that the Security Council had no power and no right to
determine whether a given area is a State, but surprisingly,
he appears to imply that the President has the power to
make a decision in that regard and to enforce it. Unfortunately, the President is not as powerful as the representative
of Hungary seems to imply. I am flattered, but I am
nevertheless helpless in that regard.

132. I should like to state that it is not for the Security
Council to decide by vote whether the German Democratic
Republic is or is not a State. Any kind of voting on that
issue would, of course, not change the situation in the
German Democratic Republic and would not be considered
to be decisive on the matter.

137. All that I can do is place the question before the
Security Council. This was the wise course taken by the
Secretary-General on a previous occasion, and this is the
course I am taking today. I will gladly exercise any action,
or adopt any course, approved by the Security Council.

133. There are a number of multilateral international
agreements in which States participate in agreement even
though they have reservations. The United Kingdom, for
instance, signing as a party, entered the reservation that its
participation in a multilateral international agreement does
not mean that it recognizes the Republic of China as being
representative of China. Nevertheless it participated.

(translated from Russian): Mr. President, I want to confine

134. Therefore, by analogy, it is quite acceptable, for a
Government that does not recognize another Government
to join it in an international agreement on certain matters,
or even not to protest the distribution of a document
emanating from that source, even though it does not
recognize it as a State.
135. I should like to point out that there are some
differences between the present case and the cases you,
Mr. President, have mentioned. First of all I should like to
4 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1967.

138. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

myself to a short statement. You have just quoted the letter
with which we are all familiar, but which was drafted in an
entirely different connexion. The representatives of the
United States, the United Kingdom and some other
countries are accusing the German Democratic Republic of
committing some sort of international crimes imagined by
them-aggression, invasion, and so on.
139. It is altogether natural and logical that, when a State
is accused of this kind of crimes, the best method, in
conformity with the Charter and the rules of procedure, is
to give the Government of that State the possibility of
sending its official representative to New York, to invite
him to the meeting of the Security Council and give him
the opportunity to appear and explain the position and
viewpoint of the Government he represents.
140. The document you have read to us was drafted by
the department headed by Mr. Stavropoulos, whom we all

undemocratic practice in this Council and it seems to my
delegation that there is no reason to act this way and to
prolong our deliberations by this long discussion,

know and respect, and apparently refers to another matter.
But in this particular case, the Security Council ought to
act justly, since an injustice once committed against the
German Democratic Republic should not become a precedent for a repetition of an injustice by the Security Council
in its capacity as the main organ concerned with the
maintenance of peace and security.
141. It would be logical therefore, and entirely in keeping
with the generally accepted international norms as well as
with the provisions of the United Nations Charter and the
rules of procedure of the Security Council, to grant any
country the right to participate in the discussion of such
important international problems regardless of the attitude
of any members of the Security Council towards that
country, whether they like it or not; the representative of
that country should be invited and his explanations heard.
This will not be to the detriment of anybody-neither those
who oppose this course, nor the common cause of
international peace and security.
142. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
Soviet Union for his statement. I should like to make some
clarifications and to reassure him that my remarks on the
precedents I invoked referred only to the question of the
distribution of the document. Of course, I did not intend to
imply any decision or orientation concerning the question
which is not a question of substance anyway-the ultimate
question of inviting or not inviting a given State, The
precedent I referred to was only in justification of the
decision taken yesterday by the President of the Security
Council.

145. It was provoked by those who attempted to convince
you not to distribute this communication as an official
document because they do not recognize the German
Democratic Republic, because they think that only the
Federal Republic of Germany can speak on behalf of the
German people.
146. The PRESIDENT: I feel bound to clarify a point,
When I referred to the lateness of the hour at which 1
received the communication, it was only because I wished
to clarify a certain point for the representative of the Soviet
Union when he said that the cable had arrived in the early
afternoon. Thus as a question of fact, I mentioned that the
stamp of the Telegraphic Unit of the United Nations bore
the time 6.53 p.m., if I am not mistaken, so that I received
it at a very late hour. But in no way did I try to imply that
my decision of yesterday was due to the lateness of the
hour. I did not imply that. I just clarified a point that had
been raised, a point of fact raised by the representative of
the Soviet Union.
147. It was a decision the President took in accordance
with what I understood was the practice and I was mainly
guided by the contents of the document of the Secretary
General to which I referred. That is a point of fact.
148. Now the representative of Hungary suggeststhat we
should distribute this telegram from what he calls a political
unit-that is not my terminology, it is the terminology of
the representative of Hungary-as an official document, and
what I am telling him is that I shall be bound by the
decision of the Council. If he makes a formal proposal and
if there are no objections-but it appears that there are-l
shall be glad to comply with the request. That is the point
which I would like to clarify.

143. The other matter, and even this matter, is for the
Council to decide.
144. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): Mr. President, I have to
apologize if I was unable to make what I wished to say
absolutely clear. I am, and I was, of the opinion that it is
not for the Security Council to make a decision by voting
on the issue of whether the German Democratic Republic is
or is not a State, or an economic and political unit. But it
was not my intention to say that the President alone can
make a decision on that issue. But, it seems to me that in
the case of a document coming from this economic and
political unit, from the German Democratic Republic, what
you distributed unofficially you distributed because you
felt that you had to let the members of the Council know
that you received a document from that source. And
because of the urgency, that was the only’possible way to
let the members of the Council know. But it seems to me
that, because of the differences between the present case
and the case you mentioned and the general practice of the
Secretariat concerning communications from the German
Democratic Republic, you can distribute this as an official
document, and I agree with you that this is the next step to
be taken in regard to the invitation to participate before we
discuss it further. But it seems to me that if we are talking
about filibustering in this case, the filibustering has been
started by those who, from the very outset, declared that
because they do not recognize the German Democratic
Republic they did not want to see the cablegram you
distributed as an unofficial document as a Security Council
document and this is, to put it mildly, an unacceptable and

149. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I should like to
say first of all that I am very happy at last to find myself in
full agreement with the representative of Hungary when he
says that there is no need to prolong this discussion any
further.
150. 1 have only this to say, the only two things I think
that need to be said at this time. First, I should like to say
that I am sure that all of us share full confidence in the
judgement and the actions of our President, And secondly,
I would wish to point out, after these many hours, that no
proposal, no motion has been put to us. If a proposal i8 put
to us, we shall be happy to vote on it. If there is no
proposal to be put to us, then I suggest that we should
return to the business of our agenda.
15 1. The PRESIDENT: Actually, the Council is not seized
of any proposal. If there are no objections, we can proceed
with the consideration of our agenda.
152. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Obviously, I have been mis*
understood. I proposed that the representative of the
German Democratic Republic be invited. There are all

(translated from

16

Russian):

possible grounds for making this proposal. I substantiated
them in my statements. In his official letter, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the German Democratic Republic
requests a reply. How will you answerhim?

spite of the agreed principles of mutual relations many
times proclaimed and recently pledged by the joint declaration of their highest representatives in Bratislava on
3 August of this year, in spite of bilateral and multilateral
obligations stipulated in treaties, occupied by their armed
units the territory of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic in
the night on 20 August and in the morning hours of 21
August.

153. The PRESIDENT: I will reply whatever is decided
upon by the Security Council and I shall be guided by the
decision of the Security Council in this regard.
154. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
took if from what we just heard from the representative of
the Soviet Union that he had a formal proposal he wished
to make. I hope that he will now formulate it so that we
may vote on it.

161. This act of use of force cannot be justified by L
anything. It did not take place upon the request or demand
of the Czechoslovak Government nor of any other constitutional organs of this Republic. The declarations of the
President of the Republic, of the National Assembly, of the
Government, and also of the Presidium of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia,
which, to my knowledge, have been presented to this body
for its information, clearly attest to it. If, in some of the
five countries, whose Governments participate in the
occupation, mention is made of requests made by some
constitutional political representatives of Czechoslovakia,
let me say that there has never been a reference to a single
name, and to the knowledge of the Czechoslovak Government, no such demand wasever made.

155. The PRESIDENT:
Will the representative of the
Soviet Union formulate his proposal, so that we can vote
on it?
156. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I am ready to state my proposal
for the third time. I propose that, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the United Nations Charter and the
Provisional Rules of Procedure of the Security Council, the
Council invite the representative of the German Democratic
Republic to participate in the debate on the question on
the agenda of the Security Council without right of vote.
(translated from Russian):

162. Neither can the military occupation of the CzechoSlovak Socialist Republic be justified by the concern for the
external security of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic or
for the fulfilment of obligations arising from the joint
defence of the countries of the Warsaw Treaty. The
Government of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has
fulfilled these obligations conscientiously and has never left
any doubt about it that it is determined and capable of
doing so also in the future. That has been expressed on
many occasions, and even the Governments of the five
countries do not claim that, at the moment of the
occupation, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic was in an
imminent danger of military aggression from abroad,
against which, after all, the Czechoslovak army was
prepared and capable and prepared to defend itself, which
even the leading commanders of the Warsaw Treaty
recognized during their visits from May to July.

157. The PRESIDENT:
I shall put the Soviet Union
representative’s proposal to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

liz favour: Hungary, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Paraguay, Senegal, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining: Algeria, Brazil, India, Pakistan.
The proposal
4 abstentions.

was

rejected

by

9 votes to 2, with

163. The military occupation of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic cannot either be justified by arguments about
the alleged danger of counter-revolution. These arguments
themselves are juridically invalid, and even when we leave
aside the absolute invalidity and nullity of such arguments,
allow me-for I consider it necessary-to state that, until
the occupation, the Government of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic fully controlled the situation on its
territory, on which there was a socialist order. The organs
of public administration and peoples’ power were functioning. Intensive, democratic political life, based on the
socialist concept of the society, on the plurality of social
organizations united in the National Front and recognizing
the leading role of the working classand of the Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia, had been developing.

158. The PRESIDENT: We shall now proceed with the
consideration of the item on our agenda. I understand the
representative of Czechoslovakia has asked for the floor,
and I now call upon him.
-7
159. Mr. HAJEK (Czechoslovakia): As a member and
Td
ap
nsible representative of the Government of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, I am taking the floor in
this august and important body of the United Nations. I am
doing this with emotion, sadness and regret, for the subject
on the agenda constitutes a tragic event and a tragic
situation in my country.
160. It is not the fault of the Government of the i
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic that its relations with some
other socialist countries have become an issue before the
Security Council and the subject of debate with the
intervention of other non-socialist countries, a debate in
which certain anti-socialist arguments have been raised. The
responsibility for that lies on those Governments which, in

164. In the course of the process which the Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia started in January 1968, and the
substance of which was the elimination of bureaucratic
deformations, the full application of humanistic and democratic substance and sense of socialism, as well as the
17

socialist countries in Europe. Its domestic life developed
firmly on the socialist basis and toward socialist objectives.
Its leading political force, the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, went through a- process of profound internal
regeneration which enabled it to grow, to be strengthened
and invigorated in an all-round manner, and to gain greater
authority and support on the part of all the people.

renaissance and regeneration of political activities and
initiatives of the people, and all-round discussion was
developing. Its development substantially strengthened
both the socialist and patriotic feelings and orientation as
well as the leading role of the Communist Party, based on
the natural authority emanating from the initiatives of
ideas, concepts and deeds. In this way, we supported the
broad positive stream of people’s political initiative, guided
by the Communist Party, and we resisted any extremist
forces and phenomena.

169. The National Front, firmly based under the leader.
ship of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, on socialist
principles, became stronger as a framework for the political
life of the country. The negative phenomena and their
impact on mass media were being isolated, and a conscious
voluntary discipline which corrected those manifestations
was developing among all those who were responsible for
handling the mass media and for handling communication
and information in public life. Consequently, nothing could
justify the apprehensions and doubts about an alleged
danger of counter-revolution in the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic. The Government had the situation firmly in hand
and had also sufficient means to repel any real attack
against the foundations of socialism. The order and
discipline in our political life, the socialist and patriotic
consciousness of our people, the genuine leading role of fhe
working class and of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia are all attested to by the reaction of all our
country to the occupation. Absolute faithfulness and
obedience to the legal organs; non-recognition of the orders
issued by the occupation armies; consistent, successful
efforts to maintain the work of the Communist Party, the
backbone of our national life; expeditious convocation of
the Fourteenth Congress of the Communist Party of
Czechoslovakia, which, under the stresses of the situation,
adopted decisions resolutely demanding the end of the
occupation and showed unshakable fidelity to the leaden
ship of Alexander Dubcek-all these offer significant proof,
even now, of how those who thought they were entitled to
interfere by such means as the occupation misunderstood
our situation, misunderstood our people and misunderstood
the whole of our social development.

165. I venture to say that under the leadership of
Alexander Dubcek and other comrades of the Central
Committee, the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia has as
never before gamed such natural authority and undeniable
leadership among the two nations of our country-the
Czechs and the Slovaks. That is also attested to by the
spontaneous powerful stream of socialist patriotism which
has developed, particularly in the summer months, and
which has manifested itself in positive deeds, in working
efforts, in voluntary collections of funds necessary for the
solution of vast economic problems and tasks.
166. These positive, truly patriotic and deeply socialist
manifestations of popular initiative made entirely secondary in our political life those negative anti-socialist
phenomena which disturbed us, and which also disturbed
our friends abroad and which, whether objectively or
consciously and intentionally, could have become allies of
the forces hostile to socialist Czechoslovakia. We have been
conscious of their existence. We did not underestimate
them, and we resisted them. However, we considered it
correct to struggle against them primarily through the wide
popular initiative which would have isolated those negative
forces and would thus also make possible administrative
steps which understandably no State can waive, and which
we were not willing to waive, either.
167. Precisely in recent days and weeks, immediately
before the occupation, the correctness and effectiveness of
our method started to bear fruit.

170. If there is anything that seriously endangers the callsa
of socialism in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, if there
is anything that is creating a danger that may compromise it
in the world, it is preciseIy the insensitive and illegal
proceedings of those Governments that have carried out the
occupation of the territory of socialist Czechoslovakia, aa
occupation which has disrupted the functioning of the
economic, social and political life of the Republic and made
it impossible for the constitutional organs and democratically elected leadership fulIy to exercise their sovereign
rights and carry out the tasks entrusted to them by the
people. For, as you know, some of those leaders have been
put in a very difficult situation, and it is precisely this
restriction of the possibilities for freely pursuing political
work, precisely this enforced-even if, thanks to the
juris, that has
popular initiative, only partial-vacuum
created the gravest danger to the cause of socialism in the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.

168. I would not have talked about this because this is an
internal matter of our country, but from the verbatim
records, I get the impression that some of the representatives who have tried to justify the steps taken against
Czechoslovakia have insisted on these phenomena, and
presented them in a distorted way. And I should like to
point to such statesmen and political leaders of the socialist
world as President Tito from Yugoslavia and his colleagues,
as well as the Chairman of the State Council of Romania,
Nikolai Ceausescu, and his colleagues who convinced
themselves about this only just recently, during their visits
in the week preceding the fateful occupation. Their
testimony only confirms what the Government of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the leaders of the
political life of our country, the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, are declaring with full
responsibility and face to face to the occupation forces and
to the world public-which means that before the August
occupation Czechoslovakia was,and remained, dedicated to
the cause of socialism, of socialist construction, of socialist
development, faithful, willing to fulfil and capable of
fulfilling its obligations vis-a-vis the community of other

171. It seriously damages and profoundly hurts the
natural feelings of friendship which our people have always
harboured and continue to harbour towards the peoples cf
the Soviet Union, of Poland, of Rulgaria, of Hungary and Of
1’

the German Democratic Republic. At the same time, there
is a much greater possibility than heretofore for a situation
in which these feelings, these hop&, this faith in socialism
-in the really humane forms and methods in socialist
society which have met with the tanks of the occupationmay degenerate into frustation and even into negativism,
with all the consequences of anti-socialist attitudes of a part
of the population. And even if we try in the situation,
difficult as it may be, to resist such negativism, we have, for
i&e time being, no full possibility to do so, prevented aswe
are by the occupying forces; therefore the responsibility for
such consequences lies entirely on those who ordered the
occupation.

would coRespond to the profoundly humanitarian substance and sense of socialism and to our democratic
traditions and mentality, and also to the significant tasks
arisiig from the present period of the development of
human society, to the scientific and technical revolution,
and to efforts towards peace and co-operation among all
nations.
175. I would like to emphasize that the national individual
features of our people, influenced by all their progressive,
revolutionary, democratic and humanitarian inheritance,
influence their thinking and bring them close to all
progressive currents in Europe as well as in the whole
world, of both the past and the present; that they create
typical feelings for the logical integration of the intellectual
and creative sources of the world; and that, they are
crowned with a profound sense of what is correct, just and
beautiful and that this is objectively reflected in thk moral
and aesthetic features of character of all our people. That
has also been expressed very clearly in the whole of our
political development from January 1968-which, I should
like to stress once more, was being oriented towards
socialist objectives, was standing firmly on a socialist base,
and was never intended to leave the context of the socialist
community of nations.

172. The danger resides also in the international response
to this act. To a much greater degree than ever in the past, a
situation has been created for slanderous propaganda, for
actions by forces hostile tb socialism and to peace which
will try to misuse the fact af the,. occupation of Czechoslovakia for the pupose of creating anti-communist, antiSoviet campaigns; of rejecting and denying the policy of
peaceful coexistence; of slandering the whole socialist
community and its important, its paramount role in striving
for and assuring peace. At the same time, such a campaign
may be used for the justification of the aggressive policies
of imperialism in Viet-Nam, in the Middle East and
elsewhere.

176. *The present occupation has struck a heavy blow to
those efforts. We are deeply disappointed, offended and
humiliated; and this is even more cruel because it came
from such countries from which we had not expected it in
the least, and from which we did not deserve it in the least.
We are saying this with sadness, but without hostility. We
firmly believe that this fateful act was done on the basis of
incorrect consideration, incorrect information, and incorrect analysis of the situation.

173. The international situation, which in recent times has
shown some promising signs of improvement, has been
deteriorating. Tensions have been growing. For these
consequences also, immensely fatal for the cause of world
peace, the responsibility lies on those decided on the
occupation. In agreement with its people, the Government
of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic will never lend itself
to these aims to contribute to negative consequences and
assist the intentions of the enemies of socialism. In this
connexion, may I be allowed to state that my delegation
absolutely dissociates itself from any attempt to denigrate
or to deny the existence of the German Democratic
Republic, even though such attempt may be linked to
expressions favourable to Czechoslovakia. It remains one of
the principles of our foreign policy that the existence of
two German States is one of the pre-conditions of peaceful
settlement and the creation of a working European system
of security.

177. The Czechoslovak Government, in full harmony with
the feelings of the pkople, is willing consistently to follow
the road of socialism also in the future, and to restore and
strengthen its fraternal ties with the countries of the
socialist camp-even with those countries with which these
ties have been so graveIy hampered, so gravely impaired by
recent events. We are fully conscious of everything that
links us with those fraternal countries; we do not forget the
traditions of these ties; we never lost sight of how
important these bonds are to us; and we also hope that our
partners will become aware of how important and advantageous it is to them to have these bonds, on the basis of
equality and respect for sovereignty and independence. Nor
do we forget what we owe to the peoples of the Soviet
Union and other peoples of the fraternal countries. We
highly appreciate, especially in this moment, the profound
understanding and genuine acts of fraternal assistance given
at present to our renaissance process and to our people by
fraternal Yugoslavia and Romania. We consider this to be
the real manifestation of a genuine socialist intemationalism. We wish only that the Governments of the five socialist
countries, seeing the unity of our people in the face of the
occupation units, and seeing the dangerous consequences of
their occupation, may grasp as soon as possible how
enormous and tragic a mis,take they have made, and will
make a decisive and speedy correction and reparation.

174. We resolutely oppose any attempt to link our name
and to link the present situation in Czechoslovakia to
attacks against the cause of socialism and communism, in
which we continue firmly to believe. For the Czechs and
Slovaks decided for the socialist road freely and on their
own iriitiative, and they have no intention of leaving that
road. After the Munich experience, after the experience of
imperialist-Fascist occupation, after their heroic struggle
and the liberation in which the Soviet armies played such a
paramount role, the peoples of Czechoslovakia set out upon
the road of socialism, and, under the leadership of the
Communist Party, in 1948 beat back the attack of domestic
and foreign reaction. In 1968, they started-again under the
guidance of the Communist Party-to eliminate the deformations of the fifties which had been detrimental to the
cause of socialism, and build their own road of socialist
development, create such social and political models as

178. Too much harm has been done, and it is an urgent
responsibility not to permit accumulation of further harms.
19

183. The PRESIDENT: In my capacity as the represen.
tative of BRAZIL I wonder whether I may be allowed to
make a very short statement in explanation of vote. I wish
to state that my abstention when the vote was taken on the
proposal of the Soviet Union was only due to circumstances. My sole personal judgement indicated for the
President the exercise of restraint, discretion and silence, It
does not in any way reflect, and should not in any way be
construed to reflect, any change in the attitude of the
Government of Brazil concerning the status of the nature
and capacity of the authorities which addressed a telegranl
to the President of the Security Council.

Together with our people and the world public, we firmly
hope that the current negotiations of the President of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Ludvik Svoboda, and his
delegation in Moscow may contribute to this end. Even in
this serious moment when the five countries are not
fulfilling their obligations towards us, we ourselves continue
to consider as binding upon us the principles, aims and
objectives of our socialist foreign policy. We continue to
strive for understanding, unity and close co-operation
among the socialist countries, and for the strengthening of
our mutual bonds, while respecting fully the national
interests, and specific features of each of those nations. We
continue to strive in the spirit of peaceful coexistence for
the ensuring of peace and wide international co-operation
in the spirit and letter of the Charter. We continue to
support the progressive efforts of the peoples of the whole
world in the struggle against colonialism, imperialism, and
against any aggression, be it in Viet-Nam, the Middle East
or in the Caribbean. That gives us every right to oppose
with all resoluteness such disrespect for international
obligations where we ourselves are involved.

184. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): I wish to make a brief
statement on the position of my delegation in this matter,
but I am willing .to yield to any representative who would
like to speak before in the exercise of the right of reply, if
any representative has so signified.
185. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. Presi.
dent, I should like to be allowed to explain the vote of my
delegation on the procedural matter which was decided
upon earlier.

179. These are the principles which our Government
claims when it demands that the foreign troops-foreign
even if they come from friendly countries-leave our
country without delay and that the sovereignty of our
country may be fully restored and applied throughout its
whole territory. The rights and functions of the constitutional representatives and political organs and their members must be fully respected+ In harmony with the views of
all our people and the recent decisions of the Fourteenth
Congress of the Communist Party, we consider all acts of
occupation organs asillegal.

186. In explaining the vote of my delegation, I should like
to say that what obliged my delegation to take a stand in
the matter of the request of the Government of the Germatl
Democratic Republic to come and appear before the
Council is the contents of the telegram addressed to you, in
that the request was based on a claim that the represen.
tative of those authorities would come here as a represek
tative of a State.
187. Ethiopia does not recognize those authorities as
being a State and it is for this reason that my delegation
was obliged to cast a vote against the motion. I want to
make it clear at the same time, however, that this stand
taken by us is without prejudice to the traditional position
we have taken with regard to rule 39 of the Provisional
Rules of Procedure of the Security Council.

180. We think that to accept this position which our
Government and all our constitutional organs firmly defend
may form the basis for a future solution. Only on this basis
will it be possible for the Czechoslovak people to join its
efforts to those of the other fraternal countries to do away
with the negative consequences of the present occupation
and to continue in its efforts to develop an advanced
socialist society corresponding to its traditions, mentality,
and the needs of our times. On this basis, we hope it will be
possible to heal the deep wounds and to restore friendly
relations with the peoples of those countries whose
Governments are responsible for the current deterioration.

188. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): The serious situation in the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic bears directly on the
question of respect for the basic rights and duties of States
under the Charter of the United Nations and the rules of
international law.
189. Mindful of the purposes and principles of the
Charter, Pakistan firmly believes that the people of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic are entitled no less than
any other people, regardless of their social system, to
exercise their sovereign rights and to enjoy the freedom
from fear of threat or use of force.

18 1. On this basis it will be possible for Czechoslovakia, as
a Member of the United Nations, again to devote its
endeavours to the constructive efforts aimed at international co-operation and the ensuring of peace throughout
the world.
I
182 The solution itself, we are fully aware, lies squarely
L!Wit the Governments of the five countries which have
occupied our country, and in negotiation with the constitutional authorities of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
I believe, however, that the Security Council, having
discussed this problem, could contribute to such a solution
by taking a wise stand and by helping to create a favourable
atmosphere for an effective and expeditious solution of the
situation and for creating such a basis as I have tried to
outline.

190. The armed forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, the Polish People’s Republic, the Hungarian
People’s Republic, the German Democratic Republic and
the People’s Republic of Bulgaria have entered the territory
of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. It follows that the
international community as well as the Security Council
have a vital stake in the withdrawal of these armed forces at
the earliest possible moment. In this context, the Pakistan
delegation notes the statement of the representative of the
Soviet Union in the Security Council that the withdrawal of
20

the armed forces of the five socialist States will be carried
out.

Socialist Republic, as well as in conformity with the spirit
of the earlier accords between the Czechoslovak leaders on
the one side and the Soviet Union and the four socialist
States on the other which had issued a joint statement. We
believe that it is only from such negotiations that an
honourable adjustment of the situation, as envisaged in
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations, namely, “in
conformity with the principles of justice and international
law”, can be brought about, leading to the evacuation of
the armed forces of the five socialist States from the
territory of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.

191, In order to view the situation in the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic in its true perspective and with the right
senseof proportion, it is necessary to bear in mind that the
entry of foreign forces has taken place as a result of a crisis
in the relations between the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the five socialist States. No territorial demands are
being made; no claims are being put forward; no doctrine
propounded about secure boundaries.

196. Turning now to the draft resolution presented by
Canada. on behalf of the eight sponsoring Powers [S/8767]
that “the Secretary-General. . . appoint and despatch immediately to Prague a Special Representative who shall seek
the release and ensure the personal safety of the CzechoSlovak leaders under detention and.. . report back urgently”, the Pakistan delegation is conscious of the humanitarian concern which originally prompted the eight Powers
to sponsor the proposal.

192. In the view of my delegation, the right to national
sovereignty, self-determination and freedom from the
threat or use of force are categorical imperatives. The
reality is, therefore, all the more painful that the most
powerful States of the world have sometimes evinced a
selective approach in this regard. It is not necessary for me
to cite specific instances in which the great Powers have
intervened in the affairs of sovereign States which they
consider to lie within the spheres of their own vital
interests.

197. In another situation, when a well-known popular
leader was jailed for demanding his people’s right to
self-determination, the Pakistan Government had hoped
that the Security Council would have shared a similar
concern.

193. Having discussed the serious situation in Czechoslovakia, the Security Council finds itself unable to act
because the basic assumption underlying its establishment
and functioning does not hold. When the permanent
members of the Security Council stand diametrically
opposed, the capacity of the Organization to act effectively
is paralysed. The question arises: what then is to be done?
Happily, the picture is not one of unrelieved gloom. The
Chief of State of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, a
hero and a patriot, President Svoboda, is now in Moscow
acting on his own volition to find a way out of the situation
in his country. I quote from his statement broadcast over
Radio Free Prague yesterday:

198. I would have had some comments to make regarding
the need to revise the text of this draft resolution,
However, in view of reports that the Czechoslovak leaders
are participating in negotiations in Moscow, it may not be
necessary to pursue the proposal any further.
199. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Mr. President, I have just
received a Tass telegram from Moscow. It is in English, and
I shall read it:
(translated

“‘We must all be aware that the issue is to find an
honourable and dignified way out of the present situation
which is threatening to have tragic consequences for our
people and their fatherland. Please be aware that it is
necessaryto continue building our Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic to proceed further on a path of democratic
development of our socialist fatherland in the spirit of the
January Plenum of the Czechoslovak Communist Party
Central Committee.”

from

Russian):

[The speaker continued in English. J

“Meeting in Kremlin, Moscow, August 24, Tass:
“The talks between the delegation of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic, headed by Ludwik Svoboda, the
President of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, and
leaders of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and
the Soviet Government were resumed on August 24. As
on August 23, the talks were held in a frank and
comradely atmosphere. The sides mutually agreed to
continue the talks on August 25.”

194. Yesterday (1444th meeting, para. 67J, the representative of the United States made a truly statesmanlike
reference to these negotiations and said that if an agreement should come out of them then “obviously this
Council should do nothing to interfere with that hopeful
and commendable process”. The representative of Yugoslavia also expressed the desire of his Government for a
peaceful solution through direct negotiations.

[The speaker resumed in Russian. J

200. The delegation of the Soviet Union is profoundly
convinced that any matter arising between the socialist
States can and must be settled by those countries without
any foreign interference, especially interference by imperialist Powers. On these premises, the delegation of the
Soviet Union considers that any appeal or action-whatever
its form and whoever originates it-, which could be used
by the imperialist forces and their powerful propaganda in
their interests cannot contribute to the settlement of, and
measures adopted to reach an agreement concerning, the
problems which have arisen.

195. My delegation would like to pay its respectful tribute
to the President of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic,
who has undertaken the task of entering direct negotiations
with the highest representatives of the Soviet Union with a
view to arriving at an honourable adjustment of the critical
situation. We trust that the negotiations are taking place on
a basis of genuine equality and that their outcome will be
consistent with the sovereign rights of the Czechoslovak
21

201. At the present stage of the debate here-which, as the
Soviet delegation has pointed out, is an illegal debate-, I
shall confine myself to acquainting the Security Council
with the appeal of the Governments of the five socialist
countries to the citizens of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic. I shall read the text of this appeal, and I request
that the President of the Security Council and the
Secretariat of the United Nations publish this document as
an official document of the Security Councils

,

,
I

“Appeal to the citizens of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic, published in the newspaper Izvestia 23 August
1968.

“At -the Soviet-Czechoslovak meeting at Cierna and
Tisou and at the Bratislava conference of the communist
and workers’ parties, the Czechoslovak representatives
declared their intention to safeguard the interests of the
working people and to halt the activities of the reactionaries seeking to undermine socialism. They promised
to strengthen the unity of Czechoslovakia and the
fraternal socialist countries.

“Brothers, Czechs and Slovaks!

j
,
/

;,;I
Ii’
,
‘,

Czechoslovakia, which made a start in rectifying the
errors permitted in the past. Our parties and peoples
supported the just endeavours to strengthen and further
improve socialist democracy. But in recent months, the
anti-socialist forces, skilfully camouflaged, have carried
the matter to the point of shaking the foundations of
socialism. A number of persons who have penetrated the
State and party leadership of Czechoslovakia have actually been sheltering these subversive activities, thereby
helping the counter-revolutionaries
to marshal1 their
forces for the final stage in the struggle to seize power.

“This comes to you from the Governments of the
People’s Republic of Bulgaria, the German Democratic
Republic, the Hungarian People’s Republic, the Polish
People’s Republic and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

“However, these assurances and commitments have
remained unfulfilled, which has further encouraged the
anti-socialist forces and their foreign sponsors to intensify
their hostile activities. Its enemies have been preparing to
plunge the country into chaos and to sacrifice the
freedom and independence of their homeland for their
own mercenary, selfish ends.

“In answer to the appeal for help addressed to us by the
party and State leaders of Czechoslovakia faithful to the
cause of socialism, we have ordered our armed forces to
provide the working class and the entire Czechoslovak
people the support necessary to the defense of their
socialist achievements, which are threatened by the
increasingly pressing encroachments of the forces of
domestic and international reaction,

“The counter-revolutionaries calculated that in the
complex and tense international situation created by the
aggressive activities of the United States, and particularly
by the growing activity of the revanchist forces in West
Germany, they could succeed in wresting Czechoslovakia
from the community of socialist States. But these are vain
hopes. The socialist States are powerful enough to stand
up for a brother country and to defend the cause of
socialism.

“Such action has resulted precisely from the collective
obligation assumed by the communist and workers’
parties of our brother nations at Bratislava to jointly
support, strengthen and protect the socialist achievements
of each people and to repulse the schemes of imperialism.
“The counter-revolutionaries, encouraged and sup
ported by the imperialists, are avid for power. Having
seized the key positions in the Press, radio and television,
the anti-socialist forces have defamed and vilified all that
has been created by the hands of hard-working Czechs
and Slovaks over twenty years of struggle for socialism.

“Dear friends!
“Your class brothers have come today to help you.

“The enemies have harassed the cadres loyal to socialism, shaken the foundations of law and order, ruthlessly
prevented class-conscious workers and peasants from
participating in the political life of the country, and
persecuted the honest intelligentsia who did not wish to
take part in activities against the people. Flouting socialist
laws, the counter-revolutionary forces have created their
own organizations in preparation for seizing power, and
all this has been camouflaged by demagogic phrases about
democracy! We are convinced that this will not mislead
the Czechoslovak people, who are devoted to the ideals of
socialist democracy. Genuine freedom and democracy can
only be ensured by strengthening the guiding role of the
working class and its vanguard-the glorious Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia.

“They have come to you, not to interfere in your
internal affairs but in order to repulse counter-revolution,
together with you, and to defend the cause of socialism
and remove the threat to the sovereignty, independence
and security of your homeland.
“The armed forces of your fraternal allied countries
have come to you to ensure that no one can deprive you
of the freedom won in our joint struggle against fascism,
that no one can prevent you from moving forward on the
shining path of socialism. These armed forces will leave
your territory as soon as the threat to the freedom and
independence of Czechoslovakia has been removed.
“We believe that the unity and solidarity of the
fraternal peoples of the socialist community will triumph
over the schemes of their enemies.

“This was precisely the goal set by the January Plenum
Of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of
jIbid., &enty-third
Year, Supplement for July, August and
September 1968. document S/8112.

“Long live socialist Czechoslovakia!
22

“Long live friendship and brotherhood between the
peoples of the socialist countries!

objection the Secretariat will take the necessary steps to
that effect.

“(Signed)

204. As I have no more speakers on my list, I propose to
adjourn the meeting now.

Council of Ministers of the Peoples Republic
of Bulgaria
“Council of Ministers of the German Democratic Republic
“Council of Ministers of the Hungarian
People’s Republic
“Council of Ministers of the Polish People’s
Republic
“Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics”

205. A substantial number of delegations have signified
their desire that the Council should reconvene urgently to
resume consideration of this item of which the Council
remains seized. Monday at 10 a.m. has been suggested
tentatively, with the understanding that the Security
Council might reconvene earlier if it was found necessary
after informal consultations had been held. I shall contact
members in this connexion, with the understanding that
unless it is decided otherwise the Council will meet Monday
at 10 a.m. I wonder whether this course is agreeable to the
members of the Security Council.

202. At the present stage of the debate, the delegation of
the Soviet Union considers it possible to stop here.

206. Since there is no objection, and with that understanding, I propose to adjourn the meeting.

203. The PRESIDENT:
During the course of his last
intervention the representative of the Soviet Union requested that the document which he read out be distributed as a document of the Security Council. If there is no

The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

23

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obloined
bookstore
or ‘write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UN&S

Les publications
der Notions
Unier
son1 en vente
dons ler libroiricr
et 10s agencec
d&posit&es
du monde entier.
Informez-vous
ouprZ$ de votre librairie
ou edressez-vour
bt
Notions
Unies, Section der venter, New York ou Gent&e.

HAH IlOJlYYHTb

M3AAHMR

COMO

PUBLICACIONES

CONSEGUIR

OPrAHM3AUHH

06bEAHHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicacioner
de 10s Nocioner
Unidas ecttrn
en todor parter del mundo.
Conrulte
a su librero
Ventos, Nuevo York o Ginebro.

HAuHti

UNIDAS

en vento en librerior
o dirijosc
o: Nacioner

y cosos distribuidoror
Unidos,
Sbccibn

de

I,,

,.,.

.~

Litho

in United

Nations,

New Ybrk

Price: $U.S. 130

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35257-October

).

1972-2,050
