S/PV.8218

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8218

th meeting
Wednesday, 28 March 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rutte/Mr. Van Oosterom/Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren. .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Bakayoko
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Lemoyne
Mr. Mukhtarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Magierowski
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Baylan
Baron Ahmad
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Collective action to improve United Nations peacekeeping operations
Letter dated 2 March 2018 from the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/184)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-08789 (E)
*1808789*

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Collective action to improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations
Letter dated 2 March 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/184)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Ministers and other representatives to the
Security Council Chamber. Their presence here today
underscores the importance of the subject matter under
discussion.
I am also delighted to welcome our briefers: His
Excellency the Secretary-General; His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission; and Ms. Fatimata Touré, Director
of Groupe de recherche, d’étude et de formation
femme-action. Mr. Faki Mahamat is joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Nouakchott.
Before each Council member is a list of speakers
who have requested to participate in accordance with
rules 37 and 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, as well as the previous practice of the
Council in that regard. We propose that they be invited
to participate in this meeting.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/184, which contains a letter dated
2 March 2018 from the Permanent Representative of
the Netherlands to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
Recalling the Security Council’s latest note of
the President on its working methods (S/2017/507), I
wish to encourage members of the Council to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and to focus on key
2/86

28/03/2018

issues. Briefers are further encouraged to limit their
initial remarks to 15 minutes or less.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Kingdom of
the Netherlands for organizing this important debate
and I thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for presiding
over it.
In the past year I have addressed the Council
several times on peacekeeping reform. It is now
time to take action together. At its best, United
Nations peacekeeping is a remarkable enterprise of
multilateralism and international solidarity. From
Sierra Leone to Cambodia, Timor-Leste, Namibia, El
Salvador and elsewhere, United Nations peacekeeping
has helped countries move from war to peace and has
supported the work of civil-society activists such as
Ms. Fatimata Touré, who is with us today. In West
Africa, for example, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Côte
d’Ivoire are now peaceful, thanks in part to the support
of United Nations peacekeeping. It is inspiring to see
Côte d’Ivoire represented here today in the Council.
Three United Nations peacekeeping missions have
completed their mandates and left after a job well done.
That is our aim for every mission.
However, we all know that United Nations
peacekeeping faces serious challenges, particularly in
four of its largest deployments: Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic
and South Sudan. Put simply, peace operations cannot
succeed if they are deployed instead of a political
solution rather than in support of one. United Nations
peacekeeping missions now operate in far more
dangerous, complex and high-risk environments. They
are under threat from armed groups, criminals and
terrorists who have access to powerful modern weapons.
United Nations peacekeepers are often underequipped,
underprepared and unready for the dangerous
environments in which they now operate. There are
gaps in command and control, culture, equipment and
training. Peacekeepers are vulnerable and they are
targeted for attack. Last year we lost 59 peacekeepers
through malicious acts. That is a sharp increase over the
figure for 2016, which was 34. I pay tribute to the fallen.
We will never forget their sacrifice. Those figures are
unacceptable and weigh on us all. That is why this year
I will spend the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers in Mali, where our Mission sustained the
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8218

highest number of casualties of any operation last year.
We are damaging the instrument of peacekeeping, and
indeed multilateralism itself, by creating unrealistic
expectations. Lives and our credibility are being lost.

exploitation and abuse. I have invited Heads of State and
Government to join the Circle of Leadership, which is
a visible and powerful symbol of our joint commitment
to preventing and ending the scourge.

Such challenges require strong collective action.
We should focus our efforts on three areas: refocusing
peacekeeping with realistic expectations; making
peacekeeping missions stronger and safer; and
mobilizing greater support for political solutions and
for well-structured, well-equipped and well-trained
forces. The Secretariat has set change in motion on the
basis of the Security Council and General Assembly’s
resolutions on sustaining peace, the Cruz report and
other reviews and reports over recent years. Today,
and on a regular basis, I will provide Member States
with a summary of the concrete actions that have been
implemented and that are the responsibility of my
Under-Secretaries-General for peacekeeping operations
and field support. The documents will be available at
the end of the meeting.

Fourthly, the reforms of the peace and security
architecture should result in better analysis, stronger
support to troop- and police-contributors, more effective
political engagement and enhanced accountability and
transparency, as requested by many Member States. The
overall goal of the reforms is to improve our capacities
to prevent conflict and to sustain peace.

First, we are working to improve the safety and
security of peacekeepers. We have already started to
implement measures to improve the preparedness and
response of missions at high risk by strengthening
training, reviewing medical support and addressing
performance issues.
Secondly, we are conducting independent reviews of
peacekeeping missions aimed at refining their priorities
and configuration, while assessing the viability of
their mandates and political processes. The reviews
are aimed at ensuring that we have well-trained and
-equipped peacekeepers who are mobile and agile and
can be proactive in dealing with challenges and threats.
Too often in the past our troops have been reduced to
waiting in a defensive position, giving hostile forces the
time and space to plan attacks.
Thirdly, I have launched a new approach to sexual
exploitation and abuse by ensuring that victims have
a clear way to report allegations and by working with
troop- and police-contributing countries to address
allegations, end impunity and prevent future cases.
I am encouraged that 90 countries have joined the
compact on preventing sexual exploitation and abuse.
I have appointed a system-wide Victims’ Rights
Advocate, who works closely with Governments and
civil society. A further four Victims’ Rights Advocates
now work in the peacekeeping missions where there
have been the highest numbers of allegations of sexual

Such efforts are critical. However, action by the
Secretariat alone is not enough to meet the challenges that
we face. Our chances of success increase dramatically
when we work together with Member States and share
the burdens, risks and responsibilities. We urgently
need a quantum leap in collective engagement. That
is why I am launching a new initiative, Action for
Peacekeeping, aimed at mobilizing all partners and
stakeholders to support the great enterprise of United
Nations peacekeeping. As peacekeeping marks its
seventieth anniversary, I hope that we can develop a
set of mutually agreed principles and commitments
for creating peacekeeping operations fit for the future.
They will be formulated with all our partners, including
at a high-level side event on the margins of the General
Assembly in September, and I hope that we can reach
a formal agreement by the end of the year. I thank the
Netherlands and Côte d’Ivoire for moving this effort
forward, and I encourage all Council members and
all our partners for peace to join. As we build this
agreement together, I have six immediate requests for
Member States.
First, I urge Security Council members to sharpen
and streamline mandates and put an end to mandates
that look like Christmas trees. Christmas is over, and
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan cannot
possibly implement 209 mandated tasks. By attempting
too much, we dilute our efforts and weaken our impact.
I hope that our mission reviews will help to end this
mandate inflation.
Secondly, I call on Member States to sustain their
political engagement and push for political solutions and
inclusive peace processes, including through bilateral
diplomacy and sanctions, if necessary. A peacekeeping
operation is not an army or a counter-terrorism force or
a humanitarian agency. It is a tool for creating the space
for a nationally owned political solution.

18-087893/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

(spoke in French)
Thirdly, I ask the Council to continue building and
strengthening partnerships with regional organizations.
The African Union is one of our most important partners,
and I thank the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for being
here with us today. Political partnerships are critical,
particularly when a United Nations mission is deployed
to support a peace process facilitated by other actors, as
in South Sudan with the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the African Union. Operational
partnerships with regional or subregional partners
are vital to peace-enforcement and counter-terrorism
missions when United Nations peacekeeping is not the
right response. I encourage the Security Council to back
these initiatives with strong mandates and predictable,
sustained funding. Our partnership with the African
Union in Somalia offers important lessons. The Group
of Five for the Sahel presents similar advantages, and I
urge Council members to give it their full support and
all it needs to achieve success. Triangular partnerships
among the Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat are also a vital part of
reinforcing our support to peacekeeping.
Fourthly, I appeal to the peacekeeping leadership
and personnel — civilian, military and police — to come
ready to deliver. Caveats imposed by troop- and policecontributing countries should not hobble our operations.
Special Representatives, Force Commanders and Police
Commissioners must ensure a clear, functional and
responsive chain of command and control, without
interference. Troop- and police-contributing countries
and their partners have a duty to improve the level of
training and preparedness of peacekeepers. I am grateful
all who contribute. I hope that they have seen our videos
showcasing the dedication, service and sacrifice of the
Blue Helmets from many different countries. However,
we cannot continue as a patchwork of personnel, with
varying approaches and mindsets. I welcome innovative
arrangements, such as triangular partnerships between
the United Nations, donors of equipment and training,
and troop- and police-contributing countries. Thanks
to such partnerships, we are able to equip and train
troops better and more efficiently. United Nations
peacekeepers must aim for the highest standards across
the board.
Fifthly, I urge the Security Council to uphold its
responsibility to align human and financial resources
with mandates. I am totally committed to budgetary
4/86

28/03/2018

discipline and to optimizing peacekeeping resources.
But arbitrary budget cuts undermine efforts to implement
ambitious and comprehensive mandates. There have
been more than 140 deaths in Mali since the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali was established in 2013. How can Blue
Helmets operate in such an environment when they
lack nearly 100 of the armored personnel carriers they
need? How can our peacekeepers in the Central African
Republic deploy to remote parts of the country without
any of the ground-to-air communications equipment
that they need?
In our peacekeeping operations overall, 15 field
hospitals are either not deployed or not functioning.
Many of the gaps are in the most hostile environments,
including northern Mali. These shortfalls reduce
mobility, medical support and communications capacity,
and severely impair our peacekeepers’ effectiveness and
ability to actively prevent conflict and engage hostile
forces. We also face critical shortages of appropriate
personnel. The presence of women in our operations
contributes directly to increase mission effectiveness
and credibility, yet we have to repeatedly ask for more
female military officers, soldiers and police personnel.
We also need experienced leaders, skilled technicians,
logistics and air assets, and specialized equipment,
including intelligence capabilities.
Sixthly and finally, I call on host countries to
give their full consent and active cooperation to
peacekeeping operations. That includes holding the
perpetrators of attacks on peacekeepers accountable
and removing impediments to their full freedom
of movement. If peacekeeping operations are to be
successful, the parties to conflict must want peace and
actively participate in a political process. When the
will of host countries wavers, United Nations Member
States, led by the Council, must use every possible
incentive and their full influence to put the peace
process back on track.
I believe that we all know what peacekeeping
operations need to succeed. I count on the engagement
and support of Council members in meeting our
joint commitments.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Faki Mahamat.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): Today’s
meeting is a timely opportunity to discuss the future
of peacekeeping at a moment when it is increasingly
challenged. I thank the Dutch presidency of the Security
Council for taking the initiative to convene this debate.
I also thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his
efforts on behalf of the cause of peace and development
in Africa.
The peacekeeping operations authorized by
the Security Council are among the most powerful
instruments available to the international community
in promoting international peace and security. They
exemplify the strong added value of multilateralism
and symbolize international solidarity. Needless to
say, Africa is profoundly attached to the principle of
multilateralism and to the institutions that embody it.
Faced with the complex and interlinked challenges that
are confronting our planet, the multilateral approach is
the only way to ensure lasting and effective responses.
Unilateralism is synonymous with egoism,
especially at a time when humankind is in need
of solidarity. It is of hollow utility because lasting
solutions to the problems that call for our attention
demand cooperation and consensus. It poses grave
threats international stability. Everything must
therefore be done to maintain and promote United
Nations peacekeeping operations, of which almost
half are deployed in Africa and contribute to reaching
the goal of ridding the continent of the scourge of war
by 2020.
The imperative need to strengthen the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations has been acknowledged
by everyone. It is linked to the volatility of the
environments in which such operations are deployed,
as well as to the lack of tangible progress made in the
political processes which they are supposed to support.
In Africa, many examples attest to that dual-reality.
The African Union is determined to fully execute
the mission incumbent upon it so as to find suitable
responses to those challenges. In that regard, I should
like to share with the Council three key messages.
The first concerns the need to provide peacekeeping
operations with the resources they require to carry out
their mandates effectively. The times are undoubtedly
inclined towards frugality, but the latter cannot be
allowed to take priority over peace and the protection
of civilians exposed to every kind of abuse, especially

S/PV. 8218

since the peacekeeping budget represents only a tiny
fraction of what is spent worldwide on weapons.
My second message involves the need for close
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union so as to move forward the political
processes underpinning peacekeeping operations. It is
clear that, in the absence of such political processes,
peacekeeping runs the risk of becoming enmired. The
response to such difficulties cannot be allowed to result
in the international community’s disengagement or a
decrease in its involvement. Unfortunately, resolving
political issues is often a long-term endeavour. The
mere presence of a peacekeeping operation has a
stabilizing effect. It would be morally and politically
unacceptable to jeopardize such benefits. The complex
nature of political processes clearly highlights the
need to redouble efforts to overcome obstacles.
From that perspective, it is crucial to strengthen the
close partnership between the African Union and the
United Nations to a greater degree, in the spirit of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security signed in
April 2017.
That joint effort must be guided on two levels.
With regard to relations between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
the agreed modalities of cooperation between the two
organizations must be translated more effectively into
action, including through joint visits on the ground and
coordinating the messages sent to parties in conflict.
More generally, it is important for the Security Council
to give due consideration to the views of the African
Union on issues of linking justice to the search
for peace, matters of inclusivity and other relevant
questions, while respecting African ownership. With
regard to the relationship between the African Union
Commission and the Secretariat, in addition to what
is already under way, we need to increase the number
of joint visits on the ground — including those at the
highest level — to consider sending, whenever possible,
joint representatives, and promote common positions.
My third message concerns the need for
complementarity between United Nations operations
and African Union missions. United Nations operations
are supposed to be deployed when minimum conditions
are met to enable the maintenance of peace once it
is restored. African Union missions are deployed in
situations that continue to be marked by violence. The
African Union and its regional mechanisms have shown

18-087895/86

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.8218

28/03/2018

their determination to take risks on the ground to
accelerate the achievement of peace. The African Union
Mission in Somalia and the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel attest to that commitment. But as
the Council is aware, those missions face financial and
logistical difficulties that undermine their ability to
carry out their mandate. I can only reiterate here our
appeal to the Security Council to adopt the measures
that we expect of it in favour of sustainable and
predictabe financing for the peace support operations
that it has mandated, while bearing in mind its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Hesitation and procrastination are no longer
the order of the day.

returned to Gao. Together with other women leaders, I
created the Groupe de recherche, d’étude et de formation
femme-action, the main role of which is to promote the
political emergence of women and protect the rights of
women and children.

Peacekeeping is at a crossroads. This form of
collective action has achieved remarkable results
that we should all be proud of, but many challenges
lie before us. I reiterate the commitment of the
African Union to working with other members of the
international community to improve the effectiveness
of that irreplaceable tool of the multilateral system.
Regardless of the legitimate criticism sometimes
levelled at peacekeeping operations, we must take
care not to throw out the baby with the bath water out
of overzealousness.

The security situation has always been characterized
by looting, vehicle theft, kidnappings, rape and armed
robbery. We have reached the point where ambulances
are being attacked, patients are forced off and the
ambulances are taken away. Humanitarian staff cannot
work, drivers cannot work, and women who travel to
work in the weekly markets as a way to provide for
their daily needs can no longer do so. When they travel,
either their vehicles explode on mines and they lose
their hands and feet, or they are stopped, stripped of
everything they have and raped. They are now forced
to confine themselves to their homes, even though they
are the heads of their families.

The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Mahamat

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Touré.
Ms. Touré (spoke in French): On behalf of the
people of the region of Gao in the northern part of my
country, whom I am representing at this table in this
debate, allow me to convey my profound gratitude to
you, Mr. President, and through you, to your country,
the Netherlands, for providing me with this rare
opportunity to address the Security Council and talk
about the security situation that the northern region of
my country is undergoing on a daily basis. Although
the members of the Council are already aware of the
situation, they need to be informed of certain facts that
may have escaped the Council’s attention.
My name is Fatimata Touré. I was born on
27 February 1961 in the Gao region, which is one of the
five northern regions of Mali. I was lucky to be able to
go to school, and of my generation only 10 women had
the chance to pursue a post-secondary education. We
had the highest percentage of women managers in the
Gao region. Following my post-secondary education, I
knew that the best thing I could do was to go home. I
6/86

The Council should remember me as a living
witness to the events that took place from 1990 to the
present day. It is with deep emotion that testify. The
1990 rebellion was incredibly atrocious. Since that
rebellion, which was ended by the Tamanrasset Accord
and the national agreement, the northern regions of
Mali have experienced no real peace to this very day,
as I address the Council.

Why is it necessary to deploy a peacekeeping
mission in the northern regions of Mali? A peacekeeping
mission is imperative because of the resurgence of
rebellion, because the Malian State is incapable of
ensuring the safety of its population and property, and
because the conflict runs the risk of unleashing national
implosion and subregional, perhaps even international
destabilization. The conflict in northern Mali impacts
all neighbouring countries, notably Burkina Faso, Côte
d’Ivoire and the Niger, and it will certainly affect other
countries as well.
With regard to the conflict in northern Mali, the
rebellion of 2012 was the most catastrophic because it
was the first that was characterized by kidnappings and
gang rape. It claimed 70 per cent of Mali’s territory,
which was occupied for 10 months. During that period,
there were no social services and, the independence
fighters having been driven out, the Islamist rebels
made the law, carrying out amputations, floggings and
a host of other such practices. We therefore have a real
need for this peacekeeping mission to provide solutions
to the various problems I have just mentioned.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

What about this peace mission? Its core mandate is
centred around two points. There are other points that
are not of interest to us beyond the two main ones. The
first is support for the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the
Algiers process. Where is that support? Everyone knows
that the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
is handicapped. The situation remains unchanged, and
even if it has changed it has not had a direct impact on
the population because it is not a concern of the people.
Within the framework of implementing the
Agreement, 26 structures need to be established.
However, to date only eight have been set up. I note
that women represent only 3 per cent of the staff of
the structures in place, though that is not what we are
concerned with. It is true that the rate of representation
of women is very low in the operationalization of those
structures, but that is not what interests us. What does
interest us is the need for the peacekeeping mission to
accompany the political process. Under the political
process, the Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
provides for the establishment of regional councils that
are directly elected by universal suffrage and include
broad executive and administrative powers. If those
measures are taken, almost all of our security problems
will be solved.
The Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
stipulates the establishment of a territorial police force.
The decision to create that force was to be followed by
a transitional period of three months. Three years have
passed, and the territorial police force has not been
created. It could have been helping us to ensure our
safety in that time.
I would like to return to the widespread insecurity
because it has a direct impact on the lives of our
communities and prevents us from working, breathing
and moving around every day. As I speak, poor citizens
are being attacked and killed at close range, with total
impunity. Indeed, no investigations or prosecutions are
conducted, negotiations and nothing is done to punish
the perpetrators of the mass killings committed in the
heart of Gao or Timbuktu. Those acts are committed
with impunity and wreak havoc on the lives of our
communities. We are sick of it and heartsore. The
distress we suffer as a result of how we are treated on
a daily basis by the various armed groups runs deep.
With respect to the mandate of the peacekeeping
mission, we have also learned things that have helped

S/PV. 8218

us a great deal. For example, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process
includes a security sector reform component, which
directly addresses communities. Based on that process,
new community violence reduction projects have
been implemented in the various at-risk communities.
Those efforts are therefore helping to reduce the risk of
insecurity in those areas, and that is truly alleviating the
suffering of the people. Sums of nearly $5,000 dollars
are being made available to the communities, which
are then being used it to relieve suffering. With the
DDR component, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is entering areas restricted to others, where water
supply problems alone can result in the deaths of people
and animals. There really are parts that have been quite
successful. Additionally, in the Department of Public
Affairs, there is a component for quick-impact projects,
in which $50,000 has been allocated to populations.
They have worked quite well in those areas.
Indeed, as the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission has said, the mere presence of MINUSMA
headquarters in the Gao region, with which I am most
familiar, has helped to reduce youth unemployment. We
need to talk about that issue. Many young people have
found jobs. Even some who have no qualifications find
resources that enable them to ensure the survival of their
population. So it really is a very important stabilization
measure for us. I am convinced that if MINUSMA were
asked to pack its bags today, the young people from
those areas would leave as well.
With regard to the mandate for the protection of
civilians and for stabilization, to be frank we are
waiting for that mandate to be carried out. It is awaited
simply because no one has yet felt that MINUSMA
is protecting civilians, nor has there been any sense
of stabilization. People are completely dissatisfied
and even have the impression that they have been left
behind, abandoned. There is no protection. Every day
they are attacked, beaten, killed or humiliated. No one
steps in; there has been no intervention. And this is
happening right under the nose of MINUSMA, even
though protecting civilians and promoting stability are
part of its mandate.
What are the sociohistorical facts of the rebellion
in northern Mali that have hampered or will hamper
MINUSMA’s mandate? First, the area is isolated, and
more importantly, it is far from large centres, which
generates a common sense of marginalization from any

18-087897/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

administration. That disrupts the socioeconomic and
political life of those regions. Then there is the size of
the area. The northern regions represent 75 per cent of
the national territory, with a population density of five
inhabitants per square kilometre. There is the additional
hardship of a hostile climate — 45°C to 50°C in the
shade in April, a hot and dry climate with accelerated
desertification, and with violence that exacerbates the
suffering and misery of the people living there.
There is also the mistrust among various groups,
born in the rebellion of the 1990s, which encouraged
everyone to arm themselves with means of self-defence
and which cultivated strong agendas that very often
lead to unfortunate events and violence that are harmful
to culture. Conflicts have been turned into communal
strife — no incident between two individuals of
different groups is seen in an ideal framework, but is
rather seen through the prism of prejudice inspired by
the spirit of retaliation or retribution.
Another factor is the complex and multidimensional
nature of the causes of conflict — historical, political,
economic and sociocultural, internal and external. And
the interests of the actors involved are divergent and
irreconcilable. I do not have to tell Council members
what they already know. There are three types of
actors, three types of rebels in the northern regions.
There are those called independence fighters, who want
to secure the independence of their territories, such as
the members of the Mouvement national de libération
de l’Azawad, who fight with great conviction. There are
those called jihadists, some of whom, despite what one
might think, also fight with great conviction because
they believe they need Sharia law to move things
forward. The third group is the drug traffickers, who
are the enemies of peace. They are the most powerful
because they are economically and politically robust.
They control the local economy and, what is more,
they do not want peace, because they are not interested
in tranquillity. They only want to secure the drugtrafficking corridors. They are present in all spheres of
the Malian Administration, with representatives at the
highest levels.
All of those factors obstruct MINUSMA’s mission
in the northern region.
What do the people expect from MINUSMA’s
mandate? MINUSMA’s mandate to protect civilians
must be tailored to our needs — security needs, economic
needs, sociocultural needs — and to the situation in the
8/86

28/03/2018

northern regions. To anticipate or counter those threats,
the mandate will need to be robust. There has already
been reference to a robust mandate in one of the recent
resolutions. But there is no difference between the
time when the mandate was not robust and the moment
that it became robust. It must therefore be made much
more robust. We must also bolster rapid early-warning
capabilities by further involving citizens, especially in
areas where civilians are constantly at risk, such as in
the northern regions of Mali.
I thank the Council for its attention and, more
importantly, for giving me the opportunity to present
the security situation in the northern regions.
The President: I thank Ms. Touré for her briefing.
I will now make a statement in my capacity as
Prime Minister of the Netherlands.
First of all, I would like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres, Moussa Faki Mahamat and Fatimata Touré
for their inspiring contributions.
United Nations peacekeeping operations save
lives. For many men, women and children in conflict
areas, the United Nations is their last hope. And sadly,
more and more people around the world have only that
last hope to cling to. Since 2010, the number of major
violent conflicts has tripled. They have also become
more complex.
The history of peacekeeping operations has
seen notable achievements, but it also has its dark
pages. We in the Netherlands know that all too well.
But that does not make us want to look away. On the
contrary, modernizing and improving United Nations
peacekeeping operations is one of the priorities of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands. We fully support the
Secretary-General’s efforts in that regard.
That brings me to my main message today: we need
to shoulder our responsibilities. That applies to us all,
first and foremost to the Security Council. We must
establish clear and focused mandates and put pressure
on parties to conflicts to find a political solution. It also
applies to host countries, which must cooperate fully
with missions. It applies to the Secretariat, which must
support missions efficiently and effectively. And last
but not least, it applies to all Member States because
we are the United Nations, and we must make sure
that sufficient funding, political support and welltrained, disciplined and well-equipped troops are
always available.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is shouldering
its responsibility. We are a big financial donor, we
make an innovative contribution to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), and we contribute to missions
in South Sudan and the Middle East. We want more
effective and flexible missions. But how do we achieve
that? Let me highlight a few specific points.
First, good intelligence is one of the keys to a
successful mission. Together with other countries,
the Netherlands has developed a new intelligence
capability in Mali. The United Nations mandate can
thus be carried out more effectively, and civilians and
peacekeepers can be better protected.
Secondly, capabilities like helicopters and medical
facilities are vital, but scarce. Norway was the first
country to set up a rotation scheme for this. After the
Netherlands and then Germany supplied helicopters in
Gao, Canada recently announced that it would take up
the baton. That is great news. Rotation schemes lower
the threshold for participation in missions, increase
their sustainability and improve their quality.
Thirdly, I would like to stress the importance of
an integrated approach within United Nations missions.
Each mission must have an overall strategy, with
benchmarks, and I am delighted that such a strategy
will be put in place for MINUSMA.
Finally, the United Nations is working more with
regional partners, such as the African Union and the
European Union. It is good news that organizations
like the African Union and the G5 Sahel are assuming
their responsibility.
Those are only a few of the many improvements,
big and small, being made. We will continue to press for
modernization of United Nations peace missions during
our membership in the Security Council and beyond.
I hope that today will spark greater commitment to
making peace operations more effective so that the
United Nations can go on making a difference to the
lives of millions of men, women and children around
the world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the Minister of State and
Minister of Defence of Côte d’Ivoire.

S/PV. 8218

Mr. Bakayoko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I thank the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the
welcome initiative to convene this high-level debate
on collective action to improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
I wish to convey the gratitude of the President of the
Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, His Excellence Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, to the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, His
Excellency Mr. Mark Rutte, for his kind invitation to
participate in this high-level debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing, and I wish to assure
him of Côte d’Ivoire’s full support for the initiatives
to make United Nations peacekeeping operations a
tool to respond to present-day challenges to conflict
prevention and consolidation of peace in the world.
I speak to this gathering in my capacity as Minister
of State and Minister of Defence of the Republic of Côte
d’Ivoire, but also as an Ivoirian citizen, bearing witness
to the effectiveness of a United Nations peacekeeping
operations in protecting and saving human lives. Indeed,
I personally benefited from the protection provided by
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, which,
as was the case for thousands of fellow compatriots,
saved my life. My delegation also includes Ambassador
Alcide Djédjé, a member of the opposing camp at the
time of the Ivoirian crisis, who also benefited from the
same protection. Together we are here, together we are
engaged in a national reconstruction process that has
enabled our country to be elected as non-permanent
member of the Security Council and to be ready to send
troops to theatres of operations to save other lives.
United
Nations
peacekeeping
operations
are taking place in increasingly challenging
environments, characterized by asymmetrical attacks
against peacekeepers and civilians. United Nations
peacekeeping missions need to shoulder, in addition
to the protection of civilians, their support role
for the political processes of crises resolution and
peacebuilding. Here, I would like to commend the
initiatives of nearly 110,000 men and women deployed
in those missions, who are working to avoid tragedies,
and I wish to pay tribute to the Blue Helmets who, every
day, sacrifice their lives for peace in the world.
We are debating improvements to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In that context, it is incumbent
upon the Security Council, on the basis of rigorous
analyses of environmental and operational constraints,
to provide peacekeeping operations with robust

18-087899/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

mandates, setting clear and achievable goals. For it is
clear that peacekeeping missions sometimes experience
difficulties in agreeing on the precise meaning of the
restrictions imposed by the mandates and in translating
overall concepts and strategies into action.
Furthermore, these mandates must be flexible
and sequenced so that mission priorities can be
progressively adapted to developments in the
sociopolitical and security context in the host country.
In addition, prior to deployment, it is the duty of troopcontributing countries to ensure adequate training
for their contingents, in accordance with the United
Nations Standards of Conduct and to make available
equipment that has been adapted to the needs on the
ground. Within that framework, and in support of
the troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat, the
Security Council and donors need to further combine
their efforts to reinforce the capabilities of the troops,
particularly with regard to intelligence, thus enabling
them to anticipate attacks on civilians and United
Nations contingents.
My country welcomes the opportunity afforded to
us once again to share its experience on this important
matter. Côte d’Ivoire, at the cost of many sacrifices and
with the help of the international community, managed
to emerge from more than a decade of instability. While
it is true that the success of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and the ongoing security sector
reform received the greatest media coverage in the
emergence from the crisis, other important aspects have
also contributed. They include support for the electoral
process, securing the territory and help in rebuilding
governing bodies.
This experience of my country allows me to
recall before the Security Council that United
Nations peacekeeping operations, such as the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, have a number of
stages, all equally important, and they are organized
methodologically to achieve the goals set. In Côte
d’Ivoire one can cite as examples the most important
stages: a political agreement prior to the deployment
of the United Nations operation; a sanctions regime,
including an embargo against arms and diamonds and
individual sanctions; the authorization to use force to
destroy heavy weapons; and respect for the political
agreement and for the result of United Nations-certified
elections. The latter — the certification of the results by
the United Nations — was decisive for the credibility to
the electoral process.
10/86

28/03/2018

However, not all operations always align with that
successful scheme, and some even face serious failures
or drag on and on. That prompts us today to seriously
reconsider their mode of operation through a courageous
reform initiative. To that end, my delegation would like
to draw attention to three conditions essential to the
success of such missions. First is prevention, which
must be dealt with as a genuine priority, one likely
to lower tensions. Next, clarity of the mandate and
the appropriate means for its implementation should
ensure better protection of civilians. That protection
of civilians is the essence of peacekeeping operations
and requires consideration of the rules of engagement
of forces. The third condition is the need for exemplary
cooperation between the United Nation system and the
Government in power.
As this high-level debate is being held, my country
remains concerned by the crises that persist on our
continent — in Mali, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, in the Central African Republic, in South
Sudan, in Darfur — or elsewhere in the world, and that
despite the presence of Blue Helmets. The persistence
of those crises challenges us and calls on us to join
our efforts to return to peace and stability in those
hard-hit countries. That is why our collective action
in support of peacekeeping operations must get away
from the partitioning of duties and build on coherence
and coordination among the Secretariat, the Security
Council, troop-contributing countries and multilateral
partners. We must also bear in mind that collective
action will be effective only if it is based on full
awareness and acceptance, on the part of each party
involved, of their individual responsibility and their
duty to cooperate with other peacekeeping actors.
Finally, although it is important to ensure
the viability of peacekeeping operations through
sustainable funding mechanisms, we believe that it is
also vital to include the gender dimension in strategic
management of forces.
Today’s Council meeting is surely the start of
a series of initiatives put forward by the SecretaryGeneral, based on the concept of collective
responsibility, that seeks to infuse a new dynamic into
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Because of its
experience, Cote d’Ivoire is aware of the importance
of a peacekeeping mission and would like, through
my voice, to reiterate its support and readiness to help
the Secretary-General in the implementation of this
ambitious endeavour.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

I cannot conclude without conveying my
Government’s gratitude to Member States who
contribute to peacekeeping operations. I would like to
echo the Secretary-General’s call for a revitalization
of the framework for cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and for the Security
Council to strengthen is support for financing African
Union forces deployed on the continent.
Mr. Baylan (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and especially Ms. Fatimata Touré
for their very strong testimony to what this all about.
Let me also thank you, Mr. President, for offering a
platform for today’s discussion.
I align myself with the statement to be delivered
later today on behalf of the Nordic countries.
Never has the world been in greater need of
effective peacekeeping, and never have the challenges
peacekeepers encounter been more complex or more
immense. Consequently, it has never been more
important for United Nations peace operations to be
optimally configured to deliver for peace and security
and to meet today’s challenges.
In recent years, important and thorough reviews
have been conducted, seeking to adapt United Nations
peace operations in light of changing conflict dynamics
and limited resources. Yet progress on implementation
has been limited. We welcome renewed efforts,
spearheaded by the Secretary-General, to strengthen
global partnerships for peacekeeping and to move
from policy to practice and from words to action. We
need more action. Otherwise, we will not make peace
operations fit for the twenty-first century.
We must strive to ensure that the United Nations as
a whole is able to engage early, flexibly and effectively
across the conflict spectrum. That is essential if we
are to deliver on our ultimate goal of peace, security
and sustainable development. Therefore, Sweden
stands firmly behind the Secretary-General’s reform
agenda, putting prevention and sustaining peace at
the heart of our efforts. Peacekeeping is one of the
instruments available in that regard, and effective and
efficient peacekeeping can reduce the human suffering
costs and save resources in the long run. Our guiding
principle must be to make the most possible difference
on the ground.

S/PV. 8218

Like the Netherlands, Sweden has a long and broad
history in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Since 1948, when the first observers were sent to the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, more
than 80,000 Swedish women and men have participated
in United Nations peace operations. Sweden currently
deploys about 350 military, police, correction officers
and civilians to United Nations peacekeeping and
contributes approximately $70 million to peacekeeping
operations per year.
In 2014, Sweden reinforced its contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping through its contribution
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Drawing
on that experience, I would like to raise three points
in particular that we believe would contribute to more
effective peacekeeping.
First, let us ensure that we can make informed
decisions. The purpose of today’s debate is to clarify
the responsibilities of each and every actor involved
in peacekeeping. To assume those responsibilities and
make informed decisions, we need the relevant facts.
The Security Council should be provided, ahead of
mandate renewals, with information on options and
trade-offs between mission tasks, costs, safety and
security and resources and on significant changes in
operational environments.
We always need to apply a gender perspective
and a whole-of-mission approach and make sure that
gender-disaggregated data is available. Integrated
analysis should also guide the force generation
process. Reporting on risks and under-performance, in
particular as related to the protection of civilians, must
be coherent and systematic. We need to encourage and
find models for frank dialogue in that regard, bringing
together all the relevant actors.
Secondly, visions and mandates must be translated
into results on the ground. Peace operations must
be integrated and fit for purpose. Three aspects are
particularly important in that regard: situational
awareness, adequate leadership and the performance
of troops.
In our own experience with MINUSMA,
peacekeeping intelligence is vital to ensure informed
decisions and operational planning, as the President
highlighted. Joint analysis and information-sharing
must be systematized from the outset of a mission
in order to contribute to more effective protection of

18-0878911/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

civilians and of United Nations personnel. It is also
crucial that missions are able and ready to act on the
information and early warnings they receive.
That brings me to the issue of leadership. The
Secretary-General’s reform agenda foresees greater
delegation of authority to the field. That, together
with the multidimensional nature of peace operations,
requires well-prepared and cohesive leadership with
clarity of roles in crisis management situations. Current
selection processes for senior mission leadership should
be reviewed and the joint training of management teams
enhanced, encompassing both civilian and military
staff, and also police components.
The legitimacy of peacekeeping depends on the
performance and accountability of troops. We all have
responsibilities in that regard. Uniformed units must
have the right training, skills and equipment to be able
to protect civilians and themselves and to deliver on
mandates in accordance with applicable law. To achieve
that, we need to hold troop-contributing countries
accountable, support capacity-building with mobile
training teams and focus on training Headquarters staff
and on the selection of qualified staff officers.
The sexual exploitation and abuse of the most
vulnerable people by those sent to protect them is a
despicable act. We strongly support ongoing efforts to
prevent and combat sexual exploitation and abuse within
the United Nations system. However, more can and
must be done, including ensuring that all perpetrators
are held to account. The Secretary-General’s proposed
measures must now be properly implemented so
that zero tolerance of sexual harassment becomes
a reality. That is crucial to maintaining the legitimacy
of peacekeeping.
Thirdly, peace is best pursued in partnership. With
regional organizations actively engaged in political
processes and security efforts in United Nations
mission settings, strategic coherence is a prerequisite
for success. Our interventions should be based on a
joint political strategy that clarifies roles, end states
and mandates. Training and capacity-building, counterterrorism operations, and the fight against human
trafficking and organized crime also need to be part of
the dialogue with partners.
In addition, frank discussions should characterize
our relations with host nations, before and during the
deployment of missions. We need the political will to
be open and transparent on mission performance, and
12/86

28/03/2018

the courage to continuously ask ourselves how we can
do better and to act when we can.
Let me end on a positive note. Even if there are many
challenges ahead of us that can be solved only by all
of us together — the Security Council, the Secretariat,
troop-contributing countries and host nations — we
have seen successes in peacekeeping missions. The
United Nations Mission in Liberia, which is closing
after 15 years, is a powerful example of the positive
contribution that peacekeeping can bring by supporting
national efforts to build sustainable peace and stability.
Careful and early planning for the transition across
the whole of the United Nations, including through the
Peacebuilding Commission, has also laid the foundation
for those gains to be sustained into the future. A longterm commitment and adequate support and funding
are needed to ensure that this is possible. We must learn
from those kinds of success stories.
Former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld
once said:
“The concept of loyalty is distorted when it
is understood to mean blind acceptance. It is
correctly interpreted when it is assumed to cover
honest criticism.”
That is our main message today. Our loyalty to and trust
in United Nations peacekeeping remains firm, but our
loyalty also requires us to continue to critically assess
and review our respective roles and responsibilities. We
must move from talk to action.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank the
Secretary-General for being at this meeting and for his
commitment to peacekeeping. I also thank Chairperson
Mahamat for his briefing, and I have to tell Ms. Touré
that her advocacy and passion and the way she fights
for the people is to be admired. It is inspiring, but it is
to be listened to. She spoke of many truths today, and I
think that we need to make sure that when those truths
are spoken, they are acknowledged. It takes courage
to say those truths and we should not let that courage
fall by the wayside. We need to honour that courage by
responding, and so I thank her for her honesty. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for coming
to preside over this important meeting on the future of
United Nations peacekeeping.
Around the world, the Blue Helmet is the most
instantly recognizable symbol of this Organization’s
mission. We send peacekeepers to take on some of the
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

world’s toughest challenges: protecting defenceless
civilians, separating warring parties and helping to
build State institutions where the rule of law is nowhere
to be found. The Charter of the United Nations makes
no mention of peacekeeping. No one thought of those
kinds of missions when the Security Council first
met, but when given an appropriate mandate and when
properly managed and equipped, no one doubts that
those missions can play an essential role in supporting
peace and saving lives. That is why peacekeeping
reform remains a top priority for the United States.
When I arrived here, we laid out a few principles
that continue to guide our approach. Peacekeeping
missions need to support political solutions. They need
host country cooperation. Mandates must be realistic
and achievable. Missions need to have an exit strategy.
And we need to be willing to change mandates when
things are not working. Those principles do not reflect
the narrow interest of a single Member State, but rather
we should all agree that they can improve peacekeeping
across the board.
Every time the United States has looked at a
peacekeeping mandate, we have gone back to those
principles. We believe that missions are changing for the
better. Missions are becoming more effective and more
efficient. We reconfigured the Mission in Haiti to focus
on police and the rule of law. We changed the mission
in Darfur and downsized it to reflect current political
and security realities. We have supported responsible
drawdowns of peacekeeping missions, most recently
in Liberia, while pushing peacekeepers in Lebanon to
actually use all of their mandated authorities to be more
effective in carrying out their tasks.
Yet, we still have a lot to do. A prime example is
in Mali, where the Mission struggles to protect itself
from terrorist attacks that have made that Mission the
most dangerous peacekeeping assignment in the world.
We have a responsibility to make that mandate realistic
and achievable. However, when a mandate is no longer
realistic or achievable, we need to change it and focus
on addressing the most pressing priorities. When a
Government stands in the way of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission, we need to put real pressure on
the Government to change course. When a mission no
longer support a political solution, we need to get the
parties back to the table or ask ourselves: Should the
mission be there at all?

S/PV. 8218

The United States strongly believes that we need
robust performance standards and data-driven analysis
on the performance of peacekeepers. The United States
encourages the Secretariat to develop and implement a
comprehensive performance policy that identifies clear
standards, evaluates the performance of all personnel
and includes measures to ensure accountability when
those standards fall short. We need to develop a culture
of performance when it comes to the peacekeeping
operations at the United Nations. The people the United
Nations serves deserve to know that when Blue Helmets
arrive, they are qualified, appropriately equipped and
ready to perform their duty.
As part of that effort, we must intensify our
work to eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping. The Secretary-General took positive
action to address abuses in the Central African Republic,
but that behaviour is still happening. There can be
no excuses. We encourage the full use of resolution
2272 (2016) authorities to end the culture of impunity,
including in responding to allegations concerning the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan. All
Member States need to support the Secretary-General
when he takes action to make sure that peacekeepers
meet the highest standards of conduct.
Resources are important for peacekeeping, of
course. The United States has long been the largest
financial contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
by far. That will not change, but peacekeeping is a
shared responsibility. With shared responsibility comes
shared burdens and shared cost. One country should
not shoulder more than one quarter of the United
Nations peacekeeping budget, and we look forward
to a more equitable distribution of the budget among
Member States.
Moving forward, the United States will not pay more
than 25 per cent of the peacekeeping budget. That is a
cap required by United States law. We pledge to work
with Member States and the Organization to ensure we
make that adjustment in a fair and sensible manner that
protects United Nations peacekeeping. All of us have
a role to play and all of us must step up. The Security
Council, the Secretariat, regional organizations, such
as the African Union, troop- and police-contributors
and host Governments have to work together.

18-0878913/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

As we move forward, we need to always remember
why we deploy peacekeeping missions in the first place.
We send peacekeepers to the front line to help those
who have been victims of war and who have often
experienced unimaginable atrocities. If we think about
the people whom peacekeepers are meant to serve and
keep them at the forefront of our minds, none of us
should hesitate to do our part to make peacekeeping as
effective as it can be.
Mr. Magierowski (Poland): I would first like to
express my gratitude to the Netherlands and to Prime
Minister Mark Rutte personally for holding today’s
debate, and to the Secretary-General for his valuable
remarks. I would also like to thank Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat and Ms. Fatimata Touré for their
comprehensive, informative and passionate briefings.
I would like to recall the Secretary-General’s words
from last April, when he said in this very Chamber that
the objective of every peacekeeping mission is “to set
the stage for stability and sustainable peace” (S/PV.7918,
p. 2). In the light of this, we must act together to make
the process of improving peacekeeping operations
more coherent and effective, which will enable us to
lay solid and inclusive foundations for sustainable
peace in the whole world. Poland has always been
a strong supporter of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We regard them as an important tool of the
international community for preserving global peace
and security. However, today’s security challenges
require an all-of-United Nations approach and the use
of all available means. I want to reiterate at this point
that Poland supports all efforts aimed at strengthening
mediation and preventive diplomacy, resolving disputes
peacefully and addressing the root causes of conflicts. I
would now like to concentrate on four issues that should
guide us in our work in the Security Council this year.
First, we are now witnessing changes in the global
geopolitical architecture that significantly affect the
nature of conflicts and consequently that of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. It should therefore be
obvious that United Nations peacekeeping operations
evolve and that new missions need mandates that are
considerably different from those of decades ago. We
need to respond to new challenges by encouraging
ourselves, as Security Council members, to formulate
realistic, tailor-made and context-specific mandates
based on deep and comprehensive needs analysis on
the ground. That should include constant monitoring
of human rights as well as security situations. Mission
14/86

28/03/2018

mandates therefore have to recognize the primacy of
politics in the entire peace process and provide a vision
of the desired final outcome of a mission. The role of
the Security Council in that process is essential.
Secondly, the role of peacekeeping in the protection
of civilians is crucial. Poland attaches enormous
importance to this issue. The report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
rightly pointed out that the principles of peacekeeping
should never be used as an excuse for failure to protect
civilians. We have already heard too many excuses
for inaction, and they were in fact inexcusable. The
protection of civilians remains a very high priority issue
for Poland, which is why we have acceded to the Kigali
Principles and why we call on Member States, including
all the troop- and police-contributing countries, to
endorse them. In that regard, we would like to stress
the importance of full respect for international law and
international humanitarian law, which is a fundamental
priority for my country. Impunity is unacceptable,
and we must therefore reiterate that every perpetrator
should be brought to justice. We also call for strict
implementation of the zero-tolerance policy on acts of
sexual exploitation and abuse and condemn any such
acts committed by peacekeeping personnel.
Thirdly, Poland considers peacekeepers’ security
crucial. That includes not only troops but all
humanitarian and support personnel in missions. The
report by Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos
Cruz has triggered a long-awaited discussion on the
current state of play with regard to the security of United
Nations peacekeepers. The effective implementation
of the post-report recommendations will require the
full cooperation and unwavering efforts of all parties
involved, including the Secretariat, the troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Security Council.
Finally, insufficient and ineffective training of
peacekeepers directly affects their performance in
protecting civilians and the security of a mission’s
personnel. There can be no proper response without
an adequate preparedness process. Peacekeepers’
training cycles should equip the Blue Helmets with a
clear vision of a given mission’s priorities. Poland is
committed to ensuring support in that area. We offer
our training capacities and are open to cooperation
with other States Members of the United Nations in
enhancing peacekeepers’ skills.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8218

We should not forget the regional dimension of
the security environment in which United Nations
peacekeepers operate. They are deployed within living
communities and troubled societies. If they are to even
stand a chance of protecting endangered civilians, they
need strong partnerships with host nations and local
and regional actors in the area.

the areas of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, we
would like to share with the Council the following
observations and conclusions, which are based on our
approaches and our colleagues’ experience within
the framework of Kazakhstan’s examination of the
practical aspects of deploying military contingents to
peacekeeping operations.

The Security Council should undertake all possible
efforts and make the most of its mandate to improve the
effectiveness of peace operations, as they play a crucial
role in building the foundations for sustainable peace.
I would like to conclude by quoting the SecretaryGeneral once again.

To begin with, finding solutions to today’s problems
of security and development requires a comprehensive,
three-pronged approach, whose main elements are, first,
the interconnectedness of security and development. We
firmly believe that if we are to achieve long-term peace
and security, we must also implement programmes
designed to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
at the same time. We also need a regional approach to
dealing with cross-border challenges and threats rather
than the more frequently applied narrow, countryspecific approach, since solutions to current problems
are not to be found within the borders of a single State.
Then there is the principle of one United Nations,
with greater coordination, streamlining and efficiency
at Headquarters and in the field. We must avoid the
excessive fragmentation of programmes and projects,
combining the efforts of the various parts of United
Nations programmes in order to implement steps
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.

“Peace operations are at a crossroads. Our task
is to keep them relevant with clear and achievable
mandates, and the right strategies and support.
Success depends on our collective efforts.” (ibid.,
p. 4)
Mr. Mukhtarov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to thank the presidency of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, for organizing today’s debate
on a very important issue. I am also grateful to the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, as well
as to Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, and Ms. Fatimata Touré,
the Director of Groupe de recherche, d’étude et de
formation femme-action, for their very informative and
inspiring briefings.
While peacekeeping operations have fostered
peace and stability in many areas of conflict, some
missions have been going on for decades as a result
of a lack of political solutions. Peacekeeping missions
carry out their activities in conditions where the local
power structures are unable to fully ensure security.
Asymmetric threats are growing and peacekeepers
are becoming targets for attacks. Since 2000, many
reports have been issued on improving United Nations
peacekeeping, including three in 2015 that made
specific recommendations.
While changes have been introduced into
peacekeeping, the number of deaths has increased,
especially in five of the largest United Nations
missions in Africa. All of that shows that conflicts,
especially protracted ones, need a collective approach
and efforts to improve peacekeeping operations
conducted through the joint actions of all interested
parties. In that regard, through analysis of the measures
and processes undertaken by the United Nations in

Secondly, peacekeeping operations must strictly
abide by the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, and all new proposals
and conditions must be carefully reviewed by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Thirdly, since peacekeeping operations today
reflect the issues present in a very complex security
environment, we must focus on ensuring cooperation
among all States Members of the United Nations by
building trust among the permanent members of the
Security Council in order to harness all available
mechanisms. Through increased cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations and the
effective division of responsibilities, we can improve
overall efficiency.
Fourthly, peacekeeping operations need clearly
defined mandates, objectives, command structures and
adequate resources based on realistic assessments of
the situation and long-term sustainable financing. We
need fresh approaches that are practical, achievable and
realistic. That demands increased situational awareness

18-0878915/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

with the potential for rapid responses in combating
asymmetrical challenges and threats.
Fifthly, since peacekeeping contingents are
not appropriate mechanisms for counter-terrorism
operations, we want to point out that regional forces
are generally better able to combat terrorist groups, as
many such cases have shown. At the same time, United
Nations peacekeepers must maintain their strictly
defined role should they be jointly deployed with
regional forces.
Lastly, developing a culture of peace should be
a priority for all peacekeeping operations, as well as
for the United Nations system, country teams on the
ground, international partners, the local media and civil
society. The participation of women in all stages and
at all levels of our peacekeeping activities will make
them more effective. We should also make creative and
innovative use of social media and digital technology
for more effective leadership, as well as in combating
violent extremism and gender-based violence.
Modern conflicts are so complex that peacekeeping
operations alone cannot resolve them. In that context,
the key to the success of our actions includes thoroughly
analysing the key causes of conflict, investing in
development, combating climate change and addressing
food insecurity and water and energy shortages. Such
an approach can help to develop an effective plan of
action for establishing and strengthening peace. In
other words, the key to success lies in eradicating the
drivers of instability, not just managing its symptoms.
Mr. Lemoyne (France) (spoke in French): I would
like first to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s debate. I believe that your contribution and
those of the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Director of Groupe
de recherche, d’étude et de formation femme-action
serve as an effective guide for us on the path of the
reforms that have been boldly launched.
France would like to pay heartfelt tribute to Peter,
a Netherlander in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA);
Aïchatou, a Nigerian, also in MINUSMA; Ratih, an
Indonesian in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon; and Luis, a Chilean in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. They are among the
100,000 soldiers, police and civilians who risk their
lives every day in peacekeeping operations, protecting
tens of millions of people around the world. Above all,
16/86

28/03/2018

their Blue Helmets are more than ever an embodiment
of the United Nations. They are a beacon of hope,
as Mr. Bakayoko saw for himself. I would also like
to pay tribute to the memory of the approximately
3,700 peacekeepers who have died in the line of duty,
including 113 of my compatriots. Their sacrifice in the
service of peace will never be forgotten. And if I may,
Mr. President, at a time when the entire French nation is
applauding the heroism of Lieutenant Colonel Beltrame,
I would like to include him in my tribute to those who
give their lives so that others may live and survive.
Member States will understand why France
will always remain committed to efforts to improve
peacekeeping operations with steadfast resolve and
conviction. Because those operations are inseparable
from the founding principles of the United Nations,
it is our collective credibility that is at stake. These
reform efforts should strengthen the effectiveness of
peacekeeping. The aim is of course to help to settle
conflicts by political means in increasingly complex
contexts, to protect civilians who are victims of conflict,
violence and massive violations of human rights and, in
short, to build collective action with Members of the
United Nations in the service of peace and security.
As the Secretary-General emphasized, and I
commend his vision and determination, that is a complex
and difficult but crucial undertaking. If we consider the
examples of Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Timor-Leste, it
can succeed. However, at times it faces new political
and security challenges in tackling asymmetrical
threats. Needless to say, in the light of that, we must
reflect and, above all, act. Peacekeeping operations are
our common good. That is why, together with all those
present, we would like to inspire a new ambition.
In order to achieve that, I believe that we must
first reaffirm the cardinal principle that peacekeeping
is a tool for achieving the political goal of peace.
Peacekeeping operations must be part of that political
horizon. The local, regional and multilateral
stakeholders involved frequently lead those political
processes, and peacekeeping operations must contribute
actively to that in full coordination with them. I believe
that coordination is key and should also be applied to
relations among the various entities present in the field
so that the link between security and development is
not merely a concept for research efforts but also truly
effective on the ground.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

If we are to ensure the success of peacekeeping
operations, we have a twofold task — better prioritizing
and sequencing for mandates so as to prevent what
the Secretary-General called a Christmas tree. That
is particularly important for the multidimensional
mandates that represent the connection to peacebuilding.
Both the short- and long-term objectives must be well
understood by all components of the mission, as well
as by its external partners. The mandates must then
be converted into concepts of operation and rules of
engagement, implemented by all Blue Helmets as part
of the principles of peacekeeping.
That goal of more effective peacekeeping clearly
requires operations conducted in optimal conditions.
The Netherlands presidency has rightly called on us
to address the issues of establishing the criteria for
success, the measurement of progress and performance
evaluations. That involves all of us — the members of
the Security Council, the Secretariat, force contributors,
host countries and regional organizations. France is
committed to that as a troop-contributor, the secondhighest in Europe and among the permanent members
of the Security Council. This is not about giving good
and bad marks but about improving the overall level of
peacekeeping. The development of evaluation, analysis
and action tools and strategic reviews conducted by the
Secretariat are of course part of that change. Troop- and
police-contributing countries should also participate
fully in that effort. I believe that better performance will
be achieved once there is full respect for the procedures
and the concept of operations of missions. That will
make it possible to reduce the number of peacekeepers
killed or injured in operations, which is still too high.
As noted by my colleague, the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and
the Cruz report have made relevant and operational
recommendations to improve the overall performance
of peacekeeping. The time for action is now. Today’s
meeting marks an important moment in the process
launched by the Secretary-General. We believe that there
are three key components to improving performance.
First is training — before, during and after
deployment, in the basic military operational areas
as well as linguistically. Without interaction with
local populations, peacekeepers will not be fully
effective. That was the issue discussed at a ministerial
conference held in Paris in late 2016 on peacekeeping
in a francophone environment. France has made a great

S/PV. 8218

contribution in that regard. We train almost 30,000
French-speaking African soldiers a year, who provide
major contingents to peacekeeping operations.
We intend to further develop our cooperation with
the troop contributors and the Secretariat. We intend to
increase our involvement in teaching French in military
and police academies, particularly in Africa, South
America and Asia. We also seek to promote the widest
dissemination of doctrinal concepts drafted by the
Secretariat to French-speaking contributing countries
and thereby help them to strengthen their participation
in peacekeeping operations by acquiring the necessary
operational skills, which will promote increasingly
effective and successful predeployment certification.
The second key to performance is better force
generation, given the need to enhance mobility and
force projection and, as has been said, to increase the
presence of women in operations.
Thirdly, I believe that peacekeeping operations
must enjoy the resources necessary to implement all the
components of their mandates and use them in the best
possible way. As the fifth-largest financial contributor
to the peacekeeping budget, France is contributing fully.
France systematically consults the troop-contributing
countries ahead of the renewal of a mandate for which
it is responsible. We are committed to doing this even
more regularly throughout the year.
The exemplary nature of peacekeeping agents is
critical for us. France fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual abuse.
Preventing and suppressing sexual violence is essential.
Any violation of the law must be firmly punished. Zero
tolerance must extend to all behaviours that could
hinder the smooth running of the mission.
Our ambition for peacekeeping must be fully
reflected in the United Nations relations with regional
organizations, which play a growing role in the
promotion of peace and international security. The
Charter of the United Nations is far-sighted in providing
for it in Chapter VIII.
The European Union plays an indispensable role,
as do, of course, the African Union and the subregional
organizations of the continent. Their operations can
play a role that is perfectly complementary to those
of the United Nations, as eloquently noted by the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission. That can been seen with the Joint

18-0878917/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, whose full
operationalization should facilitate the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
France welcomes and fully supports the
development of such operations, which must have
established planning and accountability systems,
as well as predictable and sustainable funding
mechanisms. France will continue to contribute to
efforts in this direction. At the right the time, and as the
President of the Republic said in Ouagadougou, within
the Security Council France will support the African
Union initiative to ensure independent and predictable
financing for African peace operations.
This year marks the centenary of the end of the
First World War. This conjuncture reminds us of our
collective responsibility not to let history repeat itself
again and again. That is why France is fully committed
to ensuring that multilateralism, and in particular
the United Nations, can meet today’s challenges.
Peacekeeping is the manifestation of that ambition. It
will naturally be at the heart of the Paris Peace Forum
on 11 November, which will fully support the United
Nations efforts to attenuate warfare. It will be the
first iteration of an annual meeting involving States,
international organizations and civil society to advance
global governance by making it ever more effective and
adapted to contemporary global challenges.
We who sit comfortably in this Chamber today
owe that to populations held hostage by conflict. We
owe it to our peoples, who demand action rather than
resignation. We owe it to Aïchatou, Peter, Ratih and
Luis, who as I speak are the very embodiment of the
United Nations and of hope on the ground.
Baron Ahmad (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and for your
contribution at this most opportune and important time.
May I also take this opportunity to thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his leadership and his commitment
to reform on peacekeeping, Chairperson Mahamat
and Ms. Touré, who gave a passionate, powerful and
poignant reminder through her reflections on the role
of peacekeeping and how its effectiveness can be
improved. I am sure we all heard her voice, her plea and
her contribution in very clear terms.
As we mark 70 years of United Nations
peacekeeping, it is right that we pause and reflect on the
18/86

28/03/2018

many lives saved and on the regions and countries that
have been stabilized over the years. There are millions
of people living in some of the most challenging places
on Earth. They have been given hope; they have been
given opportunity. That is the proud legacy of the toil
and sacrifice of hundreds of thousands of men and
women who have put their lives at risk. Some, indeed,
have lost their lives to protect the most vulnerable. In
this 70th anniversary year, we salute their service and
the service of those who support United Nations efforts
through regional bodies like the African Union Mission
in Somalia.
Over the past seven years, the challenges that
peacekeepers face have evolved. Disputes are
increasingly complex. Mission settings are increasingly
dangerous, and too often our collective contribution in
this building has failed to keep pace. United Nations
peacekeeping is far too important to fail. In recent
years, we have indeed made progress, for example
in planning and force generation. The Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial Conferences in London in 2016
and Vancouver in 2017 delivered 80 new pledges of
personnel and capability. This progress must continue.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s call to
action this year, and also I welcome his statement
today on a sharpened focus on the safety and security
of peacekeepers. The United Nations action plan
to implement some of the recommendations is also
very timely. I also welcome the Secretary-General’s
statement today that he will provide regular updates
on the delivery of the action plan. As we embark
on this collective effort to improve United Nations
peacekeeping, the United Kingdom would suggest
three areas on which to focus.
First, the Security Council must take its
responsibilities seriously and have the information
available in order to do so. We must set clear, achievable
objectives for peacekeeping operations and not be afraid
to sequence so that mandates provide the right direction
and the right resources at the right time. We should go
further, setting mandates that are most strategic and
take a longer-term view. To do this, the Council needs
high-quality, timely and accurate information and
analysis. We, States and institutions alike, need to work
together better to achieve this.
Secondly, to succeed peacekeeping operations need
to be complemented by all the tools that the United
Nations and the international community have at our
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

disposal. We need better coordination at Headquarters
and in the field with peacebuilding, better development
and all other arms of the United Nations to support. That
is why we support the vision and themes underpinning
the Secretary-General’s sustaining peace proposals and
his peace and security architecture reforms.
Thirdly, we must improve performance, and
strengthen accountability for underperformance. There
needs to be a better match between the capacity of the
troops and the tasks that they are asked to perform. That
requires the Department for Peacekeeping Operations
to reinforce work on force generation, training,
performance monitoring and, indeed, evaluation. It also
requires Member States to deliver the capabilities that
they have committed. We must continue to recognize
the essential role of women in ensuring the successful
delivery of peacekeeping, and engage more women in
all components of all missions.
Above all, we must stop sexual exploitation and
abuse by those sent to protect civilians, and we must
offer real protection for women, children and all
vulnerable communities, as Ms. Touré highlighted in
her contribution this morning. Furthermore, addressing
conflict-related sexual violence is equally crucial. The
United Kingdom plans to host an international meeting
in 2019 marking progress made and the next steps to take
since the Global Summit on Ending Sexual Violence in
Conflict was held five years ago. Although we welcome
the progress made, in particular the United Nations new
victim-centred approach, too many incidents of concern
across the United Nations system remain.
Through the leadership of the Secretary-General,
we have an opportunity to make United Nations
peacekeeping fit for our times. It is the responsibility
of all of us to work together to seize that opportunity.
That means the Council, the Secretariat, regional and
subregional bodies, host States and those who provide
troops, police and financing. Let us not forget that
those United Nations peacekeepers, under the banner
of the United Nations, act in the name of each and every
one of us. It is therefore our responsibility to ensure
that they embody the ideals of the Charter of the United
Nations because, through them, we ultimately unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
convey our gratitude for the holding of this debate and
especially welcome your participation in and contribution
to the debate, Mr. Prime Minister. We are also grateful

S/PV. 8218

for the presence of other high-level authorities, and we
welcome the briefings by Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Ms. Fatimata Touré, Director of Groupe de recherche,
d’étude et de formation femme-action. In particular,
we would like to highlight the vision and leadership
of Secretary-General António Guterres at the helm of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
As a country, Peru is committed to those
operations. We have contributed troops since 1958, and
we currently have a presence in six countries, including
an engineering unit in the Central African Republic.
We believe that the Blue Helmets are essential to
the protection of civilians and advancing transitions
leading towards achieving sustainable peace in the 15
countries in which they are currently deployed. We pay
special tribute to the soldiers of more than 110 countries
committed to that noble mission.
We believe that the current discussion is
important inasmuch as it relates to the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations in circumstances in which
they must respond to increasingly complex mandates,
including in situations in which there is really no peace
to maintain. In that regard, we must first consider that
the cost of peacekeeping is typically nominal compared
to the costs associated with war and its destruction, and
that successfully maintaining peace requires a firm and
supportive international consensus that begins in the
Security Council and must be translated into concrete
operational capacities. That requires mandates with
precise goals, coherent strategies and sufficient
financial and logistic resources, which in turn means
that their mandates, and the international community’s
general approach to peacekeeping operations must be
periodically reviewed and updated by the Council. In
that vein, we would like to highlight four points.
First, it is necessary to clearly define the goals
and functions of troop-contributing countries so
as to increase the effectiveness of operations. The
Organization must be able to raise the standards of its
peacekeeping operations as they relate to emergency
situations and specific needs. To that end, fluid
dialogue relating to policy and operational dimensions
needs to be maintained among the Council, troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat. Specifically,
as set out in resolution 2378 (2017), we believe that
it is necessary to move forward in establishing rapid
deployment mechanisms, training troops and using
modern technology and specialized capacities. The

18-0878919/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

increase in women’s participation and leadership is also
an important development.
Secondly, it is crucial to adapt peacekeeping
operations strategies to their contexts on a case-bycase basis. The Organization must clearly determine
the viability and validity of a given mandate based
on developments on the ground. In that regard, we
underscore that two conditions — the consent and
cooperation of the host State, and the existence of a
real political process — must first be met. In addition
to that, the Organization must provide an adequate
assessment of the risks associated with and the causes
underlying the conflict. It is also desirable to generate
synergies with countries bordering the country hosting
the mission so as to prevent cross-border trafficking
that sometimes fuel the conflict.
Moreover, peacekeeping operations must be able
to depend upon capacities involving intelligence and
exercising influence upon their interlocutors on the
ground. The use of general and specific sanctions has
proven to be effective, but in certain cases it can be
complemented with other measures involving political
pressures. It is important to explore the best forms of
complementarity involving military forces or regional
coalitions in order to determine the best course of
action. Such participation should be complemented
financially by the Organization.
Thirdly, it is necessary to ensure the security
of peacekeeping operations. The number of Blue
Helmets who have recently lost their lives in the line
of duty is unacceptable. Together with the Secretariat,
Peru considers that to be a priority issue that must
be addressed by the immediate implementation of a
plan of action covering training and early warning.
In line with the report authored by former United
Nations Force Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security
of United Nations peacekeepers, and the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809), we believe that it is essential to
analyse the environment to which a given unit will be
sent, and to provide it with the corresponding resources
and training. Its credibility and, ultimately, ability to
fulfil its mandate depend on that. In that connection,
we commend the important work of the SecretaryGeneral in preventing and firmly and decisively
addressing all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations.
20/86

28/03/2018

Lastly, it is necessary to align peacekeeping
operations with peacebuilding efforts with the general
goal and the process of achieving sustainable peace,
aimed at ensuring the orderly transition to stable
and safe environments, respect for human rights and
sustainable development. It is therefore important that
the Council maintain close cooperation with troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat, as well as the
Peacebuilding Commission. Peacekeeping operations
must do the same on the ground, while working with
various national stakeholders and the United Nations
country team.
We would like to conclude by recalling the words
of former Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar
upon receiving the first Nobel Peace Prize on behalf
of peacekeeping operations. He said then that they
symbolize the international community’s will to bring
about peace and represent the impartial and practical
manifestation of that will.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the presidency
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands for organizing
this high-level debate on peacekeeping operations and
for building on the momentum generated over recent
years on the reform agenda. We are pleased to see you,
Mr. Prime Minister, presiding over this meeting, which
demonstrates the importance that your country attaches
to reforming and strengthening the role of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing,
as well as for his leadership on the issue. Allow me to
say how grateful we are for his statement today, which
was frank, incisive and comprehensive. He has said all
that needs to be said. It is a must-read statement indeed.
We are also pleased that Chairperson Moussa Faki
Mahamat was able to join us via video-teleconference,
and we thank him for his remarks. We are proud of
what he has been doing to revitalize the African Union
Commission. Let me take this opportunity to express
how pleased we are to see the excellent cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
under their respective new leadership.
We also thank Ms. Fatimata Touré for her remarks.
The Security Council mission was in Mali and two
other countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel in
October last year. We therefore had the opportunity to
appreciate the deep concern she expressed and shared
with us. We thank her.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We all agree that United Nations peacekeeping
operations are one of the most important tools that we
have in the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security. That is why we continue to attach
great importance to United Nations peacekeeping. But
at the same time, we know that the peace and security
challenges we face today are by far different from
those we faced in the early days of United Nations
peacekeeping. That is why there is a need to change and
adapt to the new reality in order to be able to effectively
respond to the challenges and threats of our time.
Of course, the discussion on the reform of United
Nations peacekeeping has been ongoing for more
than two years now. There are many good ideas and
recommendations that have been generated through
those discussions. It therefore seems to us, as was also
alluded to by the Secretary-General, that now is the
time to prioritize implementation. What matters most
is taking practical steps to move the reform process
forward. It is vitally important that we avoid getting
bogged down in the same old discussions, some of
which have been with us since the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), issued more 17 years ago. We thank the
Secretary-General for making the reform agenda his
top priority and for the important measures that he is
taking in that regard. That was manifest in his statement
today. Let me now raise a couple of issues.
We agree that there is a need to change our mindset
for the reform process to succeed. That is absolutely
important. Part of the new way of thinking should be
that reform of United Nations peacekeeping requires
the involvement of everybody. Therefore, the idea of a
shared responsibility involving all actors — including
host nations, regional organizations, the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat — is very critical. That should be
front and centre in the whole reform process because
there is a great need to alter the tendency, which is
often apparent, to look at reform only from a narrow
perspective. It is vitally important that this tendency be
avoided and discarded.
We very much appreciate that there is a lot going on
at the moment in terms of reforms, which is not limited
to peace and security. What is involved is a reform
process that is system-wide, encompassing management
and development reforms as well. We certainly see a lot
of synergy among all those reform processes, and we
understand the enormous significance that they have in
avoiding fragmentation and ensuring a holistic approach

S/PV. 8218

to addressing peace and security threats and challenges
across the whole conflict cycle, from prevention and
resolution to peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
That said, however, we understand that it is
practically impossible to implement those reforms all
at the same time and in one go, and we see value in
prioritization. Taking the incremental approach in
undertaking those reforms will have a better chance of
delivering the desired result. As recommended by the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/466), the Secretariat should be
much more field-focused. While appreciating the bold
steps that are being proposed to reduce bureaucratic
barriers and ensure greater efficiency, we should be
careful not to make the reform process too centred on
structures and processes at the Headquarters, without
having much impact in the field. Here again, propositions
and visions have been laid out in a convincing manner.
What remains is implementation on the ground in an
equally convincing manner.
Peacekeepers can only be expected to effectively
deliver on their mandate of protecting civilians, while
ensuring their own safety and security, if they are
provided with the necessary resources and capabilities,
which are matched with the needs and requirements on
the ground. Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat rightly
stressed that point. The issue of performance and
accountability can be meaningfully addressed if those
necessary conditions are fulfilled. That is in no way
meant to understate the value of ensuring accountability
and compliance with the required standard of
performance. It is rather a call for balanced judgment
and objectivity. It is very obvious that we have yet to
address that challenge. That, at any rate, is the view
of troop- and police-contributing countries. We are
hopeful that the ongoing reform will seriously address
the challenge, which is critical to the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping.
The other important point that should also be
emphasized is the need for global-regional partnerships,
which are no longer a matter of choice, but one of
necessity. That has been a topic of discussion here in
the Council, and it is encouraging to note that there
is now greater appreciation of that important reality.
Such partnerships are no doubt instrumental, not only
in enhancing the responsiveness of the United Nations
in addressing conflict situations, but also in ensuring
greater efficiency and effectiveness. We are pleased that
the Secretary-General has attached great importance

18-0878921/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to the issue and is already taking important steps to
significantly enhance the partnership, for obvious
reasons, with the African Union.
Those important reforms cannot be carried out
without bringing all Member States on board. That
is no doubt frustrating, as building the necessary
consensus is never easy, but it is indispensable and
without alternative. It is, however, undeniable that at
present summoning the needed political will is bound
to be difficult, though not unachievable. It is doable
because it is in the common interest of all to ensure that
the reforms succeed, including those involving peace
operations. But that is going to require every effort
to be made to build trust and a spirit of compromise
among Member States. That is why there is need to
work in close consultation and partnership with troopcontributing countries and other relevant stakeholders.
As one of the leading troop-contributing countries,
we definitely attach great importance to strengthening
the United Nations peace operations in all their aspects.
Our long-standing contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping operations is because of our history
dictated by a strong conviction in multilateralism
and collective security. That can be attested to by
our track record over the past 70 years, as well as the
performance of the thousands of our peacekeepers who
are currently operating in some of the most volatile
conflict situations, making sacrifices for the cause of
regional and international peace and security.
I wish to conclude by reaffirming Ethiopia’s
commitment to continuing to play an active role in
enhancing the role of United Nations peacekeeping.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate and for preparing the
concept note (S/2018/184, annex) to that end. I would
also like to thank His Excellency the Secretary-General
for his valuable briefing, as well as His Excellency
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, and Ms. Fatimata Touré for
their briefings.
Out of our sense of responsibility with regard to
peacekeeping, and based on our previous experience
as a troop-contributing country (TCC) and a host
for 12 years to the successful United Nations IraqKuwait Observation Mission, whose mandate ended
in 2003 — and Kuwait funded two-thirds of its
budget during the whole period — we would like to
22/86

28/03/2018

focus our statement on improving the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations through four aspects.
First is shared responsibility. Peacekeeping
operations require coordination among the relevant
parties and United Nations organs, which in turn
requires addressing the pressing needs on the ground.
In order to do so, we use peacekeeping operations,
one of the most United Nations effective means for
maintaining peace and security. When we speak of
the three principles of peacekeeping — the consent of
the parties, impartiality and the use of force solely for
self-defence — we must begin with the cornerstone,
which is the perspective of the host country. It is the
party that must be consulted throughout the phases of a
mandate, from its formulation to full implementation,
and including its extension and review.
The triangular cooperation, consultation and
coordination that has been initiated by the Security
Council mechanism with the TCCs and the Secretariat
is another necessary way of ensuring cooperation with
TCCs and hearing their concerns and perspectives
throughout the various phases of a peacekeeping
mandate. In addition to that, the note by the President
on the Security Council’s methods of work (S/2017/507)
provides guidance on coordinating with TCCs.
The second aspect is current challenges. Last year’s
debates on peacekeeping operations provided us with
many ideas and visions, most recently in December in
this Chamber (see S/PV.8150), when Council members
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations addressed the issue of the ongoing provision
to peacekeeping missions of the information they need
in order to gain a clear understanding of the threats
that they and civilians face, in addition to addressing
the gaps in the military and civil requirements of
peacekeeping in the areas of training, equipment, skills
and language.
The cooperation of TCCs in sharing experiences
and in capacity-building throughout the various stages
of troop deployment can help to ensure coherence
and coordination in dealing with challenges faced by
peacekeeping. Kuwait supports all actions and efforts
of the Secretary-General to improve the performance
and efficiency of peacekeeping operations and
address deficiencies that present obstacles to the
full implementation of peacekeeping mandates. We
appreciate the deep sense of responsibility that the
Secretariat has demonstrated and its in-depth study of
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

performance, as well as the current action plan, set out
in the Cruz report, for addressing the increasing number
of fatalities in peacekeeping operations. We highly
commend the peacekeepers who sacrificed their lives
to maintain peace and protect civilians everywhere.
The third aspect is external factors affecting
peacekeeping
operations.
The
changes
that
peacekeeping operations are dealing with are not
limited to coordination or addressing challenges
during deployment. They also include adapting the
principles of peacekeeping, such as the use of force in
self-defence and defence of the mandate, to the increase
in threats that do not respect the United Nations
flag and the protection it provides, as the SecretaryGeneral mentioned. Addressing external factors and
cross-border challenges with their implications for
peacekeeping operations, such as climate change,
migration, displacement, increased conflicts and
greater needs, requires a whole-of-mission approach
that addresses the root causes of conflict, achieves
sustained peace and ensures the non-recurrence of
conflict. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
importance of the Secretariat’s ongoing strategic
reviews of peacekeeping operations, which are a tool
that the Council must use in order to adapt to changes
that Member States cannot control.
Fourth is regional cooperation. Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations provides us
with an effective tool for cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, particularly when
deployment of peacekeeping troops requires the
participation of neighbouring countries, as we have
witnessed in a number of missions in Africa. Regional
cooperation is not limited to mobilizing and deploying
forces. It also requires the participation of the parties
concerned, starting with the host country, in the phases
of formulating and reviewing a mandate, the emergence
of challenges and changes before a situation escalates.
In conclusion, the aforementioned factors and
challenges require clear and flexible mandates that can
give peacekeepers the ability to adapt to changes on the
ground and to the level of threats that they face, and
ensure that operations can function properly without
being indefinitely extended while at the same time
failing to achieve their mandated goals. We must take
the initiative and draw on the Council’s reports, reviews,
experiences and recommendations accumulated over
more than a quarter of a century. We reiterate our
appreciation to the Kingdom of the Netherlands for

S/PV. 8218

raising this topic today, with the aim of listening to
the views of the greatest possible number of Member
States on ways to improving peacekeeping, which has
been one of the Council’s most important tools over
more than 70 years of maintaining international peace
and security.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s meeting on collective action to
improve United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We thank Secretary-General Guterres, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and Director Fatimata Touré for
their briefings.
We support the Secretary-General’s focus on
improving the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and his emphasis on
the importance of achieving political solutions to
conflicts. Indeed, the main task of the United Nations
peacekeeping presence is assisting the parties in
reaching political agreements on peaceful settlements
and ensuring that they are implemented as quickly as
possible. In the absence of progress on the political
track, missions can remain in countries for years. Of
course, United Nations peacekeeping initiatives need to
be adapted to the realities of today. They are deployed
in difficult and dangerous conditions and increasingly
in situations of domestic political crisis, compounded
by grave humanitarian and socioeconomic situations.
The most acute challenges of all are those presented by
transborder issues such as the movement of weapons,
organized crime, terrorism and drug trafficking.
However, even under such difficult circumstances
it is crucial to respect the Charter of the United Nations
and the core principles of peacekeeping — the consent
of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in self-defence and to protect the mandate. In
our view, the increasingly frequent proposals that have
lately been made to interpret them flexibly or revise
them are pernicious. That particularly applies to calls
to replace the ideology behind the implementation of
peacekeeping operations with so-called proactive and
robust peacekeeping and give Blue Helmets the right
to the first use of force. It is extremely doubtful that
such an approach can facilitate the desired goal, which
is reducing the number of deaths among peacekeepers.
On the contrary, it runs a high risk of producing the
opposite effect. If the Blue Helmets’ neutral authority
is undermined, it can turn them into active participants

18-0878923/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in conflicts, with an inevitable increase in the number
of clashes with opponents and therefore the numbers of
victims. Robust mandates cannot become routine and
must be finely calibrated for each individual situation
where they are deemed truly necessary, especially
considering that the experience available so far of
granting peacekeepers extra powers, for example in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mali, has not
yet convinced us that the results on the ground fully
justify the sacrifices by the peacekeepers in those
operations. More than anything, we believe that the
greatest potential for increasing peacekeepers’ safety
lies in strengthening their professional training and
their material and technical equipment.
The principle of impartiality is also key, including
in the context of implementing mandates for the
protection of civilians. Peacekeepers should never, on
any pretext, however well-meaning, side with one or
another party to a conflict, let alone cite any non-United
Nations principles that might permit the possible use of
force with regard to a host State.
The overall success of United Nations peacekeeping
activities, as well as of each individual mission, depends
largely on the coherence of the efforts of the participants
involved in the process, above all the Security Council,
the Secretariat, the troop-contributing countries
and the host States. In that regard, it is important to
ensure not only that each link in the chain carries out
its responsibilities conscientiously but also that the
collaboration between each of those links is effective,
confidential and transparent.
As always, the Organization’s new peacekeeping
challenges demand comprehensive discussion and
consideration on the part of Member States and the
Secretariat with a view to coming up with consistent,
balanced approaches, dealing with the fragmented
nature of the political and legal frameworks,
developing relevant doctrines and producing normative
documents in good time and based on analysis of
accumulated experience. In that connection, it is
important to ensure that any reform of United Nations
peacekeeping activities is carried out in strict accord
with the decisions of Member States. Any arbitrary
interpretation, as there has been with the concept of
information gathering and analysis for intelligence in
peacekeeping, could have a negative impact on Member
States’ interaction with the Secretariat and could also
risk damaging the credibility of the United Nations in
the conduct of peacekeeping operations.
24/86

28/03/2018

In our view, using intelligence for implementing
a peacekeeping operation’s activities is something
that should be done based solely on the Charter of
the United Nations and with the consent of the host
Government, and only for the clearly defined and
limited legitimate purposes of ensuring peacekeepers’
safety and protecting civilians. Any use of intelligence
flexibly or for political purposes, including fulfilling
a mandate’s political tasks, is unacceptable. We hope
that the relevant conclusions will be drawn and that
we will soon see results. It is also extremely important
to establish constructive cooperation with host
States, since the potential success of United Nations
operations is directly dependent on it. International
assistance should support local and regional efforts, not
replace them.
Peacekeeping operations’ mandates should be
clear, realistic and fully capable of responding to
the challenges facing the United Nations and the
particular situation on the ground, with an emphasis on
addressing the specific reasons for individual conflicts,
not resolving various generic initiatives. In order to
optimize peacekeeping operations on the economic
front, it is advisable to accompany the modification
of their mandates with an emphasis on reducing these
kinds of side issues. Well-considered exit strategies
are also essential, along with plans, as needed, for
transforming peacekeeping operations into other types
of political presence or as support to United Nations
country teams’ reconstruction and development efforts.
In that regard, it is important to take account of the
views of both the host Governments and the country
teams in order to avoid distorted interpretations of
missions’ mandates or the possibility of overburdening
them, which will ultimately make their implementation
more effective.
A particularly important factor in implementing
peacekeeping operations is genuine partnership on the
part of the members of the international community.
The efforts of regional and subregional organizations
operating in their areas of responsibility, as outlined in
Chapter VIII of the Charter, have become increasingly
significant in that regard. In fact, no one has advanced
this issue further than the African Union. We believe
that it will be impossible to establish lasting peace
throughout the continent without the active efforts of
Africans themselves. It will therefore be important to
work to ensure that it is the countries of Africa that play
the major role in determining the pathways to peace
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and security in accordance with their own principle of
African solutions to African problems.
The Russian Federation has solid experience
in training peacekeepers. Russian higher education
institutions have successfully trained personnel,
including women, for African law-enforcement
bodies. Since 2000, more than 350 foreign police
peacekeepers have been trained at the United Nationscertified Preparation Centre of the All-Russia
Advanced Training Institute of Russia’s Ministry
of the Interior in Domodedovo, outside Moscow.
The military educational and scientific centre of the
Russian Federation’s combined land-based armed
forces military academy in Naro-Fominsk, as well as
our armed forces’ international anti-mine centre in
Nakhabino, are also prepared to train peacekeepers
from developing countries. We have developed a
system that includes both general and specialized
training immediately prior to deploying peacekeepers
to specific missions. We will continue to provide all
necessary assistance for strengthening the capacities of
United Nations peacekeeping.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is grateful to the presidency of the Netherlands for
convening today’s open debate, and welcomes you,
Prime Minister Rutte, to the Council. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union, for their
briefings. I have also listened carefully to the statement
by Ms. Touré.
I would first like to pay full tribute to the
peacekeepers around the world who are serving in the
cause of peace. In the 70 years of the history of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, these missions have
made an enormous contribution to the maintenance
of peace and security. In recent years, they have been
faced with more complex environments and mandates,
with ever-increasing asymmetric security risks and
peacekeeper casualties. Their continually expanding
mandates are supported by only limited resources,
and Member States and the Secretariat should work
together to help the peacekeeping operations adapt in
the light of the constantly evolving situations on the
ground. China is determined to participate actively in
the reform of the United Nations peace and security
architecture and internal management, and will work
together with all the relevant parties to improve the
ability of United Nations peacekeeping operations to
maintain world peace.

S/PV. 8218

First, it is important to adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the fundamental principles guiding our peacekeeping
operations. That is both a prerequisite of and a guarantee
that the missions can conduct their work effectively
and win the trust of host countries. It is important
to fully respect the sovereignty of host countries,
strengthen communication with them and, based on a
response to their real needs, help them achieve peace
and stability and enhance their capacity-building in
that regard. It is important to avoid arbitrarily taking
over responsibilities that fall under the purview of
national sovereignty.
Secondly, Security Council mandates must be
explicit and feasible, and have a clear focus. The
Council must give priority to political settlements,
focus on the core tasks of peacekeeping and take into
full consideration the situation on the ground, the
resources available, the capacities of troop-contributing
countries and other important factors. The priorities
and core tasks must be adjusted in a timely fashion
as the situation dictates. In due course, workable exit
strategies must be formulated, if the conditions allow
and the host countries request it. Troop-contributing
countries must be given more opportunities to take
part in the discussion as mandates are developed and
adjusted, which will also help to improve them.
Thirdly, it is important to strengthen the support
and guarantees that the Secretariat provides to
peacekeeping operations. The logistical support for
peacekeeping operations must be optimized so as to
ensure the maximum effectiveness of the resources
allocated to them. Both the Secretariat and the
peacekeeping missions should prioritize the safety and
security of peacekeepers by establishing rules in that
regard, enhancing the in-house monitoring and analysis
of the local security situation, improving early-warning
capabilities and internal information-sharing on
potential security threats and ensuring that funds and
equipment are available for the purpose. It is important
to enhance and guarantee medical capabilities,
particularly for medical treatment and evacuation
during emergencies.
Fourthly, it is crucial to enhance troopcontributing countries’ capacity-building and expand
partnerships with regional organizations. The
international community should take the real needs
of troop-contributing countries, especially when they
are developing countries, into full consideration.

18-0878925/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Their capacity-building in peacekeeping must be
strengthened. It is also important to ensure targeted
training and resources for peacekeeping operations.
Attention and support must be given to the
African Union and the other regional and subregional
organizations that are playing an important role in
the maintenance of international peace and security
in Africa. The African Union must be assisted so as
to enable it to establish an African standby force and
quick reaction force as soon as possible. China supports
African Union’s proposal on funding for United Nations
peacekeeping operations and hopes to see details on the
African Union-owned peacekeeping operations.
China has actively participated in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and has made major
contributions to them. We are the second-largest troopcontributing country among Security Council members
and the second-largest financial contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, with 2,500 Chinese
peacekeepers now deployed in 10 missions, including
those in South Sudan, Mali, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Darfur. In the face of complex security
situations and difficult natural conditions, they are
working diligently to maintain peace and protect local
civilians, and winning praise for the United Nations
and its peacekeeping operations.
China is actively honouring the commitment
that our President, Xi Jinping, announced to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We have established
a peacekeeping standby force of 8,000 troops and two
standby peacekeeping police units, and have completed
their registration in the United Nations Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System. We have sent our first
helicopter squad to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Africa and are giving the African Union
active military assistance. The China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund views peacekeeping
capacity-building as an important task, through which
it aims to assist the United Nations in enhancing the
safety and security of peacekeepers and supporting
developing countries, particularly African countries, in
building their peacekeeping capacities.
Last but not least, China is ready to work with
other Member States to further improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations so that the world can enjoy
lasting peace and universal security.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin by personally
26/86

28/03/2018

welcoming you to New York, Prime Minister Rutte, and
congratulating you on the Kingdom of the Netherlands’
excellent presidency of the Security Council for the
month of March, which is ending with this timely
initiative of convening a high-level open debate on
United Nations peacekeeping operations. I would
also like to welcome to all the ministers who have
joined us today, as well as Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Ms. Fatimata Touré, Director of Groupe de recherche,
d’étude et de formation femme-action. I thank them
both for their excellent briefings.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
today’s very important open debate, which is enabling
us to analyse and address together key aspects of the
chief responsibility of the United Nations, which is the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
that regard, my Government would like to commend
the Secretary-General for the initiatives that he is
spearheading to introduce reforms in various areas
of our Organization, particularly our peacekeeping
operations, considering that they represent one of
the key platforms of the United Nations — since it is
through them that we experience events directly, and
it is there that the United Nations focuses its main
effort and joint action to fulfil its mandates. We also
commend the members of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations for their skill and ability and
for having so ably shaped the study and in-depth review
of issues related to peacekeeping operations with a view
to achieving reform and enabling missions to carry out
their important tasks effectively and efficiently.
We would like to take this opportunity to convey
our gratitude to all the personnel of peacekeeping
operations on active service for their courage and
valour and to express our deepest condolences to the
relatives and friends of those who have paid the ultimate
sacrifice in discharging their duties.
Equatorial Guinea believes that the time is ripe to
launch reforms to bring a new dynamism to the planning
and implementation of the strategic international peace
and security architecture that the United Nations
supports, with the aim of enabling them to confront the
new challenges and trends that conflicts present today.
A careful analysis of the issues that are the focus of the
current reform efforts leads us to conclude that they
provide guidance and a more concrete, complex and
credible strategic vision capable of adapting to evolving
events and the evolving nature of conflicts.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

All of the elements and points of these reforms
represent a backbone of support for peacekeeping
operations. We recognize that the chief responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
belongs to the United Nations, as set forth in the Charter
of the United Nations, and that under the leadership
of the Security Council, peacekeeping operations are
one of the fundamental instruments available to the
United Nations in fulfilling its noble mission. The
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, as the
only body of the United Nations tasked with broadly
studying all issues related to peacekeeping operations
in all their aspects, including measures aimed at
improving the Organization’s ability to carry out those
operations, in accordance with resolution 2378 (2017),
has done its work, and we commend the quality of the
efforts to frame the reforms. We believe firmly that
their adoption and implementation will have a positive
effect on the implementation of future peacekeeping
operations and special political missions and will
improve their strategic structure and functions so that
they can act with greater coordination and flexibility
in varying conflict situations, however complex they
may be.
It is important that the parties involved in
peacekeeping and international security operations,
and all actors, honour their commitments and
responsibilities and faithfully interpret the rules set
out in the mandates, always paying close attention to
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
It should be noted and underscored that in resolving
African matters, it is necessary to carefully take into
account the customs and cultures of African ethnic
groups, their ancestral traditions for resolving disputes
and conflicts, starting with the advice of elders, tribal
chiefs and religious leaders, and youth community
associations. Those groups of traditional actors play a
very important role in resolving issues and are the basic
cells and links that can have a positive influence in
resolving any conflict affecting their community. That
creates greater trust and transparency and generating
very little criticism of missions as they discharge
their duties.
Africa’s voice must be heard and kept in mind when
designing and structuring peacekeeping operations,
since more than half of all missions are deployed on
African soil. African nations are the principal troopcontributing countries for those operations. We think
that improving communication and coordination with

S/PV. 8218

African countries is indispensable for enhancing the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. The African
Union, the regional and subregional organizations and
the countries of the regions affected are stakeholders
that should also be an integral part of the deployment
of any peacekeeping operation in Africa. It is important
that such operations collaborate and cooperate
with regional and subregional organizations. In
that connection, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
welcomes the excellent collaboration and coordination
that currently exist between the United Nations and the
African Union, between Secretary-General António
Guterres and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Mahamat.
Peacekeeping operations should not be considered
an end in themselves, but rather as a means to
reach a solution to a conflict so they can ensure a
transition to peacebuilding and later to development
and reconstruction. Therefore it is important that
peacekeeping operations be designed to support the
efforts of the host country, build capacity and strengthen
security, be self-sufficient and achieve sustainable
development. United Nations development agencies or
other organizations must also play the leading role in
such efforts.
I cannot conclude without expressing the concern
and condemnation of the Government of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea with regard to constant criminal
attacks on the staff of peacekeeping and international
security missions carried out by terrorists, armed
groups and enemies of peace. Such attacks must stop.
The Governments concerned must shoulder their
responsibility to protect peacekeeping missions, and
the violators must be brought to justice.
At the same time, Equatorial Guinea pays special
tribute to the more than 100,000 men and women who
serve and have served in peacekeeping operations and
commend them for their professionalism, dedication
and courage, especially those who have given their
lives to maintain peace and security. We encourage all
others in the field to continue to defend international
peace and security, because many children, women and
elderly people throughout the world are in despair, and
their only hope is in peacekeepers. We ask that they
continue their efforts. We are with tham.
To conclude, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reiterates its commitment to continuing to support the
efforts and initiatives of the United Nations within its

18-0878927/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

architecture for international peace and security, as
it has already done in several African conflicts and
emergency situations by donating financial support
and material goods and training staff to ensure the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the Prime
Minister of the Netherlands, His Excellency Mr. Mark
Rutte, to today’s meeting and thank the presidency
for convening today’s important meeting. We also
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres;
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat; and the civil society
representative, in her capacity as Director of the Groupe
de recherche, d’étude et de formation femme-action,
Ms. Fatimata Touré, for their briefings.
My delegation would like to begin by paying
its most sincere tribute to all men and women in
contingents in United Nations peacekeeping missions
around the world, who spare no effort in discharging
their duties and mandate. We thank the countries that
contribute troops, police, observers and civilians for
their generosity, solidarity and commitment to the
United Nations system and to countries that are plagued
by the effects of conflict and instability.
There is no doubt that the international landscape
is not static; it is undergoing tremendous change.
Persistent threats to international peace and security
from terrorist groups and transnational crime have
revealed the imperative need for peacekeeping
operations to undergo profound structural reform that
allows them to adapt more efficiently and effectively to
their respective environments.
The United Nations has received important inputs
and information and recommendation instruments to
advocate a change and improve the performance of
deployed missions and optimize the various levels of
the system’s internal decision-making and planning. We
refer to the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) and to the report
and recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), which
examined various options, mechanisms and tasks, as
well as challenges facing peace operations now.
On the other hand, the report on improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers, better known
as the Cruz report, is a relevant tool that makes a
considerable contribution to issues relating to the
security of peacekeepers and to the structural issues of
28/86

28/03/2018

peacekeeping operations, such as leadership, mindset,
equipment, and training and capability of troops.
The approaches included in the aforementioned
reports enable us to pinpoint the various priorities of
peacekeeping operations. They also identify ways to
strengthen them in order to develop a coherent and
adapable system for meeting new conflict and postconflict situations. Operations will be guided by clear,
specific and achievable mandates that are developed
in accordance with the reality on the ground, specific
action plans that avoid operational complications.
As a State that champions dialogue and mechanisms
for peaceful resolution of conflicts and disputes, Bolivia
believes that political measures are the drivers of the
new design and implementation of peace missions.
Such measures should be used to find political
solutions that will lead to sustainable and lasting peace.
Political dialogue implies learning; it requires thinking
and acknowledgement of the differences, but also of
agreements. It facilitates recovery from a crisis and can
avert the escalation of violence.
We underscore that a preventive approach,
within the framework of an in-depth, case-by-case
study, is indispensable to an appropriate design and
understanding of mandates, whatever their nature, with
regard to the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the States, promoting national ownership
and without using that approach as an intervention tool.
A technical, logistic and, above all, realistic analysis
is required to effectively and adecuately determine the
economic, human and material resources missions need
In that regard, we underscore the pressing need to
improve the institutional agility of troop deployment, as
well as in selecting the best trained and most specialized
troops to respond to the asymmetric contexts, which we
mentioned earlier. It should be noted that appropriate
levels of equipment and training for troops is not the
responsibility only of contributing countries, but also
of the Organization in general.
The constant attacks against members of
peacekeeping forces and the regrettable tolls they
take demonstrate the need to strengthen the key parts
of missions, principally those related to situational
knowledge on the ground and the capacity of units to
mobilize and react quickly, and above all to reinforce
the defence and protection measures of the camps and
the personnel themselves.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In that regard, we must take into account all
possible modalities of support for the financing of
peace operations in a sustained, predictable and flexible
manner. Those modalities must be assessed and revised
in such a way that they allow better autonomy for the
United Nations vis-à-vis countries that provide greater
support to missions, since the financial element could be
against the very purpose and objective of the missions.
It is worth noting that no peacekeeping mission
can succeed if it does not have the host country’s
support. Ongoing and fluid coordination, the exchange
of information and confidence-building mechanisms
between missions and local authorities are essential.
Finally, given that this is the last open debate in
March, I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf
of my delegation, to congratulate the delegation of the
Netherlands for the successful and efficient leadership
of the work of the Security Council during this month.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
Furthermore, I wish to inform all concerned that
we will be carrying on this open debate through the
lunch hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia.
Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I thank the presidency
of the Netherlands for convening this timely debate. I
appreciate the briefings by the Secretary-General and
other briefers.
I am honoured to speak on behalf of the 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
While noting that efforts to make United Nations
peacekeeping more effective and efficient are under
way, priority should be given to the field missions and
the people on the ground. In the light of that, ASEAN
would like to offer the following points.
First, reform should be geared towards enhancing
performance and capabilities and improving and
expediting decision-making processes in the field
missions. Secondly, in order to conclude a mission

S/PV. 8218

successfully, the budget and other resources must
match the mission’s mandates. Thirdly, the safety and
security of our peacekeepers is a shared responsibility
of us all in this body. Members of the Council may
rest assured that ASEAN will continue to promote and
support United Nations peacekeeping through ASEANled mechanisms and collective efforts.
I will now speak in my national capacity.
Indonesia has been providing peacekeeping
services for more than 60 years and since 1957 has
deployed more than 37,000 peacekeepers to various
United Nations missions. Today, Indonesia is one of the
ten largest contributors to United Nations peacekeeping,
with more than 2,650 personnel in nine missions, 83 of
whom are female peacekeepers. Last month, I visited
our troops in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, to which Indonesia contributes the greatest
number of troops. I wish to share my observation from
the ground.
First, we need to consider new ideas in protecting
civilians in conflict situations, including new measures
to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers on
the ground. Secondly, we can no longer do business
as usual. Peacekeeping missions and peacekeepers
must be well trained and well equipped, adequately
resourced and geared to win the hearts and minds of
the local community.
Since each conflict has its own dynamic, it is
important to formulate tailored capacity-building for
peacekeepers. For that reason, Indonesia established its
own peacekeeping centre in 2007 as a training ground
for Indonesian peacekeepers and a hub for peacekeeping
training centres in the region. Together, we need to find
a new way to provide cost-effective and innovative
procurement of equipment to address capability gaps in
peacekeeping missions, including the participation of
strategic industries from developing countries.
Thirdly, strong partnership and an approach
coordinated among all stakeholders must be improved.
Troop- and police-contributing countries and host States
should be given more voice in designing mandates. The
Security Council should make sure that mandates are
clear and realistic, have an achievable exit strategy,
and are focused on supporting political processes. The
Secretariat should formulate policies that are flexible
and less bureaucratic, allowing missions to perform
more effectively. We welcome the Secretary-General’s

18-0878929/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

28/03/2018

efforts in proposing a reform of the peace and security
pillar of the United Nations system.

The Secretary-General has laid this out in his reform
proposals, and he has Germany’s full support.

Fourthly, engagement with regional and subregional
organizations should be enhanced to support political
processes in peacekeeping missions, and fifthly,
we should have more women peacekeepers. I have
witnessed at first hand how women peacekeepers are
well positioned to help win the hearts and minds of the
locals and to effectively protect civilians, as well as
prevent and combat sexual exploitation and abuse.

Germany is a strong financial and political
supporter of United Nations peacekeeping. We are
helping to strengthen peacekeepers’ safety and
security, make policing a core area of peace operations,
and increase women’s role in peacekeeping. In order
to support the United Nations in crisis prevention and
follow the Secretary-General’s call for a quantum leap
in peacebuilding funding, Germany has tripled its
contributions in these areas.

As a candidate for non-permanent membership
of the Security Council in 2019-2020, Indonesia
will remain committed to being a true partner for
world peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
Mr. Maas (Germany): I wish to thank Prime
Minister Rutte for organizing this important debate on
peacekeeping. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing. I am honoured to be here
today, just days after assuming my new office.
Collective action is crucial for United Nations
peacekeeping, as it is in any other policy area. Be it
climate change, migration or economic development;
be it human rights, global health or sustaining peace
and security — we need more collective action. We
need robust multilateral institutions and at the heart of
our rules-based order, we need a strong United Nations.
Where better than in this Chamber to underline that
we need a Security Council that is united in both its
purpose and its responsibility?
The peacekeeper’s Blue Helmet stands for help
and protection. It symbolizes peace and security. For
the international community, it is a call to joint action
and shared responsibility. The more than 100,000
peacekeepers helping countries to navigate the difficult
path from conflict to peace deserve our respect, deep
gratitude and support.

Our largest United Nations deployment is in
Mali. Our Parliament agreed to provide up to 1,000
peacekeepers and high-end capabilities such as
helicopters and drones. That combined effort will
hopefully help secure lasting peace and stability in
the country itself and in the Sahel region in general.
German support in Mali, South Sudan and Lebanon,
to name just a few countries, is always embedded in a
comprehensive political strategy — both nationally and
within the European Union. As laid out in our recently
adopted coalition agreement, Germany will continue
to build on this engagement in the coming years, as
a candidate for — and hopefully a member of — the
Security Council in the biennium 2019-2020.
In conclusion, I would like to make three points.
First, we need stronger and more effective partnerships
among the United Nations and such organizations
as the African Union, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Secondly, peacekeeping is not an end in itself. It is a
tool to support political solutions. We need a coherent
political strategy, clear-sighted objectives and realistic
expectations from the start. Thirdly, peacekeeping
will only be as effective as we are willing to make
it. Missions must have the means they need to fulfil
their mandates.

The return of violent conflict has caused immense
human suffering at great social and economic cost. Just
one glaring example of this is Syria, where all too often
the Council has been unable to take decisions, or where
its decisions have not been implemented.

One more thing must be said: at times, peacekeepers
have let down the very people they had sworn to protect,
including through sexual abuse and exploitation. That
is unacceptable. There must be accountability. In order
to further improve peacekeeping, we have taken careful
note of the Secretary-General’s proposals. Our words
must now lead to action. We owe this to the people we
are entrusted with protecting.

The answer to drawn-out crisis situations can be
only a more coherent approach to sustaining peace.

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Defence of Estonia.

30/86

18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Luik (Estonia): I would like to start by saying
that United Nations peacekeeping operations have
played a unique role in securing peace and stability
globally for a very long time. We thank the Kingdom of
Netherlands for organizing today’s open debate on this
highly relevant topic.
Estonia also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
The international security environment has
significantly changed in recent times. The threats we are
facing are more complex, asymmetric and sometimes
difficult to attribute. Correspondingly, there has
been a change in the peacekeeping environment. Our
peacekeepers can rely less and less on the protection
provided by the colour blue as they are increasingly
being targeted themselves, as highlighted in the Cruz
report. At the same time, United Nations peacekeeping
missions carry greater mandates and demands: they no
longer only keep the peace, but are on the ground to build
peace, protect civilians, help address the root causes of
conflicts and assist in finding political solutions.
It is our belief that the United Nations will maintain
its leading role in bringing peace and stability to
different regions. In order to successfully continue to
do so, the United Nations needs to adapt to the new
security environment. In the light of this, we welcome
the Secretary-General’s push to reform how the United
Nations manages peacekeeping missions and the whole
peace and security pillar. Accordingly, I would like to
make a couple of more specific remarks.
First, we share the idea that Security Council
mandates for peacekeeping operations could be more
realistic and robust. The Council is the primary political
body responsible for giving guidance and consulting
with partners in the field. The Council should increase
its focus on adopting more mission-specific and tailored
mandates. Closer coordination with the United Nations
mission commanders would also help to achieve tasks
for the successful fulfilment of mandates.
Secondly, decision-making should be improved.
The United Nations could become quicker and more
flexible in addressing the dynamics of crisis areas.
To that end, we support greater delegation of power to
the field, which would help guarantee that operations
are reactive and can rapidly and effectively respond to
complex and changing circumstances on the ground.
We believe that approach would also benefit from
improved gender balance in peacekeeping.

S/PV. 8218

Thirdly, Member States have a responsibility to
provide adequate troops and capabilities to United
Nations operations. It is not by chance that the year
2017 saw the highest number of peacekeeper fatalities
from acts of violence in absolute terms in the last two
decades. We are sad witnesses to the simple fact that in
crisis areas where more than one mission is ongoing,
United Nations missions are less equipped and not as
well trained as operations led by other actors.
Also, restrictive national caveats make it more
difficult for our Blue Helmets to achieve the overall
success of the missions. Adequate training and
equipment of forces is the responsibility of all of
the States Members of the United Nations. Stronger
implementation of accountability measures and
remedial action should be adopted in order to ensure
that our troops are prepared and able to carry out the
tasks we ask them to do. It must also be noted that we
have zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse.
Fourthly and finally, I would like to underline that
creating security and stability requires cooperation
and coordination with other actors in the field who
are working towards a similar goal. In this regard, the
Government of Estonia has recently decided to deploy
troops within the French-led Operation Barkhane to
help improve stability in the Republic of Mali and the
wider Sahel. Our troops will be based in Gao, right
next to the much larger base of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. These two missions work to bring stability and
safety to the population of Mali, and it is crucial that
they continue to support each other’s efforts.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
every peacekeeping or military operation encounters
challenges. In our view, to keep pace with changes in
the field, the United Nations could focus on a couple
of key themes: tailored country- and region-specific
mandates, and better prepared forces with greater
capabilities and fewer caveats. Estonia will continue
to contribute so as to make a difference in favour of a
peaceful world and promote these ideas throughout our
bid for the non-permanent seat on the Security Council
for the biennium 2020-2021.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of National Defence of Canada.
Mr. Sajjan (Canada): I am pleased to speak on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women. Peace and
Security — an informal network of 53 interested

18-0878931/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Member States, representing all five regional groups
of the United Nations and chaired by Canada. In the
context of today’s open debate, the Group wishes to
emphasize the importance of women’s participation and
gender perspectives in United Nations peacekeeping.
As recognized by resolution 2378 (2017), women
play an indispensable role in peacekeeping. Their
participation and decision-making at all levels is key to
the operational effectiveness of missions. Experience
has shown that women bring valuable perspectives
to and increase situational awareness in missions by
accessing a greater diversity of information about
threats and conflict and help to built trust with local
communities. This supports both the safety and security
of peacekeepers and the operational effectiveness
of missions.
We therefore support calls, including the specific
targets set out in resolution 2242 (2015), to increase the
number of women in uniform and civilian women in
peacekeeping. We must redouble our efforts and engage
in new and creative thinking to resolve persistent gaps
in and structural barriers to female participation and
leadership. We recognize the importance of political
will, attitudinal change and resources for increasing the
meaningful participation of women in peacekeeping. We
encourage the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support to finalize work
on a gender strategy for Headquarters and to ensure the
implementation of targets in field missions.
Beyond increasing the number of women deployed,
greater efforts are required to mainstream gender
considerations in peacekeeping. In that regard,
peacekeeping operations need to be equipped with
appropriate gender-responsive conflict analysis and
expertise at all levels and all stages, including in the
development of mandates. Leadership in peacekeeping
operations must ensure that such experts, including
gender advisers and women protection advisers, are
provided with the access and resources needed to fulfil
their critical tasks.
Lastly, we condemn in the strongest terms cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping
operations and in international assistance. Recent
allegations across the United Nations have reinforced
the need for a system-wide approach. We welcome the
recent initiatives of the Secretary-General, including
the appointment of a sexual exploitation and abuse
Victims’ Rights Advocate and field-based victims’
32/86

28/03/2018

rights advocates, and we welcome efforts to combat
sexual harassment.
Yet, much more still needs to be done to ensure
accountability and fundamentally reconfigure our
collective approach to make responses victim-centred.
We encourage the Secretary-General to ensure that
common standards are developed and implemented
across all United Nations entities and shared with
implementing partners to better prevent and respond to
sexual exploitation and abuse. Both the United Nations
and Member States must play their part. Allow me to
now make a few remarks about women in peacekeeping
and security in my national capacity.
Canada views the participation of women in all
aspects of peacekeeping as essential to mission success.
Yet, despite that reality, the United Nations and its
Member States have repeatedly failed to reach targets
set for the deployment of women. The time for change
is now and we must be bold. Recently, Canada launched
the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace Operations, an
innovative and multilateral pilot initiative to design,
implement and evaluate a combination of measures
to overcome barriers to women’s deployment to
United Nations peace operations and to support their
effectiveness once on missions. Last month, Canada
hosted representatives from Member States, the United
Nations, civil society and academia for a design
workshop on the Elsie Initiative. Canada has also
formed a contact group to conduct advocacy in the
United Nations system with regard to the representation
of women in United Nations peace operations to help
us develop and implement the five-year pilot initiative.
Peacekeeping operations play a life-saving role
in the protection of the most vulnerable, including
children. Canada believes that there is much more
we can do to enhance child protection. As many of
those present know, Canada developed the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of
the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. Canada
launched this initiative last November, in partnership
with retired General Roméo Dallaire. It seeks to identify
early warning signs, take action to end recruitment and
promote the reporting of abuses and grave violations
against children. Since their launch five months ago,
the Vancouver Principles have already been endorsed
by 62 Member States. In the coming year, Canada will
convene the endorsing States, the United Nations and
members of the child protection community to develop
practical implementation guidance for those principles.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Each of the initiatives I have mentioned reflects
Canada’s understanding that we must do peacekeeping
differently and in a way that reflects the present day
realities of conflict. For decades, peacekeeping has
helped to prevent violence, preserve peace and provide
protection to millions of vulnerable people affected by
conflicts. Moreover, as my Prime Minister has said,
peacekeeping operations are important for us not only
because they allow us to assist millions of vulnerable
people in conflict zones, but also because a peaceful
world is a more secure world for Canada.
What we have seen over the past 25 years, however,
are mandates that are more complex and that demand
more and more from both our personnel and systems
of responding. Though the peacekeeping community
has been adapting and incorporating lessons learned,
it is imperative that we continuously adapt, innovate
and respond to new challenges. We must identify the
root causes of conflict and the grievances that fuel it.
In short, we must do peacekeeping differently, better
and together.
There is so much analysis and reporting and so
many initiatives under way that encourage us to look
at peacekeeping in a comprehensive manner. Canada
commends the leadership of the Secretary-General and
his reform efforts across all pillars, which recognize
that sustaining peace remains at the heart of what
we do. We also welcome the important work that
the United Nations is undertaking on enhancing the
safety and security of our peacekeepers. Lieutenant
General Santos Cruz and his team have delivered frank
assessments and honest advice. The mantle now lies
with us.
As Members of the United Nations, whether as
host nations or as troop, police, financial or equipment
contributors, we all have an essential role to play. That
is why Canada is proud to chair the Working Group
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
This year, the Committee completed one of its most
compelling negotiations, during which it brought
together the voices of troop and police contributors
to discuss various major efforts to improve the way
we deliver peacekeeping. That is also why, during
the Vancouver Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Conference in November, Canada convened 80 Member
States and five international organizations to do just
that. In the lead up to and during the Conference, we
examined how we could collectively ensure greater
safety for at-risk populations. We explored early

S/PV. 8218

warning and rapid deployment, smart pledges, training
and capacity-building. Forty-eight new peacekeeping
pledges were made, significantly enhancing the
United Nations peacekeeping capabilities. Following
the Vancouver Ministerial Conference, Canada
remains steadfast in its continued commitment to and
engagement in United Nations peacekeeping.
To that end, Canada has begun deploying key
enablers and military capabilities that leverage
Canadian expertise. Those are aimed at giving the
United Nations the smart and flexible tools it needs to
enhance performance and operational effectiveness.
Last November, we committed a C-130 Hercules
aircraft to provide tactical airlift support for the United
Nations Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, and
preparations for deployment are currently under way.
That contribution speaks to our support in helping to
enable the United Nations rapid deployment capacities
and effective delivery in the field.
Last week, Canada committed an air task force
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). That
contribution will include Chinook helicopters to
provide urgently needed transport and logistics
capacity and Griffon helicopters to provide armed
escort and protection. We look forward to joining the
57 MINUSMA partner countries in our collective
efforts to bring sustainable peace and stability to Mali
and the Sahel.
In conclusion, Canada is convinced that, when
properly mandated, resourced and supported,
peacekeeping remains one of the most flexible and
effective tools available to the international community
in responding to crises. We welcome this open debate
as an opportunity to further develop our collective
thinking on how to respond to key challenges in the
years ahead. All of us share that responsibility.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor and deliver this
statement on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
At the outset, we wish to convey, on behalf of
the States members of the Movement, our respect to
His Excellency Mr. Mark Rutte, Prime Minister of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands, and to express our

18-0878933/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

gratitude to his delegation for convening this high-level
open debate on such an important issue. We are also
grateful for the concept note (S/2018/184, annex) that
has been circulated to guide our discussions today.
We also take this opportunity to recognize the
diligence with which the delegation of the State of
Kuwait, a member State of the Movement, presided
over this organ during the brief but intense month
of February.
In addition, we thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
Ms. Fatimata Touré for their valuable briefings.
Anything that concerns improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is a matter of vital importance to the
Non-Aligned Movement, in view of the fact that
88 per cent of peacekeeping personnel deployed on the
ground come from non-aligned countries. Throughout
our statement in this open debate, we will therefore
emphasize the need for effective triangular consultations,
or rather a renewed and revitalized alliance of shared
responsibility among the Security Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat, in
order to perform objective assessments and harness the
potential of peacekeeping mandates and operations.
Such an alliance could result, among other things,
in the formulation of clear and viable mandates that
reflect the scale of existing challenges on the ground,
but only if such cooperation is continuous, substantive,
representative and meaningful, including before the
renewal of mandates.
In that regard, the action plan resulting from
the Santos Cruz report on improving the security of
United Nations peacekeepers, of which we take note,
provides a good basis for jointly responding to issues
of concern and the common challenges we face, as
well as for defining a long-term strategy, ensuring that
peacekeeping operations can address the realities on
the ground.
The States members of the Movement reiterate their
commitment to promoting the peaceful settlement of
disputes, in accordance with the provisions of Article
2 and Chapter IV of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as with all relevant United Nations resolutions
and international law as a whole, in order to contribute
to strengthening international peace and security and
to save future generations from the scourge of war
and armed conflict, including by strengthening the
34/86

28/03/2018

role of the United Nations in the peaceful resolution
of disputes, the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
the promotion of trust, national reconciliation and postconflict peacebuilding, rehabilitation, reconstruction
and development.
While there is agreement on the fundamental role
that United Nations peacekeeping operations have
played in achieving security and sustaining peace,
as indicated in the concept note (S/2018/184, annex),
we emphasize that, in the context of an integrated
approach and with the objective of lasting peace and
security, the implementation of all mandated tasks
must be supported and accompanied by an inclusive,
parallel and comprehensive political peacekeeping
process that is well planned and carefully designed,
based on national ownership and the support of the
international community, as well as the consent and
adherence of the parties concerned. In other words,
peacekeeping operations should not be used as an
alternative to addressing the root causes of conflicts or
to manage conflicts.
It is worth noting that during the seventeenth
Summit of the Movement, held in 2016 in Venezuela,
our Heads of State and Government reaffirmed their
principled position on peacekeeping operations,
which must be carried out in strict compliance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. They also stressed that respect for
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of States, as well as non-interference
in internal affairs, are fundamental elements of joint
efforts to promote international peace and security.
In doing so, they reiterated that respect for the basic
principles of peacekeeping — primarily the consent of
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
cases of self-defence and defence of the mandate — is
essential to the success of peacekeeping operations.
As reflected in the Santos Cruz report, performance
affects the security of peacekeeping personnel.
However, when dealing with the issue of performance,
it is the performance of missions as a whole, and not
only that of their contingents, that should be evaluated.
Guaranteeing the effective implementation of mission
mandates is the responsibility of the interested
parties and is subject to a variety of critical factors,
including but not limited to viable, realistic and welldefined mandates; political willingness, leadership,
performance and accountability at all levels; sufficient
financial and human resources; and policies, planning,
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

guidelines and operational training. In addition, we
reiterate our support for the Secretary-General’s zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
In addition, the States members of the Movement
reiterate the importance that they attach to discussion
and the reports of the annual substantive session of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which
is the only forum of the United Nations with a mandate
to thoroughly consider every aspect of the issue of
peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, we wish to state that the safety of
United Nations mission personnel remains a matter of
concern. We categorically condemn all attacks and acts
of violence against peacekeepers, which saw a notable
increase last year. Likewise, we call for all necessary
measures to be taken to ensure that those responsible
for such attacks are held accountable and brought to
justice. In that regard, we, the 120 members of the
Non-Aligned Movement, take this opportunity to pay
tribute to and recognize the important work carried out
by all peacekeeping personnel, men and women alike,
who work in armed conflicts and, in many cases, in
adverse conditions on the ground, risking their lives
on a daily basis. We extend our sincere appreciation to
all of them, including those who have lost their lives
in operations on the ground, defending the flag of the
United Nations and the cause of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on a successful presidency and on
choosing this very timely and important subject as the
theme of this open debate, at a time when peace and its
keepers are facing difficult challenges.
Lebanon and the United Nations have been strategic
partners regarding the question of peacekeeping for
almost half a century, through the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). That interim
period has lasted 40 years. The mandate of UNIFIL,
as members of the Council are aware, is based on
resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) and resolution
1701 (2006). Today, UNIFIL has 10,500 troops from 41
countries, making it one of the largest United Nations
peacekeeping operations around the world. Moreover,
the Lebanese Government committed 15,000 troops in
2006 to be deployed in southern Lebanon for the first
time in 30 years.

S/PV. 8218

In your concept note (S/2018/184, annex),
Mr. President, you ask what host nations can do to help
peacekeepers. I will answer that question by talking
about the strategic relationship between Lebanon and
UNIFIL. However, first allow me, on behalf of Lebanon,
to say that we are very grateful to UNIFIL and every
single country, many of which are represented around
this table and in this Chamber, for their participation
in the peacekeeping Mission. UNIFIL has lost 312
soldiers since 1978, and Lebanon will always be
indebted and humbled by the sacrifice of the families
of those soldiers and their countries.
The partnership between the Lebanese Armed
Forces (LAF) and UNIFIL has been consolidated
and cemented since 2006, when the Lebanese army’s
fifth brigade deployed in the south to extend the
Government’s authority and ensure security and
stability in the region. LAF and UNIFIL soldiers do
routine patrols and work in close coordination on all
issues related to security and stability in the area of
operations. While the situation on the border is fragile,
that partnership has helped to establish a new strategic
environment in the south and, although it is not perfect,
there is calm on the Blue Line. UNIFIL conducts
land and maritime joint exercises with the LAF and
contributes to mine clearing and mine awareness and
education for local populations.
There are vital requirements for a host country
to support and strengthen peacekeeping forces. I will
now detail five of those requirements that the Lebanese
Government has been fulfilling:
First, since the adoption of resolution 2373
(2017), the Lebanese Government has been working
on establishing a model regiment to deploy in the
south to further enhance the Lebanese Government’s
security presence in the area. The Rome conference
was a concrete example of the Lebanese Government’s
commitment to strengthening its national military and
security forces. That enables the Government to exert
control over and assume responsibility for security in
the country and ease the burden of peacekeepers.
Secondly, the Lebanese Government has shown
strong will, resolve and unparalleled commitment to
ensuring that UNIFIL succeeds in its mission.
Thirdly, Lebanese officials express their support for
UNIFIL through the Lebanese Government’s repeated
public statements of support regarding resolution 1701
(2006) and its full implementation, with visits of high-

18-0878935/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

level officials to UNIFIL’s headquarters and area
of operations.
Fourthly, communication and good relations with
the local population are equally important for the
success of a peacekeeping operation, and Lebanon
encourages such relationships. UNIFIL helps the local
civilian population through many projects, such as
quick impact projects, which address the most pressing
needs of the population
Fifthly, one of the most strategically vital roles
of a peacekeeping force is prevention. In that regard,
Lebanon and the United Nations, through the Tripartite
Committee, have been able to diffuse tension, solve
problems, de-escalate and avoid conflict in southern
Lebanon on an almost daily basis.
Twelve years after the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006), we have seen no sign of progress on reaching
a permanent ceasefire, solving the underlying political
problems in the region, such as Israeli withdrawal from
the occupied Lebanese territory, or halting its daily
violations of Lebanese sovereignty by land, air and
sea. We in Lebanon are encouraged by the SecretaryGeneral’s peace and security architecture reform and
support his endeavours, but what is needed is action
from the Security Council that solves the political
problems and tackles the root causes of issues. Openended peacekeeping operations do not end conflicts;
implementing United Nations resolutions does.
The Security Council has to shoulder its responsibility
and end the gridlock that has characterized its work
for the past few years. Peacebuilding, prevention and
coalescing around the will of a Security Council that
works for permanent solutions and not security band
aids is what will make durable peace a reality around
the world, especially in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): The role of peacekeeping
operations has evolved dramatically over the years.
High expectations, coupled with greater resource
constraints, have accentuated the difficulties missions
face and have sometimes created frustration about the
ability of peacekeeping operations to achieve their
objectives. Brazil continues to believe in the capacity of
United Nations peacekeeping operations to contribute
significantly to the successful resolution of conflicts.
However, change is required. We therefore thank you,
36/86

28/03/2018

Mr. President, for convening this debate and welcome
the Secretary-General’s effort to renew dialogue on
peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping is a unique instrument for dealing
with conflicts. We hope that the reforms proposed by
the Secretary-General will be implemented in such a
way as to strengthen peacekeeping’s integration with
other instruments in a coherent way, while recognizing
and preserving its distinctiveness.
The changes that we seek require action not only
by the Security Council, but also by other bodies
with responsibility for peacekeeping. The Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, in particular,
offers a great opportunity for Member States to
reflect upon and help strengthen, in a democratic
setting, the fundamental political consensus that
underpins peacekeeping partnerships. It should take
responsibility for giving directions and not just reacting
to predetermined decisions. During this year’s session,
the Special Committee requested the Secretariat to
develop an integrated performance policy framework
for mandate implementation, based on clear standards
for all relevant civilian and uniformed personnel. The
Special Committee has also encouraged the Secretariat
to develop a clear, comprehensive and transparent
procedure on caveats, in consultation with troop- and
police-contributing countries.
Brazil welcomes the Secretary-General’s efforts
to address the increasing number of fatalities in
peacekeeping operations, and we recognize the
important contribution of the Santos Cruz report. We
welcome its emphasis on the need to provide adequate
resources, equipment and training to peacekeepers,
particularly specialized training for specific threats.
We also agree that a sense of shared responsibility is
needed in the field. As highlighted by the Santos Cruz
report, some units deployed tend to operate in isolation
from others deployed in the same mission. By working
together, contingents will contribute to a more efficient
implementation of mandates and to decreasing the
number of fatalities suffered by peacekeepers.
Civilian leadership and personnel also need to
play a more active role in taking necessary preventive
measures to avoid casualties, including by promoting
greater situational awareness, achieving an appropriate
mission footprint and guaranteeing that logistic
decisions are needs-oriented.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The focus of the report on casualty reduction,
however, should not lead to an understanding that an
increase in the militarization of operations would be
the main way to make them more effective. Brazil
reiterates that the success of peacekeeping operations
will be determined not solely by the actions taken by
military components, but also by their capacity to
protect and sustain peace and to create an environment
conducive to long-term political solutions. The
success of peacekeeping missions also depends on
the existence of achievable mandates and, most
importantly, on the political will of regional actors and
the international community.
In our effort to improve peacekeeping, we must not
fail to recognize the contributions achieved through
that tool. The recent downsizing or closing of missions,
such as in the cases of Haiti, Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia,
where missions have created conditions conducive for
peace and security, show the positive effect that United
Nations operations continue to have, bringing hope for
a better future to millions of people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): At the outset, my delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered by Her
Excellency Minister Marsudi of Indonesia on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Today’s meeting and briefings underscore two
important points. First, the endeavour of peacekeeping
is a collective commitment and, secondly, peacekeeping
operations now deploy in increasingly complex
operating environments.

S/PV. 8218

human resources to support an effective and efficient
discharge of mandated tasks, including equipment and
other assets.
Secondly, the efficient and effective achievement
of mandate outcomes depends on the qualities and
capabilities of peacekeepers. Ensuring that peacekeepers
meet national, international and United Nations
standards is important. The Kingdom of Thailand works
towards that goal before and during deployment. It
should be everyone’s priority. Both predeployment and
in-field training require a management approach that is
systematic, as an integral part of operational planning.
Towards that end, Thailand is committed to ensuring
that all its peacekeepers, including the new horizontal
military engineering company that will soon join the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, are properly
prepared, trained and equipped in order to meet the
diverse challenges that they may face in the field.
Thirdly, developing and aligning a common
understanding among stakeholders is key to ensuring
that the mandate’s objectives are met and delivered
effectively. In that regard, we must stress the
importance of close consultations and communication
among the Security Council, host countries, troopand police-contributing countries and other relevant
agencies in a timely, appropriate and flexible manner. It
is also important that mission mandates be aligned with
and supportive of national priorities. The emphasis
should be on utilizing the existing mechanisms in
the society to build positive resilience and long-term
drivers of peace.

We congratulate the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations on its 2018 substantive
session, which has produced a meaningful draft report
(A/AC.121/2018/L.3) that touches upon the issues of
troop performance and accountability for the first time.
We wish to underline the following key elements.

Fourthly, we need stronger partnerships. Enhancing
the capacities of regional and subregional organizations
is essential. We must also ensure enhanced dialogue
among the regional and subregional organizations
and the Security Council, as well as other United
Nations bodies, in order to achieve synergy and
ensure complementarity.

First, planning is the first important step.
Peacekeeping mandates must be planned thoroughly
and be achievable, realistic, context-specific and
flexible. The careful planning of mission transition and
post-mission United Nations support should also be
in place from an early stage. It is also necessary for
all stakeholders to exchange information based on a
frank and clear situation assessment. Mandates must be
commensurate with an adequate level of financial and

Last but not least, active listening and an open
mind in seeking new ideas and being creative are
essential to ensuring that peacekeeping operations are
fit for purpose. As a concrete example of concerted
action on useful new ideas, the Kingdom of Thailand
has joined others in a Group of Friends to support the
management of the environmental footprint of field
missions throughout their life cycle. We are convinced
that a lighter footprint will allow for cost efficiencies,

18-0878937/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the improved safety and security of peacekeeping
troops and a better overall delivery of the mandate.
In conclusion, good planning, adequate resourcing
and competent personnel are imperative to the success
of any peacekeeping operation. It is our fervent hope that
we continue our efforts in that direction and continue to
share ideas and experiences in order to further improve
our collective peacekeeping action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Noke (Japan) (spoke in French): Allow me
first of all to thank the Netherlands presidency for its
initiative in organizing this timely open debate today
following the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), various
high-level meetings of Member States and discussions
in the Security Council, including the adoption of
resolution 2378 (2017).
My Government appreciates the efforts of the
Secretary-General to ensure that peacekeeping missions
can implement their mandates more effectively and
continues to support the various United Nations actions,
such as improving the security of peacekeepers,
the protection of civilians and the role of women. In
that regard,
Japan associates itself with the activities and
statements of the Group of Friends to which it belongs.
(spoke in English)
Japan also stresses that political efforts are
of the utmost importance for resolving conflicts,
as demonstrated by resolution 2406 (2018), which
renewed the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, clearly emphasizing the importance of
supporting the peace process as the Mission’s mandate.
In order for United Nations peacekeeping
operations to implement their mandates while ensuring
the safety and security of their staff in today’s complex
operational environments, peacekeepers must be
sufficiently equipped and trained. Since 2008, Japan
has supported peacekeeping centres in 13 African
countries. Furthermore, with the participation of
Brazil and Switzerland, Japan has supported the
capacity-building of United Nations peacekeepers
under the triangular partnership project of the United
Nations, troop-contributing countries and supporting
Member States.
38/86

28/03/2018

As part of that project, since 2015 Japan has
provided training in Kenya on the operation and
maintenance of heavy engineering equipment to 130
future peacekeeping engineers from five African
countries. Engineering is a critically important enabler
for the security of personnel by improving the physical
security and mobility of peacekeeping missions. The
triangular partnership project will be enhanced and
expanded to other regions and capabilities. As our
Foreign Minister, Mr. Taro Kono, said last September,
the training will be provided to countries in the IndoPacific region given that more than 30 per cent of
peacekeepers are from that region (see S/PV.8051).
Moreover, medical capabilities are essential to
safety and security. I echo the Cruz report in that regard.
Japan has already supported the United Nations in the
standardization of buddy-aid training and will support
the training of medical personnel in Africa under the
triangular partnership project.
Resolution 2378 (2017) and the corresponding
letter to the Secretary-General (S/2017/766) emphasize
the importance of effective and efficient training and
capacity-building. The triangular partnership enables
role-sharing among Member States to develop capable
peacekeepers. Japan strongly encourages Member
States to participate in the partnership. With their
involvement, such training efforts will be a sustainable
way to share our skills and experience.
With regard to training and capacity-building,
I would like to emphasize the importance of the
linkage between force generation and training and
capacity-building. The Secretariat also needs to assess
mission-specific needs for effective training and
capacity-building.
(spoke in French)
I mentioned the need for collective and concrete
actions by all stakeholders to tackle challenges
in peacekeeping. Under the banner of a proactive
contribution to peace, Japan will continue its concrete
contributions to making peacekeeping more effective
and more efficient in response to today’s challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Stener (Norway): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the five Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We warmly welcome the initiative of the Netherlands
to organize this open debate on how to strengthen
United Nations peace operations. Let me also thank the
Secretary-General for outlining his vision and proposed
timeline. I am also grateful to the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and to Ms. Fatimata Touré
for their valuable contributions today. The Nordic
countries would like to make four points.
First, the success or failure of a peace operation
is defined primarily by whether it helps to bring about
a sustainable and peaceful settlement of the conflict.
All missions must therefore be guided by a clear
political strategy. They need to have the full backing
of the Security Council, the contributing countries,
regional actors and the host nation in order to fulfil
that strategy. Consultations about when and how to
deploy an operation should involve all stakeholders,
including troop- and police-contributing countries. It is
also important to consult with regional and subregional
organizations, most notably the African Union. In
that regard, we welcome the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security as a basis for further deepening
that partnership.
Secondly, missions must be mandated, planned
and designed in response to each specific context. A
gender-sensitive and whole-of-system approach should
guide that process. Our goal should be to reduce the gap
between expectations and the ability to deliver. The new
practice of conducting independent reviews of missions
is a major step towards a more strategic approach.
Those reviews can be used by the Security Council
when drafting and revising mandates in order to ensure
that they are better prioritized and sequenced. Close
coordination among those who mandate, plan, manage
and implement operations is necessary. We welcome
this month’s agreement on guidelines to improve the
existing mechanisms of triangular cooperation, and we
call on all parties to use them actively.
Thirdly, United Nations missions must be better
adapted to the increasingly complex and high-risk
environments in which they operate. The Nordic
countries fully support the Secretary-General’s plan of
action to follow-up on the report authored by former
United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers, to address
crucial safety and security concerns. Uniformed units
must have the right training, skills and equipment

S/PV. 8218

to be able to protect themselves and deliver on their
mandate. We must collectively seek to measure and
improve performance at all levels and for all categories
of personnel. The zero-tolerance policy against
sexual exploitation and abuse must be fully respected
and implemented. We can reach those goals only by
working together.
Lastly, the Nordic countries are firm backers of the
Secretary-General’s ambition to double the number of
women peacekeepers. We support the goal of reaching
a ratio of 15 per cent women among military officers
and 20 per cent women among police officers in United
Nations operations by 2020. We strongly believe that
an increase in the number of women peacekeepers will
have a positive effect on the ability of United Nations
operations to deliver on their mandates
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of Ethiopia, Norway and my
own country, the Republic of Korea. Our three countries
are leading the group of friends of United Nations peace
operations, an informal cross-regional group dedicated
to making peace operations more fit-for-purpose. We
thank the Netherlands for convening this open debate
on such an important topic. We also join others in
thanking the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Director of Groupe
de recherche, d’étude et de formation femme-action for
their informative briefings.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), together with other
recent reports, presents a clear set of recommendations
to enhance the effectiveness of United Nations peace
operations. It is high time that all relevant actors — the
Security Council, contributing countries, regional actors,
the Secretariat and host countries — come together and
implement them in a strategic and holistic manner. For
that reason, we fully support the Secretary-General’s
action plan for peacekeeping, which mobilizes all
partners and stakeholders to support the effectiveness
of peace operations. Today, we would like to raise
five points.
First, United Nations peacekeeping operations
should better support political processes led by local
actors. Mandates should be more focused and realistic
based on an accurate and in-depth analysis by the
Secretariat of the specific context. Mandates should also

18-0878939/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

be designed as part of a broader political strategy that
considers the entire peace continuum from prevention
and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and long-term
development. The political strategy, in tandem with
the United Nations development assistance framework,
could guide efforts to determine the division of labour
among missions, United Nations country teams and
other relevant actors. The Peacebuilding Commission
is also well placed to advise the Security Council in
following up on peacebuilding components, especially
during transitions.
Secondly, we need to ensure that peacekeeping
missions operate more effectively in today’s complex
and high-risk environments. As peacekeeping casualties
have hit a historic high level, both the Secretariat and
contributing countries need to prioritize the safety and
security of peacekeepers. In that regard, we welcome
the Secretary-General’s plan of action to address
such concerns, while upholding the basic principles
of peacekeeping. The capabilities of peacekeeping
operations must also be an enhanced to better meet
their mandates. Intelligence, the introduction of
new technology and increased engagement with
local communities to ensure local ownership need to
be considered.
Thirdly, faced by multidimensional challenges,
effective
peacekeeping
requires
the
shared
responsibility of all actors, including regional
organizations, such as the African Union (AU), that
are leading many political processes. In that regard, we
welcome Secretary-General Guterres’ commitment to
strengthening the strategic partnership, especially with
the African Union, by holding the first summit-level
United Nations-AU annual conference, among others.
Fourthly, the Secretary-General’s initiative to
reform the peace and security architecture provides
a critical opportunity to strengthen peacekeeping
operations. We should ensure that ongoing reform
efforts, together with those of the management and
development system, result in a coherent holistic
approach of United Nations activities on the ground.
Lastly, the culture of dialogue should be promoted
for frank and constructive discussions on peacekeeping
among the relevant actors, including the Security
Council, contributing countries, the Secretariat and
host nations. For, when the stakes are high, walking
together becomes an imperative.
40/86

28/03/2018

Ethiopia, Norway and the Republic of Korea
together, with other friends of United Nations peace
operations, remain committed to working closely with
the Secretariat and the wider membership to identifying
solutions and facilitating dialogue to improve peace
operations in the months to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank Prime Minister Rutte
and the Netherlands for convening today’s timely
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the other
briefers whom we heard this morning.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
This year Ireland marks the sixtieth anniversary
of its contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Not one year or one month has passed since
that date without Irish troops wearing the blue helmet
abroad. It is part of who we are at the United Nations.
With 86 Irish soldiers having lost their lives in the
service of such missions, Ireland is in no doubt as to the
significance of this debate. Unfortunately, such losses
are becoming all too frequent. It is our responsibility to
determine how to prevent such sacrifices.
This is not the first time that we have considered
the issue. Previous discussions have demonstrated that,
although we are often frank about our shortcomings, we
are less adept at addressing them. Repeatedly, we have
acknowledged the disconnect between mandates and
strategic direction and between mandates and adequate
resources. For peacekeeping missions to be successful
and for peacekeepers to be safe, missions must be more
than a means for demonstrating political resolve. They
must be a meaningful tool for the attainment of peace.
Mandates must match the needs presented by the
conflict, resources must match the mandate, and they
must be reinforced by political support. Strategic
reviews of peace operations are a welcome additional
tool for ensuring that operations remain fit-forpurpose. However, we must ensure that proper analysis
is conducted at the very outset so that, from conception
to implementation, we are assured that mandates are
designed and operations resourced to meet the real
security challenges that such missions face on the
ground. Equally, we must be transparent and open
when we identify failures. Only by learning from our
mistakes and holding ourselves accountable can we
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

ensure that our words of support in this Chamber are
not hollow and that mistakes are not repeated. That goes
to the heart of the credibility of the Security Council.
The report authored by former United Nations
Force Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto
dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers, highlights the incoherence that
often exists between mandates and capabilities. That is
not a bureaucratic or theoretical concern. If we continue
to fail to act on that call, we will, as the Cruz report states,
be responsible for consciously putting our personnel
in harm’s way. Effective, focused and appropriately
resourced operations drive efficient operations. We
must ensure that our drive for efficiencies does not
blind us to that fact. Key regional partner organizations,
such as the European Union, are developing capability
platforms that could help address some of the resource
challenges that United Nations peacekeeping missions
face. Ireland is ready to work with the United Nations
in the framework of permanent, structured cooperation
to develop and utilize those tools for the benefit of all.
Effectiveness is also strengthened through the
increased participation of women as peacekeepers — an
aim to which Ireland is committed — along with doubling
female participation in our defence forces. Ireland
recently co-hosted an event in the Netherlands with
the Dutch Foreign Ministry, which focused on the
challenges that remain in addressing structural and
societal barriers to such participation. We need to listen
more to those women peacekeepers in the field to allow
us to strategically effect change. Similarly we need to
be more strategic on the issue of capacity. We all know
that training is a key issue, and many Members have
provided offers in that area. We now need to identify
where gaps continue to exist and consider how best to
address them. Now more than ever, the United Nations
needs to demonstrate that it is capable of fulfilling its
obligations. That requires developing the capacities of
those on whom we call to carry out that role.
Responding to and addressing conflict demands the
use of the widest possible range of tools and instruments
Security is just one step on the path to peace. To that
end, Ireland fully supports the Secretary-General’s
reform efforts, in particular to increase emphasis on
prevention and political strategies. The most effective
means at our disposal for the protection of our citizens
and the protection of our peacekeepers is taking action
that means they never need to be deployed.

S/PV. 8218

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Netherlands for convening this
timely high-level open debate, since it offers us the
opportunity to highlight the importance of collective
partnership in the implementation and improvement
of the mandates of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
In 2016, the number of violent conflicts in the
world was the highest in the past 30 years. The high
percentages of conflicts within States persist, resulting
in the unfortunate loss of human life, setbacks in
development levels and tensions over human rights
and the environment, among others. Moreover, the
report on deaths and injuries resulting from violence
in peacekeeping operations, presented by Lieutenant
General Santos Cruz to the Secretary-General last
December, states that in 2016 the number of such
incidents was the highest since 1994.
This time of major challenges to the performance
of peacekeeping operations on the ground and the
expectation of implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s reform proposals make it appropriate to recall
and take inventory of the recommendations from the
2015 report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) to improve peacekeeping
operations. Political options should be favoured.
Peacekeeping operations should be enabled to carry out
multidimensional preventive and peacebuilding actions.
Security, development and human rights solutions
should be channelled and the role of women in peace
underscored. Humanitarian issues should be addressed,
having communities and individuals as the ultimate
purpose of their activities throughout all phases of the
peace continuum, in partnership with relevant actors
and in close cooperation with host States.
General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Council
resolution 2282 (2016), on the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, confirmed those
recommendations and are at the centre of the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to reform the architecture and in
that way to enhance the effectiveness and coherence of
the United Nations system, including the peacekeeping
operations. Those consensuses are the centre of the
strategy to design and oversee the mandates that the
Security Council must forge to improve peacekeeping
operations. The Council must commit to constantly

18-0878941/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

reviewing the mandates to ensure that they are in line
with current needs and that the security of the members
of the operations can be guaranteed.
We echo the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral that the Security Council should be asked
to place greater emphasize on the mandates of the
peacekeeping operations being clear, realistic and up
to date, as well as having well-identified priorities and
sequential and flexible timelines, which can change and
adjust according to the realities on the ground. We hope
that, within the framework of the Secretary-General’s
review of peacekeeping operations, the Council will
consider those recommendations to improve the political
process behind the creation, updating, transitioning and
withdrawal of the operations.
The discussions in the context of this year’s
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
reaffirmed that that is the path to take, but they also
recognized that the improvement of the peacekeeping
operations still has a long way to go and goals still to
meet. The Council needs to have greater and improved
interaction with other organs of the Organization, fieldbased country teams, military- and police-contributing
countries, financial contributors, regional organizations
and recipient countries, among others, so that we can
maximize the efficiency, effectiveness and security of
their members, as well as to allocate adequate, timely
and predictable resources to operations. Without those
elements, it will be difficult for the operations to fully
and effectively fulfil their mandates and contribute to
the efficiency and image of the United Nations on the
ground.
The C-34 also showed that disagreements among
Member States regarding financial issues remains
one of the major gaps in the implementation of all the
recommendations over the past two years. That affects
the feasibility of implementing the proposals and those
contained in the United Nations action plan to reduce
fatalities due to acts of violence against peacekeeping
operations staff.
The
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
the
Peacebuilding Fund are two strategic allies of the
Council in promoting such collective action with a
strategic and coherent approach. They serve as a hinge
among the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, and generally
among the peace and security and development and
human rights pillars of the Organization, so that
42/86

28/03/2018

prevention, comprehensive approaches that address the
deep structural causes of the conflicts, mediation and
peacebuilding may be the vehicle by which we truly
achieve sustainable peace.
That is the real paradigm shift of the United Nations.
It is here in the Security Council, with all States,
that we must focus our efforts. Since 2015, Mexico
has again joined the peacekeeping operations out of
conviction and because it is aware of the contribution
we can make to sustainable peace in the world, and also
because Mexico is a stakeholder that complies with and
assumes its global responsibility. Mexico will continue
to support those operations and to join the collective
action to strengthen them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Let me begin by thanking you, Madam
President, and the delegation of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for convening this open debate. We are
also grateful for the concept note (S/2018/184, annex)
that serves as the basis for our deliberations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Italy on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
We believe in the importance of creating spaces
to discuss ways to improve the participation of all
actors in support of the Organization’s peacekeeping
operations with the understanding that this is a shared
responsibility and a strategic multilateral partnership,
especially with regard to the host States, with the
support of the Secretariat, regional organizations, the
Security Council and Member States. The latter include,
of course, troop- and police-contributing countries.
Furthermore, this open debate is quite timely,
as we are witnessing an increase in attacks on staff
of peacekeeping operations in various missions. In
following up, my delegation takes note of the report
of Lieutenant General Santos Cruz as a response
to the five most lethal years for the Organization’s
peacekeeping soldiers and police officers. The report’s
recommendations include, inter alia, instituting a
much more robust military response to armed threats,
including an eventual willingness to attack first and
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

confront the attackers where they lurk, rather than
waiting behind the walls of peacekeeping bases.
With regard to robust responses, Guatemala
reaffirms its position that the use of force must always
be the last resort, especially when acting on behalf of the
United Nations. While we fully understand the reasons
why mandates calling for more robust operations have
been developed, especially when the protection of
civilians is at stake, it is our view that such action under
the aegis of the United Nations should be carefully
considered by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations in order to analyse its scope.
It is essential for the Security Council to be clear
that one of its main responsibilities is to provide
peacekeeping operations with realistic mandates.
Given the reality on the ground, some mandates are not
always adapted to the specific context of the mission in
question and, in some cases, are not entirely obtainable.
To achieve the desired impact, the Security Council
could carry out a better analysis of the situation on the
ground and set objectives that can be met.
With regard to host countries, the Council has a key
role to play. Regrettably, the international community
has witnessed situations where host countries go back
on their agreements or violate international law and
international humanitarian law. That is unacceptable
by any standards.
In conclusion, we should recall that one of the
most powerful preventive tools is early involvement
on the part of the Security Council. In that regard, in
addition to the information provided by the Secretariat,
the reports of the Peacebuilding Commission could be
a useful tool. We have seen that when the Council is
decisive and united, it not only sends an unambiguous
political message, it can also make use of the resources
at its disposal to prevent specific situations on the
ground from deteriorating further.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): We are pleased to see you presiding over
today’s meeting, Madam. On behalf of Argentina, I
thank the Netherlands for having convened this open
debate on a topic that is of particular interest to us,
in view of our regular participation as a troop- and
police-contributing country, which began exactly 60
years ago. We would also like to thank the Secretary-

S/PV. 8218

General, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Director of the non-governmental
organization Groupe de recherche, d’étude et de
formation femme-action for their important briefings
to the Council.
Argentina agrees with the concept note for this
debate (S/2018/184, annex) with regard to the need for
all parties concerned to renew their commitment to
peacekeeping operations as an essential political tool of
the Organization for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We stress the importance of having
a clear joint strategy on the challenges, expectations,
resources and requirements for missions’ effective
performance in fulfilling their mandates.
We believe that the recent substantive session of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
was a positive step in that direction. One of the issues
discussed in that session was the security of missions,
particularly as it relates to the report submitted by
Lieutenant General dos Santos Cruz. In addition to
supporting the general framework of that report, we
understand that the main change that has contributed
to an increase in peacekeeping deaths is that the most
recent missions have been established in unstable,
complex and high-risk situations where there is no
peace to maintain. That is why in recent years the main
challenge to peacekeeping operations has been to adapt
to those operational circumstances and the mandates
assigned to them.
The incorporation of mandates on the protection
of civilians into peacekeeping operations has been
one of the most important developments regarding
peacekeeping missions that we have seen this century.
We reiterate that the issue should not be considered
from a strictly military perspective, but should rather be
part of a broader political and humanitarian approach
centred on building a safe, protected environment. We
believe that it is crucial that all Member States continue
moving towards a clear and common understanding
of the modalities and implications of such activities,
particularly in cases where it is necessary to use force
to provide security to civilians who are threatened
by physical violence, in accordance with missions’
mandates and the rules of engagement.
Argentina reiterates its commitment to the
Organization’s zero-tolerance policy for cases of
sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as its support
for the measures adopted by the Secretary-General in

18-0878943/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

that regard. Along with more than 80 countries, we
have joined the Voluntary Compact on Preventing and
Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. We also
support the Canadian-led Elsie Initiative on Women in
Peace Operations, in the understanding that increasing
the number of female Blue Helmets would make
missions more effective.
In line with the Secretary-General’s holistic take
on the pillars of peace and security, development and
human rights, which is also reflected in his recent report
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43), we
believe that peacekeeping operations, as part of the
United Nations system, can assist host countries in their
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development while simultaneously attending to the
needs of populations and working towards longerterm goals for resolving conflicts. We also stress that
missions should include enablers who would assist host
countries in the area of infrastructure, especially when
that could help to protect civilians. The experience of
the Argentinian hospital in Haiti demonstrated that it
was possible to expand its work into the community
and thereby generate empathy without undermining
its effectiveness.
Argentina underlines the need for missions that
are more effective and flexible, with clear mandates
and parameters both for their personnel and for host
countries, with planning done sufficiently in advance
and based on priorities established from the beginning
in consultation with troop- and police-contributing
countries, with better specific capabilities and specially
trained personnel and, crucially, with the necessary
financial resources for carrying out their mandated
tasks satisfactorily. However, we are witnessing
a growing tendency in the Organization to expect
better performances from peacekeeping operations
doing larger numbers of jobs in increasingly risky
and complex operational environments, while at the
same time attempts are being made to freeze or reduce
their general level of funding. If Member States truly
want to improve the effectiveness and performance of
the peacekeeping system, we should analyse ways to
generate ideas and alternatives to do that. The system
has its advantages and is broadly supported by the
international community.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
personnel of the United Nations who have lost their lives
in carrying out their peacekeeping duties. Reflecting
on their sacrifice should encourage us to consider
44/86

28/03/2018

the best ways to renew our collective commitment to
peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Moragas Sánchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
Spain advocates for an active and robust role for
the United Nations in conflict prevention, political
mediation and conflict resolution. This Organization
has a unique added value, the product of its broad
legitimacy amd its extraordinary ability to open avenues
to dialogue in multiple scenarios. With that it has been
able to create an unstoppable dynamic of peace.
We believe that current crises must be tackled with
a more realistic and effective approach. That means
that all the parties concerned must make courageous
decisions. In that regard, we appreciate the direct and
frank tone of the report of Lieutenant General dos Santos
Cruz on the security of United Nations missions. The
document has the virtue of departing from bureaucratic
rhetoric and focusing on a transparent analysis of the
issues. The ensuing action plan and mission reviews
will strengthen an approach that seeks not to assign
blame but to find common solutions. That said, I have
six brief observations with regard to the SecretaryGeneral’s reform of the peace and security pillar of the
United Nations
First, we must strengthen the systems for mission
planning and operations. We must ensure that the legal
basis for missions, their mandates, are adapted to the
reality of a particular crisis and are clear and orderly in
their implementation. The interested parties must have
measurable goals, through performance indicators,
that respond to conditions that are decisive, defined
and attainable.
Secondly, we must reinforce capacities. Current
crises demand new capabilities. Concepts such as
force protection, appropriate predeployment training,
combating improvised explosive devices, intelligence,
offensive capacity, adequate equipment and an
effective system of lessons learned, among others,
are of particular importance in this context. Mission
contingents are not United Nations armies, as the
Secretary-General rightly noted this morning in his
statement, but neither should they be a mere collection
of capacities or a disparate accumulation of troops. We
must have an acceptable level of force cohesion and
interoperability, and that is a challenge that we must
tackle together.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Thirdly, we must optimize resources. The
current crises require us to look for synergies among
international organizations, regional organizations and
other bodies operating in conflict zones, including the
security and defence forces of host States. In the Sahel
region, the bilateral operations and European Union
operations — the European Union Training Missions in
Mali and the Central African Republic — are successful
examples that show the viability of this approach. The
work of all of those missions has benefited the United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. We must continue and deepen the search for
those complementarities.
Fourthly, we must strengthen the political
dimension of missions. The achievement, maintenance
and consolidation of peace should be the result of
a structured and continuous process that meets its
objectives through realistic strategies until it arrives at
a stable and sustainable State. We must ensure that the
institutions of the host State can design their own future
and maintain their own security. We need to establish
clear exit strategies for missions. In short, politics must
always be a permanent and cross-cutting dimension
in the actions of the United Nations, because we all
know that the United Nations must not and cannot do
everything, everywhere, or at all times.
Fifthly, if there is no force protection, the force
cannot protect civilians. The majority of current
missions have a wide range of mechanisms aimed at
supporting States in their responsibility to protect
civilians. The strengthening of national capacities
to ensure the necessary accountability for atrocious
crimes is included in their mandates. That is why
predeployment training and the identification of threats
at the planning phase are essential. Spain also calls
for the inclusion of a gender perspective in all phases
of a mission, and we welcome the work being done
by child protection and women’s protection advisers.
Their interaction with the parties to a conflict is key
to achieving changes in the mindset of State actors and
armed groups. We believe that more women should
be deployed in peace missions and in leadership
positions, as outlined in Security Council resolution
2242 (2015), not only because women have added
value in the protection of civilians, but also because
of the unquestionable role they play in early warning,

S/PV. 8218

capacity-building and contributing to the development
of more cohesive and inclusive societies.
Finally, we should all support a zero-tolerance
policy in cases of exploitation and sexual abuse. The
legitimacy of the United Nations and the ultimate
purpose of the missions are at stake. That is why Spain
has signed the Compact introduced by the SecretaryGeneral. The current President of Spain, Mariano
Rajoy Brey, is a member of the circle of trust to combat
this phenomenon.
I should not conclude without expressing the
unequivocal and decisive support of Spain for the
work done by the human rights components of these
missions. Considering the risk before us that a world
undergoing change could become a world in decline,
the United Nations is now more necessary than ever.
This Organization is facing the major challenge of
committing to in-depth reform that is multidimensional,
coherent, timely, bold and balanced. Our most universal
Spaniard, Miguel de Cervantes, said that “to change the
world ... is not utopia or madness. It is justice”. I recall
that today in particular because the reform that we are
undertaking is essential.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): We thank the presidency of the
Netherlands for convening today’s open debate, the first
this year on the topic of peacekeeping. We are meeting
against the backdrop of the previous year, which saw
the highest number of fatalities due to attacks among
United Nations peacekeepers since 1994.
The questions regarding the limitations of United
Nations peacekeeping operations continue to confront
us, as several complex missions show little signs
of resolution. The issue has been debated here long
enough. Several expert reports on it exist, and the
reasons for the situation are very clear. Besides the
changing nature of armed conflicts themselves, they
include serious, chronic shortcomings resulting from a
lack of clarity in mandates, a mismatch in the resources
available to peacekeepers, inadequate consultations
with troop-contributing countries and a lack of focus
on political solutions to building and sustaining peace.
These are all well known.
However, a coherent approach to jointly addressing
these reasons continues to elude us, while we continue
to look for shortcuts and focus narrowly only on

18-0878945/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

enhancing efficiency, effecting savings, improving
logistics or expanding the availability of troops and
their rapid deployment. We are still not addressing
the core issues. What is actually missing is the
political will to acknowledge and implement many of
the recommendations.
On the question of mandates, of the 15 current
peacekeeping missions, six have 15 or more mandate
components and five have between seven and 10.
We would like to know if there are any assessments
of whether such missions can do justice to all their
mandated components with the limited resources
available to them. Several recent mandate renewals
have once again shown the limitations of a process that
continues to be led by a few and is primarily driven
by numbers and individual national agendas rather
than by the aim of providing adequate resources for
realistic mandates.
The Council could utilize its Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations to debate and agree on
strategic objectives for the missions, design mandates
and monitor the capacity to achieve them. The Working
Group could submit recommendations after engaging
with a broad range of actors, including the Secretariat
and troop- and police-contributing countries. The
Council could review and modify mandates when
needs on the ground shift, rather than waiting until the
mandate cycles end.
I now want to turn to the very serious concern of the
increasing loss of lives of United Nations peacekeepers
due to attacks on missions. In the past four years, of the
176 fatalities due to acts of violence, 43 were the result
of attacks by improvised explosive devices (IEDs). We
believe that missions facing such threats should have
dedicated resources for countering IED threats. There
should be concerted efforts to upgrade the security
infrastructure of the camps. Capabilities for timely and
reliable medical and casualty evacuation, including
the use of helicopters with night-flight capability and
night-retrieval operations, are essential. In addition,
force commanders should be given direct command
over such air assets for missions in order to respond in
a timely manner to crisis situations and accidents.
An issue that is much discussed is the importance
of greater female participation in peacekeeping.
However, actual progress in this regard still leaves
a lot be desired. According to the latest data of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the overall
46/86

28/03/2018

percentage of female United Nations military observers
and staff officers is currently around 8 per cent. India,
the first country to contribute a women formed police
unit to peacekeeping, is one of only 26 countries that
have reached the goal of 15 per cent for women military
observers and staff officers. The fact remains that most
other countries have yet to reach that target.
With its long experience in United Nations
peacekeeping, India believes that peacekeeping’s
success should be judged on missions’ ability to sustain
peace by enabling political solutions through integrated
responses. That is, of course, the shared responsibility
of the Security Council, the Secretariat and troopand police-contributing countries. We hope that the
collective political will to address peacekeeping’s wellknown challenges effectively will emerge sooner rather
than later.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate the Netherlands on its successful
presidency of the Security Council this month.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect, which consists of 50 member States and the
European Union and is co-chaired this year by Italy, in
the framework of a split term with the Netherlands and
the State of Qatar.
The Group would like to thank the Kingdom of
the Netherlands for bringing the very important issue
of peacekeeping to the forefront of discussions in the
Council. I would also like to express my gratitude
to the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Director of the
non-governmental organization Groupe de recherche,
d’étude et de formation femme-action for their very
useful and important briefings.
This is the first time that the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect has made a statement in an
open debate in the Security Council. While it is clear
that protecting civilians is the primary responsibility
of Governments, the protection of civilians has
become a central element of many peacekeeping
missions’ mandates, as we have heard. United Nations
peacekeeping missions often have a broad range
of mechanisms aimed at supporting and assisting
States in strengthening the protection of civilians,
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

rebuilding communities and creating the conditions
for sustainable peace. Many missions have been given
mandates pertaining to the rule of law in order to help
ensure accountability for atrocity crimes, including
by strengthening national capacities and supporting
national, hybrid and international courts and justice
mechanisms. Against that backdrop, the Group of
Friends would like to stress the following three points.
First, threats of violence against civilians should
inform planning and decision-making in peacekeeping
operations. Strengthening the links between threatbased assessments, planning and decision-making can
enable stronger mandate implementation and strengthen
the protection of civilians.
Secondly, the States Members of the United Nations
and the Secretariat should enable United Nations
peacekeeping operations to improve their analytical
skills by providing them with adequate tools that can
help identify threats as they emerge. Better awareness
of emerging threats can result in an improved ability to
respond effectively before a situation escalates. In that
context, tools such as the United Nations Framework
of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes can help to analyse
conditions that may increase the likelihood of atroUnited
Nations Logocities or trigger their commission. We
recognize and encourage the important role of women
generally and female peacekeepers in particular in
the prevention of atrocity crimes, as active actors in
the areas of early warning, promoting cooperation,
capacity-building and creating more cohesive and
inclusive societies.
Lastly,
the
effective
implementation
of
peacekeeping mandates requires a shared responsibility
among all stakeholders to support efforts to deliver
peace and security, including partnerships with regional
organizations and arrangements, as appropriate, and
enhanced partnerships among United Nations entities.
As we have seen all over the world, regional and
subregional arrangements can play a key role in leading
international responses to mass atrocities. We hope that
through this forum we can identify strategies that can
protect men, women and children more effectively and
help implement our joint commitment to protecting and
promoting human rights, including as embodied in the
concept of the responsibility to protect.
I would now like to make some additional remarks
in my national capacity.

S/PV. 8218

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union and the statement made
earlier by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security.
I would once again like to emphasize that
the protection of civilians, conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace have become
the fundamental concepts for peacekeeping today,
and they represent the way forward. The Kigali and
Vancouver Principles should be fully implemented
by peace operations, particularly with regard to child
protection. We also encourage the Secretary-General to
advance his vision of a peace continuum in which our
primary goal must be the quest for political solutions.
And we support an enhanced role for the Peacebuilding
Support Office in integrating peace and security with
development and human rights. In that regard, we
believe that the police component can play a crucial
role in facilitating the transition from peacekeeping to
more robust development assistance and peacebuilding,
as is noted in resolution 2382 (2017), which we helped
to adopt last year.
The African Union Mission in Somalia and the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel are successful
examples of cooperation with regional organizations.
They also confirm that we need enhanced strategic
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in order to ensure effective and costefficient peace operations and strengthen African
capabilities in that area. We are in favour of the use of
United Nations-assessed contributions for African-led
peace operations, provided that appropriate standards
for troop quality, financial transparency, human rights
compliance, conduct and discipline are met.
Italy is one of the most generous contributors to
the peacekeeping budget and the leading contributor
of Blue Helmets in the Group of Western and other
States. As a troop-contributing country, we are very
concerned about peacekeepers’ safety and security.
We consider the report of Lieutenant General Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz, and its action plan, as well
as the independent mission reviews, to be timely and
helpful measures.
Technology is key to increasing the safety and
security of peacekeepers. The use of unmanned
aerial vehicles in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has provided the Mission with enhanced

18-0878947/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

situational awareness and played a key role in providing
safety and security for peacekeepers as well as
protection for civilians and humanitarian actors.
Training is also crucial to the effective
implementation of mandates. Peacekeepers need
specific training in order to do their job better. That
is why the pledges for peacekeeping that Italy has
made this year include a series of training courses
developed by the Security Force Assistance Centre
and Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units
in Vicenza. I would also like to briefly mention Italy
and Bangladesh’s creation of the Group of Friends of
the Management of the Environmental Impact of Field
Missions Throughout Their Life Cycle. Nor should we
forget logistics. Peacekeeping operations’ capacity to
deliver on and fulfil their mandates is closely related
to the speed of their deployment and the operational
effectiveness of field missions. Italy fully supports
the United Nations Global Service Centre in Brindisi.
It is an essential hub providing logistical support to
peacekeeping missions around the world.
Lastly, ensuring a more inclusive involvement of
troop- and police-contributing countries when the
Security Council is reviewing mandates is key to
reviving a sense of shared responsibility. The Council
should always remember to give due consideration to
the views of those countries, whose men and women are
risking their lives on the ground and to whom I would
like to pay the most respectful tribute, especially those
who have lost their lives over the years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I too would like to begin by
congratulating you, Madam, and the Netherlands on a
very successful presidency and for convening today’s
very important debate.
We would also like to begin be welcoming the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative announced by
the Secretary-General earlier today. We are in broad
agreement with its six priority areas.
With the operating environment becoming ever
more volatile, we are hearing increasing calls to update
our tools for dealing with contemporary challenges,
responding to current threats and doing our job better.
We hope that our discussion today will provide valuable
insights on all these issues. I would like to focus on
two specific questions — peacekeeping as a shared
48/86

28/03/2018

responsibility and strategic coherence in the pursuit of
political solutions.
Negotiations in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations this year were particularly
focused on performance, and rightly. How else can
we gauge success? However, performance cannot be
evaluated solely in terms of what our troops on the
ground do or do not accomplish. It also depends on
resources, capabilities, intelligence and many such
factors that troop-contributing countries (TCCs) do
not control. The TCCs have never shied away from
discussing performance, personnel, training and
equipment. Performance policies, however, should
be devised in consultation with the TCCs. The only
conversation that can yield results is one that deals with
performance in a holistic manner.
The Secretariat has the responsibility of providing
pragmatic and realistic analysis of the situation on
ground in terms of the political environment, resource
gaps and possible exit strategies. The Council then has
to reflect that information in its mandates. Rather than
focusing merely on cutting costs and troop numbers,
operations should dictate logistics, and not the other
way around. I would like to point to a particular example
relating to the vital task of the protection of civilians,
which requires specific enablers and capacities. The
recent pilot project on protection by projection in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo showed that it
is extremely challenging to carry out protection-ofcivilians tasks based only on a projected show of
power. It is the job of the Secretariat and the Council to
clearly articulate specific tasks such as the protection
of civilians in terms of expectations and the requisite
resources and capabilities. If resources are shrinking,
expectations will have to be adjusted accordingly.
With regard to strategic coherence in the pursuit
of political solutions, let me make three points. First,
we have all talked about the primacy of politics and
the need for a greater focus on political solutions.
Peacekeeping missions, especially those with
multidimensional mandates, are on the ground to
facilitate post-conflict peacebuilding and help to make
progress towards sustainable peace. The peacekeepers
are not there to negotiate political solutions or enforce
peace. They are there more as tools to support political
processes. Secondly, the inclusion of regional partners
in political processes could be a force multiplier and
should be used as such. Thirdly, investing in mediation
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

is, of course, a sound investment. Without that, we risk
making the whole exercise self-defeating.
The Secretary-General’s reform initiatives envisage
changes within the Secretariat’s reporting lines. We
hope that these reforms will make the provision of
logistical support to missions better and quicker.
Reform should not just talk about the performance and
mindsets of troop- and police-contributing countries;
it should also include a rethink of the Secretariat’s
performance in bringing out the true picture on the
ground and, as the Secretary-General has said, of the
Council’s mindset in putting together achievable and
realistic mandates.
Since the 1960s, Pakistan has contributed more
than 200,000 troops to 43 missions and has lost 156
of its bravest in the pursuit of peace. We are fully
committed to United Nations peacekeeping and are
ready to engage in any process or discussion, from
political strategy to operational issues, to help United
Nations peacekeeping match the changing conflicts
and threats.
The President: I now give the floor to the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.
Ms. Adamson: I thank you, Madam President, for
holding this open debate.
I am honoured to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves with
this statement. I will give a shortened version of my
statement, the full text of which is being circulated now.
I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing and would like to convey the EU’s strong
support for his efforts to make the ability of the
United Nations to deliver on the ground more effective
and efficient.
I would first like to pay tribute to the thousands
of peacekeepers who have been putting their lives
in harm’s way for more than 70 years. We owe them
a frank debate and determined action to ensure that
peacekeeping operations can effectively deliver on their
mandates and that our Blue Helmets are provided with
the means to perform. Recent reports, from the 2015
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
report (see S/2015/446) to the Santos Cruz and Cammaert

S/PV. 8218

recommendations, highlight the need for change in
order to ensure successful peacekeeping operations
in very complex and challenging environments. We
concur with the Secretary-General’s call for the United
Nations to become less risk-averse when it comes to
innovation and to continually test new ideas, building
on lessons learned.
The experience with the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel) represents a combination
of efforts we have never seen before. The EU and
the United Nations have come together to support an
African Union-mandated African initiative through
a channelling mechanism for financial contributions
that also enables third parties to engage. By supporting
the G5 Sahel Joint Force in its efforts to tackle
terrorism, organized crime, people-smuggling and
human trafficking in the region and thereby improve
the overall security situation in Mali and beyond,
we are also acting in support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). At the same time, the EU is
providing financial reimbursement for MINUSMA’s
support to the G5 Sahel, as well as supporting the G5
Sahel in establishing a human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework for its
operations. It is also important to note that resolution
2391 (2017) calls for international contributions. The
EU has delivered on that and we call on our fellow
United Nations Members to do the same.
Indeed, the importance of global-regional
partnership in peacekeeping has been underlined by
many speakers today. We continue to advocate for an
increased role for regional organizations within United
Nations-authorized interventions, facilitating rapid
deployment, when appropriate; complementing United
Nations operations or deploying in a bridging capacity,
for instance, in order to restore a safe and secure
environment conducive to the subsequent deployment
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation, as was
the case in the Central African Republic with the EU
military operation in the Central African Republic. We
also remain committed to giving full support to Africa’s
efforts to manage its own security. The EU’s support
will continue to cover all phases of the conflict cycle,
including African-led initiatives to engage in preventive
diplomacy and mediation, the operationalization of
the African Peace and Security Architecture and the
deployment of African-led peace support operations.

18-0878949/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Together with the United Nations, we are deepening
our cooperation on topics of mutual interest as part of
our long-standing strategic partnership on peacekeeping
and crisis management. The ongoing process for
defining the follow-up to our priorities for the period
from 2015 to 2018 in order to strengthen this strategic
partnership on peacekeeping and crisis management
is therefore very timely. Another area in which United
Nations-EU cooperation has intensified and in which
the EU’s added value and complementary role are
unmistakable is security sector reform. In the past few
years, the EU has undertaken a greater role within the
overall responsibility for coordinating security sector
reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
well as of United Nations special political missions.
Going forward, we must become even better at
drawing on our respective expertise and comparative
advantages to mutually support each other in the field
and to ensure progress, including on implementing the
women and peace and security agenda in peacekeeping,
as well as working with other partners to generate
smart pledges. We should focus on areas where our
cooperation is likely to make a real difference on the
ground. It is equally important to be realistic about
what we can achieve and to manage expectations.
The reform initiatives launched by SecretaryGeneral Guterres on management, the peace and
security pillar and the development system will be
necessary enabling factors in the success of his efforts
to ensure that peacekeeping operations have a greater
impact. Even the most successful peace operations
cannot be a substitute for political processes. We
continue to stress the paramount importance of political
solutions to conflicts in order to address their root
causes and the drivers of conflict, including human
rights violations, as well as the priority that should be
given to prevention. Prevention and sustaining peace
must be thought of as a continuous process of which
peacekeeping missions are only one essential part.
The Council, together with other stakeholders, should
reconsider ways to build consensus around strategic
objectives for peacekeeping missions, the design of
mandates, the prioritization of tasks and how to best
monitor achievement. An effective feedback loop is as
crucial as the underpinning in-depth conflict analysis.
Strategic reviews should support the adjustment of key
operations through an assessment of the capabilities
and conditions needed for successful mandate
implementation. A comprehensive performance policy
50/86

28/03/2018

for peacekeeping operations should also ensure that
necessary remedial actions are taken swiftly.
We would also like to underline the importance of
reducing the overall environmental impact of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. A lighter footprint
would enable cost efficiencies, as well as improving
safety and security both for troops and citizens of host
countries and, ultimately, mandate delivery.
We continue to underscore that the protection of
civilians must be at the core of peacekeeping mandates.
We also want to emphasize the critical role that United
Nations peacekeepers play in protecting children
in armed conflict. The effective implementation of
the protection of civilians as a whole-of-mission
effort requires better planning support for missions,
capturing lessons learned effectively and improving
analysis, alongside strengthening accountability for
the implementation of mandated tasks. Consistent with
clear mandates, peacekeepers must protect civilians and
be able to use force when civilians are threatened with
physical violence, while operations must be equipped
with the necessary tools in that regard.
Finally, the international community will continue
to address many challenging issues on the peacekeeping
agenda this year. The EU stands ready to continue to
constructively engage in that work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I would like to thank
the Kingdom of the Netherlands for convening
today’s meeting.
The Security Council mandates peacekeeping
missions to help countries navigate the difficult
path toward peace. Yet peacekeepers today face
unprecedented challenges, especially in Africa.
Working in dangerous environments, they are often the
targets of armed groups, and the threats that they face
are increasingly complex. Our responses must therefore
evolve to match the realities on the ground. We must
ensure that peacekeepers are properly protected and
supplied with the necessary knowledge and training,
as well as technological equipment, so that they can
fulfil their mandates completely. Israel commends
the Secretary-General’s initiative in requesting and
publishing the report of Lieutenant General Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz on improving the safety
of United Nations peacekeepers, and we appreciate
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the Secretariat’s efforts to internalize the report’s
recommendations. It is now the responsibility of the
Security Council and the States Members of the United
Nations to support immediate action to address the
report’s serious conclusions.
Israel is actively engaged in lending knowledge,
expert advice and medical training to peacekeeping
operations as well as supplying them with technological
support. We have recently been working with the
Medical Services Division to establish life-saving
first-aid training for all peacekeepers and to support
its efforts to establish a mental-health strategy action
plan. We are also expanding our partnership with
the Department of Field Support in order to improve
camp security in field missions. We look forward to
continuing our collaboration with United Nations
departments on those important matters.
We also believe that the United Nations must
continue to enforce its zero-tolerance policy and
enhance its efforts to combat sexual exploitation, abuse
and harassment both in local communities and within
peacekeeping operations, sometimes known as “blue on
blue”. Too often, peacekeepers face threats of violence
and assault from within as well as from external
sources, which violates their most basic human rights,
creates more victims, sabotages the ability of missions
to fulfil their mandates and damages the legitimacy of
the United Nations. Israel is committed to the protection
of peacekeepers. We fully support peacekeeping efforts
and will continue providing peacekeeping operations
with the tools for success.
If we want peacekeeping operations to achieve the
objectives that the Security Council sets for them, we
must provide them with proper mandates and ensure
that they are fully implemented. Israel has first-hand
experience with this topic in relation to the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), a peacekeeping
force stationed just beyond Israel’s northern border. In
resolution 1701 (2006), the Security Council authorized
UNIFIL to “take all necessary action ... to ensure
that its area of operations is not utilized for hostile
activities”, with the goal of establishing “an area free
of any armed personnel, assets and weapons, other than
those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL”.
In resolution 2373 (2017), adopted last summer, the
Council requested that the Secretary-General look at
ways to increase UNIFIL’s visible presence, including
through patrols and inspections. It also requested ways
to provide prompt and detailed reports on restrictions

S/PV. 8218

to UNIFIL’s freedom of movement and on specific
areas to which UNIFIL does not have access, and on
the reasons behind those restrictions.
But the reality on the ground shows that UNIFIL’s
mandate has not been fully implemented. We continue
to see an alarming situation that suggests that UNIFIL
may be unable to fulfil all the provisions of its mandate.
Hizbullah, the Iranian proxy and internationally
designated terrorist organization, has taken more than
two thirds of Shia towns and villages in UNIFIL’s area
of operations in southern Lebanon, using Lebanese
civilians as human shields to protect its arsenal of more
than 100,000 missiles and rockets. As we have informed
the Security Council, armed Hizbullah fighters are
visiting the Blue Line with leaders of other Iranbacked militia groups, in flagrant violation of multiple
Security Council resolutions. They use those visits to
call publicly for violence and for Israel’s destruction.
In accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL should be able
to fully monitor and explore these unlawful activities
and report on the true gravity of the situation in its area
of operations, including the areas that it cannot access.
This Iranian-supported terror and the strengthening
of Hizbullah in Lebanon represent just one example
of Iran’s dangerous aggression in our region. It is
unfortunate, but we must all recognize that Iran’s
destructive behaviour has only gotten worse in the years
since the signing of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action. Iran is empowered by that agreement. Billions
of dollars have flooded into the Iranian economy, only
to fund a dangerous missile programme and the work
of violent extremists in Lebanon, Yemen, Syria and
Gaza. As we speak, the United States is conducting
an important effort to fix the terrible flaws in what
we have always said is a bad agreement. We are now
at a critical juncture. This is the last chance to correct
past mistakes and recognize that we must all embark
on a new path to rein in Iran’s reckless behaviour. I
have a simple message for the permanent members of
the Security Council today. They must not miss this
opportunity. In 45 days, the clock will run out and
the rules of the game will change. They have a choice
to make, which is either to choose to work with the
Americans and support their genuine efforts to make
the Middle East a safer place, or to choose Iran and
enable a dangerous regime. I urge them to make the
right choice before it is too late for all of us.
Israel’s commitment to peacekeeping operations
is unwavering. We reiterate our support for the United

18-0878951/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), as
its forces continue returning to their positions in the
Area of Separation. We appreciate UNDOF’s important
contributions to regional stability and look forward to
continuing our support for its mission, as well as for all
of the important protectors of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See thanks
the presidency of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
for convening today’s debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The Holy See believes in the
central role of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security and appreciates the
significant contribution of United Nations peacekeeping
operations to the prevention and resolution of many
armed conflicts within and among States.
In these times of shifting and changing threats
to international peace and security, it is timely
to seek together ways to further improve United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Indeed, today’s
briefers highlighted the diverse challenges across the
peacekeeping realm, which now includes international
terrorism, violent extremism, transnational organized
crime and climate-related emergencies. They pointed to
the need for more robust, coherent and comprehensive
collective action in the context of the evolving threats
to international peace and security.
As the challenges and threats continue to evolve,
the Holy See believes that the protection of civilians
and critical civilian infrastructure, such as schools,
hospitals, religious and cultural sites and water supplies,
should remain a constant and crucial dimension of
peacekeeping. In some situations of armed conflict,
in particular when the conflict has involved ethnic
cleansing or other forms of mass displacement, it is
important that peacekeepers help to create the necessary
conditions for the safe and dignified return of refugees,
other forced migrants and internally displaced persons
to their homes and properties.
That clearly requires a holistic approach, involving
other United Nations agencies and various other
institutions and stakeholders. From the start of every
mission, the peace and security instruments of the
United Nations must therefore work in tandem with
development, human rights and humanitarian actors.
Human rights violations are drivers of conflict.
52/86

28/03/2018

Restoring respect for human rights will often contribute
to addressing the root causes of conflicts and to
sustaining peace.
Another significant element in our common search
of ways to improve United Nations peacekeeping
operations is to identify the best times to deploy and
to end a peacekeeping mission. Making the right
decision in those critical areas has become all the
more challenging of late as calls for the continuous
engagement of a peacekeeping operation, from the
early signs of conflict to the post-recovery phase,
increase. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding have become
so interwoven that many now expect them to routinely
overlap in United Nations operations. My delegation
trusts that the United Nations will always listen to and
consult with the Governments and populations directly
affected on the ground.
The challenge of making the best decision at those
two critical moments of a peacekeeping operation is
made more acute by the fact that no two conflicts are the
same. It is therefore necessary to refrain from taking a
one-size-fits-all approach and to tailor a peacekeeping
operation in accordance with its specific purpose
and context, including the cultural and religious
sensibilities of the peoples directly affected by the
conflict. In that regard, my delegation believes that the
active participation of host countries in the orientation
and training of peacekeepers before they are sent into
the field is an important component in order to ensure
the success of the mission.
My delegation has noted of the serious efforts
aimed at setting new policies to strengthen the rules
that govern the conduct and discipline of personnel.
For example, strengthening norms for the prevention
of sexual abuse against women and children by
peacekeeping personnel is a necessary collective action
to improve the credibility and acceptance of United
Nations peacekeeping missions in their respective
areas of operations and beyond. In that regard, the roles
and responsibilities of the troop-contributing countries
and the United Nations offices directly responsible for
the oversight of peacekeeping operations should not
be underestimated.
In the same vein, in the light of the worsening
security situation prevailing in many field missions, the
safety and security of United Nations personnel remain
among the highest priorities. The United Nations should
ensure that peacekeepers receive specific training for
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the mission and that they are adequately equipped to
protect themselves from aggressors. The perpetrators
of attacks against United Nations peacekeepers must be
brought to justice in conformity with the provisions of
international law.
In closing, the Holy See pays special tribute to those
peacekeepers who have made the ultimate sacrifice in
the name of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Plepytė (Lithuania): Allow me to start by
commending the Netherlands, as President of the
Security Council for the month of March, for convening
this timely open debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union. I
would like to make some additional remarks in our
national capacity.
As a troop-contributing country, Lithuania has a
great interest in making United Nations peacekeeping
more efficient and capable of addressing the needs
of the twenty-first century. Since October last year,
Lithuania has significantly increased its United Nations
peacekeeping contingent. Currently, 39 Lithuanians,
both men and women in uniform, are deployed to
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, serving in high-risk
security environments. The safety and security of
personnel deployed to overseas missions are of the
highest priority for us. In that regard, we fully support
all efforts to implement the plan of action and to take
concrete measures to improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers and other mission personnel, as proposed
by Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz
in his recent report.
In environments where peacekeepers are directly
targeted, where widespread violence is ongoing or
where thousands of civilians need protection from
unthinkable acts of violence, peacekeeping operations
must remain fit for purpose. To confront the unique
challenges of this century, peacekeepers require the
tools and capabilities of the twenty-first century. In
addition, missions require well-trained and skilled
troops. Due to the increasing focus on the protection of
civilians, training on humanitarian issues, human rights
and gender sensitivity are essential for peacekeepers to
be able to carry out their tasks properly.

S/PV. 8218

Predeployment assessment is critical to ensuring
that peacekeeping contingents meet United Nations
standards and, even more important, respect the
values and principles of United Nations peacekeeping.
All allegations of misconduct must be examined
thoroughly and those responsible for such conduct must
be brought to account. In cases of shortcomings or
misconduct, repatriation should be accepted as the only
solution. A zero-tolerance policy with regard to sexual
misconduct, wherever and whenever it occurs, must be
strictly implemented.
However, making United Nations peacekeeping
missions more efficient and fit for purpose is not
limited to the better training of troops or a better chain
of command or to ensuring adequate logistical support.
The participation of women at all levels greatly
increases the operational effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions and should therefore be strengthened. We also
agree with those who call for a clear mandate and exit
strategy from the very beginning of the engagement.
It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
set sound, realistic and achievable mandates for
peacekeeping missions. However, that should not justify
inaction. Regular, robust and independent reviews are
necessary in order to evaluate the progress and to adapt
the objectives.
Moreover, continuous horizon-scanning and early
warning provide us with the opportunity to use other
tools at the disposal of the United Nations. More
investment in preventive diplomacy, early action and
mediation, through full use of the United Nations
standing mediation capacity, remain vital. Greater
commitment and engagement must be devoted to
supporting political processes and to preserving the
continuum of peace.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the need to seek a more
holistic United Nations response to peace operations. We
need better complementarity of peacekeeping, conflictprevention and peacebuilding work to be carried out
in close cooperation and coordination among all the
actors involved. However, even more fundamentally, it
is time to focus all our efforts on implementation of
the recommendations related to peacekeeping. We can
no longer afford to live from one report to the next,
while failing to fully implement the recommendations
and ideas generated. The continuous efforts of the
Secretariat, including the Strategic Force Generation
and Capability Planning Cell, as well as the long-term
commitment of Member States to implementing such

18-0878953/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

recommendations, are of fundamental importance to
improving peacekeeping operations. Lithuania remains
committed to doing its part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I would like to congratulate
the Netherlands on taking this important initiative and
to thank the presidency for convening this very timely
and relevant open debate, and in particular for its
having been presided this morning by His Excellency
the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union, as well as with the statement delivered by the
representative of Italy on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect.
Last year, we witnessed an unprecedented number
of peacekeeping fatalities. I would like take this
opportunity to pay tribute to every man and woman for
their sacrifice in the service of peace. It is imperative
that we minimize the risk of deliberate attacks on United
Nations missions or personnel, including through better
early warning, intelligence and detection capabilities,
and improved situational awareness and risk mitigation
mechanisms. In line with the conclusions of the report
recently issued by Lieutenant General Santos Cruz,
as well as this year’s deliberations of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, we need to
revisit the ways and means of ensuring the safety and
security of our peacekeepers, making sure that the
missions are sufficiently resourced and that personnel
have all the training and equipment necessary to
fulfil their mandates. In this regard, we welcome
the report entitled Improving security of United
Nations Peacekeepers of December 2017, and urge
the Secretariat to implement its recommendations, in
close cooperation with the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs), the police-contributing countries (PCCs) and
the Security Council.
Slovakia has been an active troop- and
police-contributing country since its admission to the
United Nations 25 years ago, having deployed to a total
of 19 United Nations missions, contributing overall
more than 7,300 men and women. Slovakia has also
participated in military and civilian missions of the
European Union, which also operates under Security
Council mandates and, together with the United
Nations in many conflict situations, helps to maintain
54/86

28/03/2018

peace and security. I would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm our continued strong commitment to and
active involvement in United Nations peacekeeping
endeavours in the future.
Currently, the highest number of our military
and police personnel is deployed in United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. I would also like to
reiterate our Government’s full support for the ongoing
political process aimed at the reunification of Cyprus.
In addition, we are proud to also serve in the Golan
Heights and in Haiti.
As a TCC/PCC, Slovakia has subscribed to many
important initiatives as a practical matter, but mostly
as a matter of principle, such as the Kigali Principles,
Vancouver Principles and the more recent voluntary
compact to eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations. I would like to highlight a
few aspects that we believe to be especially relevant in
the context of today’s open debate.
First, the issues associated with the supply side
of peacekeeping operations remain at the cenre of our
concerns. As a matter of priority, we must continue to
address the difficulties in getting enough troops, the
right equipment and adequate logistical support.
Secondly, efforts to improve the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations should be read in conjunction
with the other reform strands, as well as with the
peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda. The peace
and security pillar reform must lead to more substantive
delivery, and the management reform to better service
delivery, with much less fragmentation. One of the
overarching goals of the reform and restructuring of the
United Nations peace and security pillar should be to
prioritize prevention and sustaining peace.
Thirdly, a number of missions struggle to operate
amidst broken or challenging peace processes and in
asymmetric threat environments. In that respect, we
welcome the initiative of the Secretary- General to
review the limitations of traditional peacekeeping
operations, including his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which he introduced this morning.
Fourthly, as has been said many times before,
peacekeeping is a unique tool, but the pursuit of
political solutions is key and cannot be replaced by
anything, including by peacekeeping. The mandates
of peacekeeping operations must evolve consistently
with the context and needs on the ground. Reviews
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of peacekeeping mandates must take into account the
existence of exit strategies that seek to help lay the
foundations for long-term and sustainable peace.
Member States increasingly view the issue of
security sector reform (SSR), embedded in resolution
2151 (2014), as an important priority for peacekeeping,
including for the timely conclusion of peacekeeping
missions. Building more inclusive security and justice
institutions also lies at the heart of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, in particular Sustainable
Development Goal 16. I wish to take this opportunity
to highlight the fact that South Africa and Slovakia,
as co-chairs of the United Nations Group of Friends
of Security Sector Reform, will convene a high-level
round table on security sector reform and sustaining
peace on 23 April, in the sidelines of the upcoming
General Assembly high-level meeting on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, to take place on 24 and 25 April.
In conclusion, peacekeeping remains one of the
most critical areas of United Nations activities and
where the Organization is most visible. Disappointment
over its action or non-action may therefore be equally
visible. My delegation looks forward to continuing to
work closely with other Member States as we determine
how best to strengthen this essential instrument for
global peace and stability. In the light of the increasing
scale and ever more sophisticated nature of conflicts,
the urgency to act is more salient than ever.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal) (spoke in
French): Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the European Union, and would like
to make a few additional remarks. To save time, I shall
limit myself to delivering an abridged version of my
statement, the full text of which will be distributed in
the Chamber.
Allow me first to congratulate the Dutch presidency
on having convened this open debate.
Peacekeeping operations are a concrete example
of our collective efforts and one of the most important
instruments in the implementation of Security Council
mandates. Today’s challenges call for a quick response
from the United Nations. It is therefore imperative to
strengthen and modernize peace operations by adapting
them to current challenges. Portugal supports the
United Nations system-wide reform process initiated

S/PV. 8218

by the Secretary-General, and in particular its emphasis
on conflict prevention, the primacy of politics and the
use of diplomacy as the optimal tools for achieving
lasting peace.
In this context, peacekeeping operations must go
beyond the peacekeeping/peace enforcement binomial
and include early warning actions in order to prevent
the emergence and aggravation of conflicts. We
therefore advocate a comprehensive approach and, at
the same time, close cooperation with local, regional
and international partners, such as those developed with
the African Union and the European Union. Similarly,
gender balance is essential in the military, police and
civilian components of peacekeeping operations, not
only for a more equitable representation, but also
to improve mission capacities to serve all sectors of
the population.
Conscious of its responsibility for international
security, my country has always maintained a high
level of participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We are currently engaged in seven theatres
of operations. I would like to highlight our participation
in two of them: the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, which is one
of the most dangerous peace operations in Africa;
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
where we have deployed our largest contingent,
consisting of 160 military personnel and 1 police officer.
This translates into an operational, unrestricted and
unrestrained rapid reaction force in cases that require a
high level of mobility and rapid response, particularly
in addressing situations of unprotected civilians or in
deterring possible attacks.
This significant commitment on the part of my
country is also an answer to the call of a very close
European ally, France, on the heels of the terrible
attacks in Paris.
Lastly, it will be essential to ensure a greater
level of operationality and effectiveness among
contingents. We also attach particular importance to
training our Blue Helmets to maintain strict respect
for codes of conduct under human rights law and
international humanitarian law. And we stand ready
to provide training for contingents from other troopcontributing countries with which we have joint
military assistance programmes and cooperation

18-0878955/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

agreements, as is the case within the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): The Philippines aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Indonesia on behalf of Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), and thanks the Netherlands for
convening this high-level open debate. We are gathered
to show our collective commitment to sustaining
peace as a goal and as a process to reinvigorate the
Organization’s mandate for peace as a core principle
across the United Nations system, with the aim of
restoring to the United Nations the lustre it had at its
creation as the world’s pre-eminent keeper and maker
of peace.

28/03/2018

We repeat our support for calls to invest more in
local political solutions to conflicts, which United
Nations peacekeeping must reinforce and not supplant.
People in conflict situations must feel that they own the
peace that we merely help to bring about and keep. It is
they who must configure the peace and the approaches
to it, and no one else.
In complex and high-risk environments, success
in peacekeeping operations must be measured by the
mandate to protect civilians as the core criterion of
success, with child protection and combating sexual
abuse as key elements. Predeployment training
efforts should be tailored to respond to particular,
country-specific challenges with regard to protecting
civilians, with clear definitions of the responsibilities,
opportunities and constraints that peacekeepers will
face in the field.

During 50 years of peacekeeping operations, the
Philippines has never faltered in its commitment to
answering calls from the United Nations for peace
and investment in peace, even as they have evolved in
a changing world. We therefore signed the Voluntary
Compact against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse,
which concerns issues that have put to shame what
should be held up and honoured — the United Nations
peacekeeping mission. We renewed our pledge at the
second Chiefs of Defence Conference to provide more
military officers as observers and staff and to deploy
more women peacekeepers, based on our conviction,
grounded in experience, that the gender that binds the
wounds of war, comforts the widows of war and shelters
the children of conflict has the strongest motivation
and the wisest approaches to preventing its outbreak
and restoring peace that is broken.

We join Indonesia in making ensuring the safety of
peacekeepers an equally high priority, principally by
enhancing the capacity of contributing countries and
drawing as much hardware from developing countries
as lessons from their generally satisfactory experience
in the field. We do not recall ever having abandoned
or abused those who sought our protection. Surely we
have something to say on that score.

Together with ASEAN, we reaffirm peacekeeping
as a key element of ASEAN’s political and security
cooperation, as highlighted in the Plan of Action to
Implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations
(2016-2020). Currently, 4,500 police, military advisers
and troops from ASEAN countries are in 12 United
Nations peacekeeping missions. The Philippines
has scaled down its contributions because of local
exigencies, but in the wake of victories at home, we
are determined to bring our numbers up again and keep
them growing in peacekeeping missions abroad. I would
now like to present the Philippines’ recommendations
for our collective action to improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

With regard to strengthening the whole-of-mission
approach, we repeat our support for relevant United
Nations resolutions on the peacebuilding architecture,
which underscore the importance of prioritizing
intervention, addressing the root causes of conflict
and devising long-term peacebuilding strategies, with
adequate and sustainable financial resources that
translate into concrete measures at the country level,
but absolutely without any political coloration. If the
politics of peacekeeping is not national, it is foreign
interference. That used to be called peacekeeping
by janissaries.

56/86

Concerning the responsibility to improve
peacekeeping operations, we support the call for
sustained triangular consultations and cooperation
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and
contributing countries. Without them, it is impossible
to have a shared understanding of appropriate policy
and of operational responses and their implications for
the mandate and conduct of an operation.

In order to revive a sense of shared responsibility
for the success of peacekeeping, we support
intergovernmental platforms that enable peer-learning
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

on building resilience and encouraging constructive
dialogue on the challenges of sustaining peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Ms. Rivera Sánchez (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the presidency of the Netherlands
for convening this open debate, and we take this
opportunity to welcome the participation of Prime
Minister Mark Rutte. We also appreciate the concept
note (S/2018/184, annex) prepared for today’s debate
and commend the Secretary-General and Ms. Fatimata
Touré for their valuable briefings this morning.
In the view of my delegation, peacekeeping
operations continue to be one of the most effective
mechanisms established by the international community
to provide collective assistance to countries transitioning
from conflict situations to peace. Everything that has
to do with improving their efficiency and effectiveness
therefore translates into an opportunity to contribute to
achieving better outcomes for those processes.
Historically, El Salvador has been committed to
peacekeeping operations and believes that they play a
fundamental role in bringing about peace in the world.
We therefore support all political processes aimed at
establishing inclusive and legitimate Governments,
providing security and promoting processes to build and
sustain peace. My country is currently contributing to
eight different missions with troops and police totalling
204 men and women, including a specialized air unit
of 60 personnel awaiting deployment to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.
My delegation takes note of the report of Lieutenant
General dos Santos Cruz, which has become an important
tool for jointly addressing issues of concern and the
shared challenges we face, and which can contribute
to identifying a long-term strategy for achieving better
outcomes in peacekeeping operations. El Salvador
deems it important to highlight some aspects that
are essential to ensuring the success of peacekeeping
operations. One of them is the importance of holding
effective triangular consultations in which the Security
Council, contributing countries and the Secretariat can
conduct objective assessments that will enable them
to improve their operationality and functionality and
to renew and revitalize missions’ functioning. The
perspectives of troop- and police-contributing countries
must be kept in mind, particularly during the policy-

S/PV. 8218

and decision-making processes, including deployment,
transition phases and the renewal of mandates, as well
as when other relevant changes are occurring. They
must have clear and achievable mandates that respond
to the challenges on the ground. The desired outcomes
can be achieved only through continued cooperation.
In order to be truly effective, peacekeeping
operations must be able to depend from the very
beginning on political support, adequate human,
financial, logistical resources, and clearly defined and
viable mandates, as well as personnel who are highly
trained for the purpose of fulfilling their mission on
the ground.
My delegation would like to acknowledge the vital
role that women and young people play in the prevention
and settlement of conflicts, and we emphasize the need
to encourage their full participation in peacekeeping
and advocating for peace, while underscoring the
importance of the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda and resolution 1325 (2000).
El Salvador is deeply concerned about the
precariousness of the political and security environment
in areas where United Nations peacekeeping missions
are deployed. The patterns of violence in conflict
areas in which peacekeeping operations are deployed
are at their worst level since 1994. In that regard, my
delegation believes that to achieve the goal of lasting
peace, operations must always be accompanied by
a parallel and inclusive process that is well planned,
carefully designed and backed by the consent and
commitment of the parties concerned.
We must ensure strict adherence to the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, especially the principles of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of States and
of non-intervention in internal affairs, which are
fundamental elements of our joint efforts to promote
international peace and security. Respect for those
basic peacekeeping principles is essential to the success
of operations on the ground.
We believe that it is vital to ensure the highest
possible levels of ethical conduct of personnel
involved in peacekeeping operations and reiterate
our full commitment to the zero-tolerance policy of
the United Nations on sexual exploitation and abuse.
In that regard, we reaffirm our commitment to the
prompt investigation and eventual determination of
responsibility for all misconduct, in accordance with

18-0878957/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

due process and the memorandums of understanding
agreed to by the United Nations.
In conclusion, my delegation condemns all attacks
and acts of violence against United Nations personnel as
they carry out their functions and reiterates its concern
for the safety and security of mission personnel in the
field. To that end, we call for action to be taken to bring
those responsible to justice and take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the United Nations staff who have lost
their lives while doing their commendable work, and to
express our condolences to their families.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): Nepal would like to
commend and express its appreciation to the Council’s
Dutch presidency for convening this important open
debate, which is giving peacekeeping the priority and
momentum it deserves. I thank the Secretary-General
for his remarks and the other briefers for offering
their perspectives.
I align myself with the statement delivered earlier
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I will read
an abridged version of my statement in the interests
of time.
With its steadfast commitment to global peace,
Nepal has been a dependable and enduring partner
in United Nations peacekeeping operations for the
past 60 years, during which more than 130,000 of its
peacekeepers have served with distinction and 73 have
laid down their precious lives in the line of duty. They
have frequently been deployed at the shortest notice and
in the most difficult theatres, where they have shown
the greatest flexibility, never accompanied by caveats.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to all
past and present Nepali Blue Helmets, and all others,
for their supreme service in the effort to make our
world a safer place.
Nepal is currently the sixth largest troop- and
police-contributing country in the world, serving in 14
of 15 missions. We combine the experience of United
Nations peacekeeping around the world with that of
a successful nationally driven post-conflict peace
process at home. From that perspective, my delegation
would like to highlight a few points that should be built
into the framework of our collective action to improve
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
58/86

28/03/2018

Peacekeeping operations should be designed and
deployed solely to complement and support an inclusive
domestic political process, thereby ensuring their own
impartiality and credibility and supporting the domestic
capacity-building of the countries affected by conflict.
The design of mandates must be based on thorough and
broad analyses of conflicts and their root causes. All
partners must be constructively engaged in the process
of formulating mandates. It should be compulsory
for penholders to consult with the prospective troopand police-contributing countries on mandates before
they are finalized, and mandates should be clear,
credible, achievable and adequately resourced. Each
should define the role and responsibility of all the
key stakeholders and actors — the Security Council,
the troop- and police-contributing countries, the
Secretariat and others.
Mandates should be clearly communicated to
peacekeepers on the ground and the tasks expected
of them must be clearly linked to those mandates.
Mission leaderships must set clear expectations for
peacekeepers and be more accountable for the whole-ofmission performance. At no time should the fact that
a contingent comes with no national caveats make it
prone to unreasonable demands, deployments, rotations
or scapegoating. Performance should be the primary
basis for rotating contingents from different troop- and
police-contributing countries, especially in transitional
times. Mandates and peacekeepers’ capacities should
be consistently aligned and adjusted based on the
evolving realities on the ground, with mobile training
support teams provided as necessary.
The United Nations should work closely with
relevant regional organizations without undermining the
host country’s sovereignty or its prerogative of initiating
a nationally led peace process. Peacekeepers must win
the trust and confidence of the civilians they protect,
including by helping local communities improve their
living conditions and ensuring harmonious relations
among themselves.
Last but not least, peacekeepers should always be
able to operate at the highest possible level of morale,
with adequate measures taken to ensure their safety,
security and dignity as they risk their lives to uphold
the principles of the United Nations. They must have
the confidence of knowing that they are never alone.
Bringing the perpetrators of crimes against United
Nations peacekeepers to justice is critical in that regard.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Peace and security, development and human
rights, the three pillars of the United Nations, are
complementary and mutually reinforcing. Thanks to
the United Nations, the world has come a long way on
those fronts, but with a paradox. Poverty, hunger and
exclusion, the breeders of most conflicts, no longer
appear invincible, but those working to end them
are in dire need of more resources. And conflicts,
where the largest part of our resources go, appear to
be perpetuating themselves or breeding new ones,
destroying development gains in most cases. Why
has that happened? It is largely because the efforts to
combat them have not been even-handed.
In conclusion, only our collective political will and
action to address philosophical, policy and strategic
questions relating to conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding will ensure success on the peace and
security front. That success will continue to elude us
until inclusive development is fully embraced as the
ultimate prevention tool, until politically negotiated
peaceful solutions are found to settle every conflict and
until conflicts anywhere are taken seriously long before
they pose threats everywhere.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
would like to express its gratitude to the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for organizing this important open debate
of the Security Council on the theme of collective
action to improve United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We thank the delegation of the State of
Kuwait, your predecessor in the presidency, Sir, for its
many successful initiatives during its tenure. We would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for the concept
note (S/2018/184, annex) prepared for today’s meeting,
which helps to frame the issues and sharpen our focus
on the key achievements that have been made as well
as the serious deficiencies that must be remedied.
We would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
and Ms. Fatimata Touré, Director of the Groupe de
recherche, d’étude et de formation femme-action, for
their valuable briefings and contributions.
(spoke in French)
While peacekeeping operations were born of
improvisation, they have continued to develop and
adapt to the numerous challenges posed by realities

S/PV. 8218

on the ground. And while assessments of their
performance are sometimes severely criticized and
lead to frustration, their usefulness as an essential
mechanism for managing and resolving conflicts has
never been questioned — indeed, the reverse is true.
That is how we understand the essence of the reform
proposed by Secretary-General António Guterres that
is the framework for this open debate. We support
the various measures proposed this morning by the
Secretary-General to galvanize the collective action of
Member States.
We should continually review our approach
to peacekeeping operations and their methods by
considering some key criteria. Of those, we emphasize
that we must have clear, realistic and implementable
mandates that are developed by taking into account
the specific the context and realities on the ground.
The political consensus that must prevail among all
the national, regional and international stakeholders
involved, especially the members of the Security
Council, should be founded on the provision of adequate
resources tailored to their mandates, including mobile
and air capabilities such as helicopters, and, needless to
say, adequate and well-trained military staff. A lack of
those prerequisites is frequently a reason for failure in
peacekeeping operations.
With regard to peacekeeping operations, Africa
has unfortunately been a giant laboratory rat in recent
years, making our continent an invaluable contributor
to the ongoing collective reflection on decisive action.
Africa’s more active involvement where the Council’s
authority is concerned will be all the more timely,
as Mr. Smaїl Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, remarked during his
statement at the initiation session for the newest
members of the African Union’s Peace and Security
Council, held in Djibouti on 27 and 28 March, since this
is a time when African leaders have shown renewed
commitment to taking up the task of implementing the
peace and security agenda for Africa.
(spoke in English)
The Security Council has an integral role to play
in defining and helping us fill the current and future
capability gaps in our missions, including through
training and capacity-building assistance. The mission
concepts for operations should be continually reassessed
and their force composition and operational plans
adjusted. Troop- and police-contributing countries

18-0878959/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

must remain flexible and adaptable with regard to
the capabilities they provide and the time periods for
which they provide them. Deploying forces that meet
operational performance and conduct standards are
critical elements in filling capability gaps.
(spoke in French)
We must share our risks and responsibilities
together and shoulder our burdens together. Let us
invest in peace together and let us mobilize to make our
peacekeeping operations more effective, together.
Ms. Sukkar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mark Rutte, Prime
Minister of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
members of the delegation of the Netherlands for
holding this important meeting. I also thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and all who briefed the
Council and shared valuable information with it.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is one of the
pioneer States in spreading peace and security in the
region and the world. We participate in peacekeeping
troops and in sharing our experience in international
peace and security. Jordan plays an important role in
dialogue and mediation for peace. We engage positively
in peacekeeping tasks based on the principled positions
of our foreign policy and the principles of moderation
and respect for international conventions and treaties.
For decades, the Kingdom has taken part in
peacekeeping operations all over the world under the
umbrella of the United Nations. We have provided more
than 100,000 participants in Croatia, Darfur, South
Sudan, the Congo, Mali, Haiti, the Central African
Republic and others. In that regard, we underscore that
peacekeeping operations should never be an alternative
to engagement in political processes that would ensure
sustaining peace, peacebuilding and finding solutions
to the root causes of conflicts and wars. We stress the
need to work for conflict prevention and to provide the
appropriate means and conditions for sustaining peace.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan values the efforts
of the Secretary-General in the reform and restructuring
of the peacebuilding sector in order to make missions
more effective. That is the responsibility not only of
troop- and police-contributing countries, but also of
all relevant stakeholders, beginning from the design
of a realistic and achievable mandate, all the way to
60/86

28/03/2018

providing adequate human and financial resources and
equipment, as well as the required political will. Host
countries, regional and local organizations, mission
commanders also share responsibility. We emphasize
the triangular consultation between the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the troop-contributing
countries, as well as the importance of multilateral
engagement and partnerships in facing challenges and
achieving world peace.
The resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly on sustaining peace, in addition
to the plan of action based on the Cruz report, are a
good starting point to identify the challenges faced by
peacekeeping operations and develop a realistic longterm strategy to tackle these challenges.
Excellent training is one of the main pillars of
the success of peacekeeping troops and for improving
their performance. In that regard, the Government
of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, represented
by the Jordanian armed forces and the Directorate of
General Security, pays particular attention to training.
We believe that providing quality training is an
effective and principal requirement. Hence, in 1996
we established a training institute for peacekeeping
operations where we train members of the Jordanian
armed forces who will be participating in peacekeeping
operations. Since 2003, we have been providing
training courses for foreign participants. Our training
institute is accredited by NATO and a member of the
International Association of Peacekeeping Training
Centres. We have trained more than 66,000 troops from
Jordan and other countries. We added another centre
for peacekeeping training in 2013, which is supervised
by the Directorate of General Security. We continue to
support the Secretary-General’s efforts with regards
to the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse.
The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan supports the efforts of the Secretariat aimed at
increasing the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. We currently have 30 women participating
in the police component of the peacekeeping missions
in Darfur, South Sudan and Abyei. Of the 12 female
officers trained in the institute, we have also deployed
three female officers from the Jordanian armed forces.
They are now staff officers in the Congo. Our goal is to
increase the percentage of women to 15 per cent by the
end of 2018. That reaffirms the importance that Jordan
attaches to the participation of women and to enhancing
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8218

their role in peacekeeping operations. Women play an
active and important role in peacekeeping.

resources and provide sound political directives to the
troops and police on the ground.

In conclusion, the role of the United Nations should
move from peacekeeping phase to post-conflict work.
We call for the continued collective support of the
international community as the world around us changes
so that we can build active partnerships at all levels
and address the root causes of conflicts and disputes
in order to prevent them. Jordan supports all efforts
towards enhancing peacekeeping and strengthening
the links between peace, security, development and
human rights. Those are the main pillars of the United
Nations for achieving international peace and security
and providing a better life for all.

We are confident that the ongoing reform process of
the United Nations peace and security architecture will
have positive ramifications for the way that the United
Nations addresses the challenges it faces in that regard.
At the same time, the mandates given to United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be commensurate with
the resources allocated to them. We must also have in
place predictable, professional and flexible logistical
support systems, as well as the tools and means for
increasing the performance of our troops and police.

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I join others in thanking
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
an issue of vital importance for the United Nations. Our
appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive overview of the current situation and
to the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Director of the non-governmental organization
Groupe de recherche, d’étude et de formation
femme-action for their informative briefings.
The first issue that I would like to address today
is the increasingly life-threatening environments in
which some of our current peacekeeping missions
are currently deployed. The intensification and
sophistication of the asymmetric threats posed by
terrorist and extremist groups is a serious challenge to
United Nations peacekeeping, both in terms of force
protection and the implementation of its mandates.
We condemn in the strongest terms all attacks on
peacekeepers, who unfortunately have suffered the
highest number of fatalities we have seen in more than
two decades during the past year. Turkey supports the
efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to ensure the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, not least in terms of improved
training for peacekeepers.
Peacekeeping operations, as the flagship activity
of the United Nations, continue to be one of the most
effective tools created by the international community
to address conflict and post-conflict environments. We
believe that an integrated, coherent and well-coordinated
political and strategic framework is necessary for their
effectiveness. Through that framework, the United
Nations system can develop clear, realistic, credible
and achievable mandates matched with appropriate

There is no doubt that multidimensional
peacekeeping operations require a variety of expertise,
which cannot be met solely by military personnel.
Therefore, it is vital to enhance the policing aspect
of our missions, in order to ensure that they perform
mandated tasks more effectively. Moreover, we should
all adopt a zero-tolerance policy towards sexual
violence incidents and make sure that the perpetrators
are brought to justice.
As a dedicated troop- and police-contributing
country, not only to United Nations operations but also
to other missions conducted by regional organizations,
such as NATO, the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Turkey is fully
engaged in global peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts. We will also continue to make contributions
to the discussions within the United Nations on those
matters with a view to developing a viable road map
to peace in conflict situations, based on the primacy
of conflict prevention, including through effective
mediation, as well as addressing the root causes of
conflicts, with the appropriate understanding of local
circumstances.
Given the magnitude and complexity of current
global challenges, we believe that the United
Nations should further enhance its cooperation with
regional organizations and establish more effective
arrangements in support of its peace operations. We
welcome the steps taken so far, as evidenced by today’s
interaction, in furthering cooperation with the African
Union. Further regionalizing peacekeeping would not
only increase efficiency by tailoring our efforts to local
needs, but also ensure their sustainability even after
international attention fades away.
Before I conclude, I would like to pay tribute to
the men and women serving in peacekeeping missions

18-0878961/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and putting their lives at risk every day to provide
peace, security and stability in various parts of the
world. They fulfil a sacred duty on behalf of the entire
international community. We pay tribute in particular
to those who have sacrificed their lives in the pursuit of
a more peaceful world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I would like to thank
the Kingdom of the Netherlands for bringing this issue
to the forefront of discussion in the Security Council.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer the European Union and the
statement made on behalf of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect.
I wish to bring to the Council’s attention the
following national views.
Peacekeeping operations have become the most
visible activity of the United Nations over the past
few decades. The global security environment is
ever changing and challenges to it are emerging and
evolving. Such challenges demand new and innovative
approaches and that must be reflected in appropriate
adjustments within international operations and
missions. They are becoming increasingly dynamic,
their mandates are growing in diversity and their
individual tasks are intertwined.
The following principles and values are the basis
of Slovenia’s participation in international operations
and missions: strengthening international security,
democracy, the rule of law, respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms and the protection of
particularly vulnerable groups.
In 2017, Slovenia marked the twentieth anniversary
of the deployment of its first contingent of Slovenian
military and police officers to international operations
and missions and the tenth anniversary of the deployment
of civilian functional experts. In those years, more
than 13,500 uniformed and civilian personnel served
in United Nations and other peace support operations
and, throughout that period, Slovenia has continued to
upgrade and enhance its participation in various ways,
such as by specializing in specific tasks and acting in
a more gender-balanced manner. In our view, collective
action to improve United Nations peacekeeping
operations should focus in particular on the following
issues.
62/86

28/03/2018

First, efforts to improve the security of peacekeepers,
as well as civilians, are our collective responsibility.
We fully agree with the recommendations contained in
the report of Lieutenant General Santos Cruz and we
support the Secretary-General’s initiative for immediate
action to address weaknesses and systemic gaps. Close
cooperation among all relevant stakeholders, such as
countries contributing troops and police, the Security
Council, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, key financial contributors and providers
of training and equipment, regional partners and host
countries, is crucial in that regard.
Secondly, we strongly believe that every
peacekeeping mission must be supported by properly
trained, well-equipped and motivated troops. Countries
that contribute troops and police themselves must invest
more in both training and equipment. The analytical
and intelligence skills required to identify threats as
they emerge should also be improved.
Thirdly, we would also stress the importance of
integrating the gender perspective into all phases of
peacekeeping. There is a need to increase the number
of women in international operations and missions
and deployed personnel must receive the best possible
training on women and peace and security issues.
Fourthly, paying due attention to the code of
conduct is another important aspect. The fundamental
role of international operations and missions is to
contribute to peace and security and protect the most
vulnerable on the ground. We would therefore like to
reiterate our support for two important initiatives: first,
the prevention of, and response to, sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations, including the
Circle of Leadership, and secondly, the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
Lastly, Slovenia will continue to participate in
activities led by the United Nations and other relevant
international organizations in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations to
establish and maintain international peace and security.
By committing to solidarity and peace, Slovenia would
like to continue to endeavour to be a reliable member of
the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I am honoured to take the floor again in the Chamber
and in particular under your presidency, Ambassador
Van Oosterom.
I thank the Kingdom of the Netherlands for
convening today’s debate. I also thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat
and Ms. Fatimata Touré for their briefings earlier today.
It has already been done by others, but nonetheless
Uruguay would like to pay tribute to the men and women
of all countries who have served in peacekeeping
operations. Their commitment and dedication have
saved and continue to save countless lives. Regrettably,
many Blue Helmets have lost their lives in service to
the United Nations. We owe them an enormous debt of
gratitude.
Uruguay is one of the 20 largest contributors of
troops and police and fully agrees with the concept of
collective action to improve peacekeeping operations.
The Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat play a key role in such
operations. The Security Council must understand that
political solutions will always guide the design and
deployment of operations and that political momentum
must be maintained throughout the various cycles of
conflict. Therefore, the political strategies that underpin
peacekeeping operations must have the support of a
united Security Council, without which the operations’
success could be seriously affected.
The Security Council also has the responsibility to
ensure the full functionality of a peacekeeping operation
once it has been deployed, which includes, among other
things, requesting and obtaining from host States full
respect for and compliance with the terms agreed to in
the status of forces agreements. Those agreements are
safeguards that protect the personnel that a country has
voluntarily seconded to a peacekeeping operation. The
Security Council has not always been able to demand
and ensure that host countries comply with the terms of
status of forces agreements.
With regard to troop- and police-contributing
countries, they bear the direct responsibility for
ensuring that they send peacekeepers who are properly
equipped and trained and prepared to implement all the
tasks under a mandate and in strict compliance with the
standards of conduct of the United Nations, in particular
those that pertain to the policy of zero tolerance against
exploitation and sexual abuse.

S/PV. 8218

On that issue, my delegation would like to
underscore the point that national restrictions — the socalled caveats — be they declared or, even worse, not
declared; the lack of effective chains of command and
control; the refusal to obey orders; the failure to respond
to attacks against civilians; and the lack of equipment
cannot be tolerated, given that they undermine the
shared responsibility for effective mandate delivery.
Moreover, the increase in the frequency of attacks
deliberately targeting United Nations staff and facilities
underscores the need for peacekeepers to be given
clear rules for their effective, proportionate and robust
defence against such attacks.
That topic has been addressed in detail by the
Santos Cruz report, which ends with a series of practical
recommendations. We highlight the importance of
implementing those recommendations, while recalling
the need to implement the recommendations of previous
reports, such as the 2015 High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations report (see S/2015/446) or the
Cammaert report, which have not necessarily received
the attention or response that they deserve.
With regard to the Secretariat, its role is decisive in
terms of providing advice and making recommendations
on addressing the reconfiguration needs of operations.
We acknowledge the important efforts that the
Secretariat is carrying out as part of the process of the
strategic reviews of the main peacekeeping operations.
We believe that those reviews are a vital exercise
within our efforts to adapt peacekeeping operations to
current needs.
We also commend the efforts we have seen in the
different forums where the theme of peacekeeping is
being addressed. Among them, we point to the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which recently
wrapped up its session, which resulted in various
points of agreement on sensible and topical aspects of
peacekeeping, such as the security and performance of
peacekeepers, the concept of the protection of civilians,
and triangular cooperation. The Fifth Committee will
soon turn its attention to the peacekeeping budget. It is
essential that Member States reaffirm their commitment
to the peacekeeping operations reform process and
provide operations with sufficient resources to allow
them to achieve their mandates.
Uruguay also underscores the useful ministerial
meetings on peacekeeping, which have proven their
worth as platforms for achieving concrete outcomes

18-0878963/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

on issues, such as the generation of forces, through
new agreements.
In conclusion, my delegation believes it is crucial that
we frame those efforts within the broader United Nations
reform efforts being pursued by the Secretary-General,
that is, management reform and the restructuring of the
peace and security pillar. Both reform proposals by the
Secretary-General, could, depending on the decisions
of Member States, have a major positive impact on the
future of peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium associates itself with the statement of the
European Union, as well as with those of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security and the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, of which it
is a member.
The figures are worrying. Peacekeepers are
increasingly being killed on mission. I would like to
begin by paying tribute to those who have contributed
to peace by sacrificing their lives, often far from
home. We owe them all a great deal. The facts are
well known — stalled political processes, differences
among the parties, a tendency to rely on the mission
to replace the role of the State, contradictory political
messages addressed by the authorities to the people.
The Blue Helmets are becoming targets for who they
are and what they represent, and that is unacceptable.
However, peacekeeping has also been a positive
experience: West Africa, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and
Sierra Leone are examples of successful missions. The
United Nations Mission in Liberia will close its doors in
two days. Those situations illustrate the importance of
having, at the outset of the mission, a clear view of the
elements that will enable the peacekeeping operation
to withdraw from the country once its mandate has
been fulfilled.
Peacekeeping is constantly evolving, and we thank
the Netherlands for giving further impetus to this debate
in the run-up to the high-level event in September and a
possible adoption of a resolution by the Council.
General Cruz’s report made recommendations
aimed not only at improving the security of the men
and women who make up the contingents, but also at
making the operations more efficient. The SecretaryGeneral wasted no time in presenting a plan of action
64/86

28/03/2018

to implement those recommendations. We welcome
those measures and would like to support their
implementation. The Cruz report is unambiguous: to
mitigate risks it is necessary to improve the performance
of the deployed troops and make the use of intelligence
more systematic and effective.
The protection of civilians has become one of the
priority tasks of peacekeeping operations. However,
that task will remain an illusion if the troops involved
do not have the necessary skills required for the
mission, if they are not properly trained and prepared,
and if they do not have the necessary equipment. Not all
troop-contributing countries have the same operational
experience. To match the level of performance with
the needs of the mission, the training and preparation
of contingents have become essential. Small gaps can
be corrected within the mission, but larger gaps need
to be identified and resolved before any contingents
are deployed.
Belgium welcomes the establishment of an agile
coordination mechanism to connect troop-contributing
countries that have expressed a need with those that
have the necessary experience. Mapping and keeping
track of trained personnel should also be improved, and
respect for the chain of command, from the moment
contingents are deployed in missions, is an essential
precondition if we want a mission to be effective,
credible and respected on the ground.
Belgium has decided to contribute to strengthening
the capacity-building of contingents from Frenchspeaking countries. We support the training of staff
officers in Entebbe, and we are also financing the
translation of manuals into French. In addition, thanks
to Belgian support, the first United Nations training
in French on the protection of civilians will be held
in June.
We also want to respond to the specific needs
identified in the Cruz report, and we will consider, in
close collaboration with the training services, additional
support to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, both in the
area of combat medicine and by providing a mobile
training team. In an asymmetric environment, such as
that of Mali, a more effective use of intelligence is an
essential requirement for ensuring security and mission
performance and, ultimately, protecting civilians.
Belgium, as a troop-contributing country, provides
a significant portion of the deployed personnel in the
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mission’s intelligence structures and is preparing to do
even more in 2018.
Improving operations also means using the
strategic review instrument more effectively. They
are an opportunity to put the political process and the
protection of civilians back at the heart of mandates.
Strategic reviews are there to give us the keys to redirect
missions in a manner more in line with mandates or,
on the contrary, to modify mandates that have become
unrealistic or impracticable on the ground.
Strategic reviews should be an opportunity
for frank conversations about what is realistic and
achievable, and about the mission horizon, without of
course diminishing the deep ambition of the mission.
In some cases, it would be appropriate to sequence the
objectives more. In all cases, including the difficult
budgetary negotiations that we will have in the coming
years, Belgium is in favour of maintaining substantial
capacities in the areas of child protection and gender
policy. The fight against impunity must also be an
integral part of the longer-term mission strategy. In
terms of good practices, the experience of mixed
patrols involving mediation or human rights experts,
police and military should be applied in more missions.
The various exchanges that will take place this
year will aim to clarify roles and responsibilities in
the reform agenda that is on the table. I can assure
you, Sir, of Belgium’s readiness to contribute actively
and concretely to this discussion throughout this year
but also even more closely with our Security Council
partners during the 2019-2020 term, for which we are
a candidate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Netherlands presidency for organizing today’s open
debate on an issue of such importance for many of our
delegations. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
and the other briefers for sharing their insights.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the various Groups of Friends to which we belong.
Peacekeeping is the flagship contribution of the
United Nations to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Bangladesh feels proud to have
been associated with it over the last three decades.
Peacekeeping is no longer a uniform, monolithic

S/PV. 8218

enterprise. There have been major shifts in peacekeeping
mandates, theatres and operational modalities over
the years. All concerned stakeholders, including the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat, have shown varying
degrees of adaptability in response to those shifts.
Increased partnership with regional and subregional
organizations and the growing participation of women
in peacekeeping have become regular features.
Notions of review and reform are now embedded
in peacekeeping. However, there is no specific
institutional mechanism within the Secretariat to steer
the reform initiatives in a coherent and sustainable
manner. In the context of the Secretary-General’s broad
vision for reform, this issue in particular deserves to
be addressed.
The focus on collective action at today’s open
debate is indeed pertinent. We all agree on the need for
reform, but we diverge on ways to make that happen.
In today’s complex and precarious peacekeeping
environment, there are certain critical issues where
we need to strive for a common understanding. The
fatalities among peacekeepers were at a record high
last year. We must get our acts together to reverse
that trend. We can start with renewed commitment
to a set of issues that would be mutually reinforced
through differentiated responsibilities assumed by the
concerned stakeholders. Our delegation would support
any constructive suggestion to that effect, including
the possibility of a General Assembly resolution on the
safety and security of peacekeepers.
The political primacy of peacekeeping operations
is a sine qua non. Where the political process stagnates
or falters, civilians become more vulnerable to
indiscriminate attacks and peacekeepers get further
exposed to asymmetric threats. It is crucial that an
objective assessment of the political process guide the
design and review of peacekeeping mandates. A longterm prognosis about sustaining peace on the ground
should determine sequenced and prioritized mandates
tailored to the specific context.
The questions of the mindset and performance of
peacekeepers have recently gained a lot of attention.
In our view, the military and policy components
of peacekeeping missions generally demonstrate a
readiness to adapt their mindsets towards facilitating
effective mandate delivery. It is expected that the
Security Council and other stakeholders will also show

18-0878965/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

sufficient responsiveness to the messages coming from
the field and therefore adjust their own mindsets and
usual frames of reference.
Our peacekeepers remain open to receiving
objective assessment and appraisal of their performance.
We recognize the rather belated yet positive initiative to
develop a coordinated performance-evaluation policy
framework, which we stress should be informed by
regular, triangular consultations. However, performance
cannot be seen in isolation from the fundamental
questions of predictable needs-based resources and
critical enablers specific to each peacekeeping mission.
Member States in a position to provide resources
and specialized equipment and training must come
forward with an unequivocal commitment to helping
to enhance the situational awareness, access, agility
and performance of peacekeepers. The decisive factor
of mission leadership and the enabling role of host
States need not be overemphasized. There needs to be
improvement on a range of issues from rapid deployment
to unimpeded access, from physical security to human
intelligence gathering, from expectation management
to reducing environmental footprints.
The current trends do not augur well. We
can certainly do better by mobilizing our shared
commitments and collective actions. Let today’s open
debate help chart a course in that direction.

28/03/2018

cooperation and robust peacekeeping, which are both
highly relevant to today’s topic.
It is crystal clear from this debate that peacekeeping
operations are one of the most reliable and commonly
used instruments. Yet a lot remains to be done in both
the political and the technical dimensions in order to
bring United Nations peacekeeping up to speed and
meet the complexity of contemporary challenges. The
challenges are indeed contemporary, but they are not
new — at least not all of them. Wars, armed conflicts
and aggression are still proliferating and often spiralling
out of control. Therefore, the Organization must be more
proactive and preventive in its actions than ever before.
In this context, I would like to express our full support
for the Secretary-General’s reform effort, which should
result in strengthening strategic advice to the Security
Council, including more active recourse to Article 99
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Comprehensive reform of United Nations
peacekeeping is important for the Organization’s
continued success and relevance. In recent years, some
progress has been achieved in making peacekeeping
operations better prepared to execute mandated tasks,
but we are not there yet. I see the following areas as
ones that continue to need to be properly addressed.

First of all, I would like to express my gratitude for
the initiative of the Netherlands to hold today’s debate.
Today’s meeting is a timely opportunity to assess
prospects for the reform of peacekeeping operations.

First, we need to secure the use of appropriate
modern technologies in peacekeeping operations
and reinforce intelligence capacities of operations.
Secondly, the police capabilities of the Organization
need to be strengthened. Thirdly, efforts to eradicate
sexual violence in United Nations peacekeeping must
also remain among the priorities of peacekeeping
reform. Fourthly, we see significant room for increasing
women’s participation in peacekeeping activity, as
well as for improving the human rights components
in peacekeeping operations. Fifthly, it is critical to
ensure that peacekeeping operations do not have a
harmful environmental footprint while executing
their mandates.

It is nothing short of symbolic that this important
session is held just two days before the closure of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) — one
of the milestone success stories of the United Nations
peacekeeping endeavour. Having contributed to
UNMIL from the very day of its deployment, Ukraine
takes pride in its role in making its success story
possible. Our Blue Helmets in Liberia pioneered such
innovative forms of peacekeeping as inter-mission

For peacekeeping operations to get stronger and
more effective, it is essential to provide them with the
right capabilities and manpower and to make them
ready and willing to implement mandates including on
the protection of civilians. Due attention must also be
paid to securing proper funding and providing sufficient
resources, such as helicopters, as needed. That is
imperative for ensuring the security and mobility of
peacekeeping personnel.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I would like to add the following
remarks in my national capacity.

66/86

18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Missions should be provided with clear mandates
set out in accordance with the core tenets of United
Nations peacekeeping and with the focus on supporting
a political solution to a conflict. In that regard, the
impartiality of a mission and its personnel should be
one of the guiding principles. The tasks of peacekeeping
operations should not be limited only to the security
sphere; they also have to be capable of providing a
proper environment and supporting electoral processes,
in accordance with democratic standards, which often
become a turning point in post-conflict reconciliation
and peacebuilding. In cases of aggression, restoring
legitimate Government authority over occupied
territories, establishing control over the State border
and securing the withdrawal of the occupying forces are
prerequisites of successful peacekeeping operations.
For more than four years the situation in and around
my own country has remained as an example of the
unutilized potential of United Nations peacekeeping.
Our request to deploy a peacekeeping operation in the
Donbass region of Ukraine has still not been properly
considered and no action has been taken. We were
encouraged that from his first days in office SecretaryGeneral Guterres declared a clear position on the
primacy of conflict prevention, mediation and other
diplomatic peacebuilding tools. In that respect, his visit
to Ukraine last July was a sound manifestation of his
commitment to bringing peace to Europe.
There now hangs over the continent a very real
threat of another full-fledged war due to ongoing
aggression by a permanent member of the Council
against my country, as well as its aggressive actions
in other parts of the world, including in the territory of
other permanent members of the Council. That is why
what is urgently needed now are concrete actions, both
on the part of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral. We stand ready to engage constructively at
all levels.
Ukraine has been a strong and reliable partner
of the Organization in peacekeeping activities and
will remain a steadfast supporter and contributor. As
announced recently by the President of Ukraine, we are
ready to extend the geography of our engagement in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. For instance,
we are ready to participate in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali.

S/PV. 8218

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to all
peacekeepers who lost their lives while safeguarding
international peace during the past 70 years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First of all,
let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on a successful
presidency of the Security Council, which culminates
in today’s debate at a time marked by key processes
relating to the maintenance of peace, in particular the
review of the peace and security pillar. I would also
like to warmly congratulate the Secretary-General for
his briefing, which confirms his firm commitment to
the maintenance of peace. Morocco also thanks the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for his
briefing, which confirms the strategic nature of the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union. Finally, I would like to commend Ms. Touré, for
her moving and passionate intervention, which enables
us to better grasp the magnitude of the challenges that
still must be overcome in Mali.
Morocco, which has been a troop-contributing
country on an ongoing basis for 60 years, has firsthand experience of this issue. Peacekeeping has
evolved, while the risks for United Nations personnel
are becoming ever greater. It is high time for the
Organization to take the necessary measures to adapt
to this fact.
The need for recasting peacekeeping is nothing
new. The report (S/2000/809) of the Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations — known as the Brahimi
report — in its day made recommendations along
those lines, and they are as relevant as ever. The same
is true of the United Nations Peacekeeping Operations
Principles and Guidelines — also known as the Capstone
Doctrine — as well as the report of the United Nations
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446), the current process capped by the Cruz
report, and the new vision of the Secretary-General,
which he presented this morning to the Council. Hence,
the importance of institutional memory.
One must also never lose sight of the fact that the
goal of peacekeeping operations is that of resolving
crises. The primacy of politics must never be sacrificed
to other elements of the mandate. We hope that the
current strategic reviews will allow us to strengthen
this critical aspect of peacekeeping operations.

18-0878967/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

On the issue of partnerships, we had an opportunity
to hear from Mr. Faki Mahamat this morning, who
presented, in a comprehensive way, the challenges and
opportunities inherent in the partnership. Morocco,
which rejoined the continent-wide African Union
organization in January 2017 and was recently elected
a member of the Peace and Security Council, is
committed to sharing its experience for the benefit of
both organizations.
More than 10 years have elapsed since the financing
of African Union operations mandated by the Security
Council has been discussed without significant
progress. We all agree when it comes to affirming
the importance of partnerships that the time has now
come for the United Nations to provide the necessary
support to the African Union in order to provide that
partnership with the resources needed to achieve the
scale and effectiveness awaited.
We would also like to emphasize Morocco’s belief
that a greater number of women in peacekeeping
missions is needed, if not mandatory. Morocco will
continue to take the necessary measures to increase
the percentage of women in its deployments in
peacekeeping operations.
Today’s debate raises many pertinent questions. We
take this opportunity to reiterate our full support for the
zero-tolerance policy aimed at ending sexual abuse and
exploitation and the recent initiatives of the SecretaryGeneral in that regard, which we fully support.
I shall restrict my remarks to the notion of collective
responsibility and that of performance. To quote an
expression dear to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierred Lacroix,
“Peacekeeping is a family within the United Nations.”
We must support that approach and avoid, to the extent
possible, shirking responsibility and finger-pointing.
This notion of collective responsibility can be made
tangible on the basis of the following elements.
First, mandates must be realistic and adapted to
the situation on the ground. It is in that spirit that we
emphasize the importance of triangular cooperation, as
troop-contributing countries have gained experience
and expertise that needs to be shared. We hope that the
group that we set up last year with Pakistan, bringing
together the major troop- and police-contributing
countries, will play a positive part in strengthening
triangular cooperation by providing a platform
68/86

28/03/2018

for exchanges, both with the Secretariat and the
Security Council.
Secondly, the documents that define a mission’s
needs in terms of equipment are vitally important for
mandate delivery. They must be regularly updated each
time that the operational concepts or the mandates
change. The equipment must be able to be looked after,
and the troop-contributing countries have an obligation
to provide material that meets United Nations standards.
Thirdly, training is the responsibility of troopcontributing countries, which undertake to provide
only military and career police officers. We are also
responsible for predeployment training, which we
provide on the basis of Secretariat documents. Hence
the importance of updating the documents made
available to us, according to the realities in the theatres
of deployment. On the basis of its experience, Morocco
has for several decades now been engaged in providing
military capacity-building and training to our many
African partners. We stand ready to offer our firstrate facilities and expertise to all in the framework of
a triangular partnership in order to expand the number
of beneficiaries.
Fourthly, managing expectations, whether of the
civilian population, the authorities or the Security
Council, is essential. Let us take the example of the
protection of civilians, which is one of the key mandated
tasks, but also the most difficult to fulfil. It is difficult
to expect that a contingent of 750 soldiers can guarantee
the protection of a civilian population on a surface area
as big as an entire country. It is vital that our soldiers
are backed by clear rules of engagement and supported
by appropriate equipment.
I would like to briefly address the second point.
We often hear talk of troop performance, but we
should rather focus on the performance of missions
in a holistic manner. All the elements that I referred
to earlier impact the performance — at Headquarters
level, at the level of the mission’s leadership and
among deployed contingents. That was rightly pointed
out in the latest report of the Special Committee on
Peaekeeping Operations.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to
the men and women deployed in extremely difficult
conditions, and more particularly to the Blue Helmets
who sacrificed their lives in the cause of peace.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Mero (United Republic of Tanzania): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on a subject of great significance for global
peace and security, particularly to the continent of
Africa. I also wish to commend Secretary-General
Guterres for his strong statement setting out his vision of
the future of peacekeeping operations. Furthermore, let
me commend Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, for his briefing.
The United Republic of Tanzania is committed
to continuing to support collective measures to
attain global peace and stability. To demonstrate that
commitment, we are proud that, among the current
uniformed peacekeeping troops in 16 missions,
Tanzania is one of the highest contributors of the
123 contributor countries, with military, police
and corrections personnel deployed to a total of six
United Nations peacekeeping missions, namely, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic.
The pursuit of shared peace, security and
prosperity lies at the heart of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is the noble and legitimate aspiration of all
peoples and nations. It is our solemn duty to design
appropriate mechanisms in order to fulfil those
ambitions, which are shared by all humankind In such
circumstances, peacekeeping has, and must continue
to be, a collective global undertaking. We must be a
community of peacekeeping nations rather than a
disparate aggregation of troop/police-contributors,
personnel contributors, financial contributors or
resource-contributing countries.
Contemporary peacekeeping operations have
undergone a tactical shift from the traditional
peacekeeping role to multidimensional operations,
which require peacekeeping missions to be configured
in a robust manner in order to implement and defend
their mandates. In view of the new dynamics, there is
an urgent need for the Security Council, Member State
contributor countries and regional bodies to work closely

S/PV. 8218

together under the auspices of triangular cooperation
mechanisms in order to achieve the envisaged political
outcome and to strengthen strategic coherence. In
that regard, based on triangular consultations among
the key stakeholders, the Security Council should be
guided by meaningful dialogue before the issuance or
renewal of actionable mandates, which must clearly
set out the operational priorities, implications and
required capabilities.
The Security Council and the Secretariat, in
collaboration with troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs and PCCs) and other actors, are indeed
solely obliged to deliver more effectively on their
responsibilities to improve peacekeeping operations. In
that regard, the Security Council needs to ensure that
a clear mandate is issued and that it is implemented
by all actors. The Secretariat should ensure that the
mandate is clearly interpreted and, accordingly, provide
guidance on its implementation. In consultation with
all actors, the Secretariat should review the status of
the implementation and should advise both the Security
Council and the TCCs andPCCs on the way forward
before the renewal of the mandate. In that regard, the
TCCs and PCCs clearly need to be informed about the
status of the operational performance evaluation of
their respective contingents in order to ensure a timely
response to the identified shortfalls.
While we commend the initiatives of the SecretaryGeneral to improve the security of United Nations
peacekeepers in implementation of the Cruz report, as a
Member State we have some concerns and reservations,
including with regard to the following. The TCCs and
PCCs remain solely responsible for ensuring that the
troops are well equipped and trained in accordance with
the specific mission requirements. The TCCs and PCCs
in the high-risk missions mentioned were not consulted
during the process in order to submit their points of
view to Lieutenant General Cruz. We think that most
of the issues outlined in the report are purely basic
military tactics and training, which are an integral part
of most national combat training standards.
In that regard, we would like to underscore the
need to respect the doctrines and training standards of
the TCCs. Since mission-specific tactical training is
not part of the United Nations training modules — but
it should be the case — we encourage missions to put
in place the appropriate mechanisms to regulate and
to evaluate the contingent’s readiness for the mission,

18-0878969/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

which should include induction or in-mission training
for all troops.
As all those present may be aware, upon the
issuance of any mandate the Secretariat needs to clearly
interpret it and outline the specific actions and rules of
engagement of the respective missions. In that regard,
there is a need to ensure that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, the commanders and the
civilian as well as the military staff officers in all
mission components have the correct mindset to defend
and to implement the mandate.
The United Nations is currently in the process of
downsizing the force levels of peacekeeping missions
due to budgetary constraints. It is very unfortunate to
note that the ongoing force reduction process is not
informed by the situation on the ground. As a result, the
lives of Blue Helmets are in jeopardy due to the fact that
the reduced force levels are outstripped by the proxy
forces and end up being overstretched and vulnerable
to those proxy forces. In that regard, we wish to appeal
to the United Nations, including the Security Council,
to regularly consult with troop- and police-contributing
countries in order to ensure that the mandates are
configured and realigned to clearly address the actual
situation on the ground with adequate force levels and
capabilities commensurate with the proxy forces.
Missions should be adequately resourced and
equipped with all critical enablers. In reference to
the recent attacks, we strongly propose the need for
all missions to have credible all-weather contingency
support for and reinforcement of troops in both day and
night operations.
In conclusion, albeit with even more weight than
in the preceding discussions, we pay heartfelt tribute
to the men and women who have had their lives altered
as a result of their participation in, and commitment
to, the cause of peace. We honour the memories of all
those who paid the ultimate price in the hope of seeing
a better tomorrow for those whom they worked hard to
protect. Their deaths must not be in vein. We owe it to
them to work hard and in a more united way in order to
realize the fruits for which they sacrificed their lives.
I congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
Netherlands presidency of the Security Council
throughout this month.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
70/86

28/03/2018

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on
peacekeeping operations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union earlier today.
I would like to make the following comments in my
national capacity.
Peacekeeping is at the heart of United Nations
efforts to increase security and to sustain peace in many
parts of the world. It plays a critical role in the face of
multiplying threats and conflicts, both traditional and
asymmetrical in nature. Yet the increased number of
casualties among peacekeepers, with the 56 fatalities
in 2017 being the highest number since 1994, is a
sobering reminder that the United Nations and troopand police-contributing countries need to transform the
system in order to face the current realities.
As the Cruz report highlights, the shift has to be
system-wide, encompassing leadership, accountability,
operational behaviour, the use of force, training,
intelligence and more. The safety of United Nations
personnel and the mission is a necessary prerequisite
for the political success of any peacekeeping mission,
particularly in high-risk settings. Mobilizing our efforts
to that end should be our utmost priority.
Along with the increased focus on the military
component of missions, it is vital to focus on the
political contexts and the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. It is clear that peacekeeping missions alone
cannot bring about lasting peace without political
solutions and support on the ground. Peacekeeping
missions should have the core objective of contributing
to the creation of conditions for an inclusive political
process aimed at national dialogue and reconciliation.
The mandates and capacities to implement those
mandates should be clearly defined. Mandates should
be realistic, context-tailored and flexible and, within
them, tasks need to be prioritized, sequenced and
adjusted over periods of time.
In that context, let me recall Georgia’s experience
with regard to peace operations. While Georgia never
enjoyed a peacekeeping operation with a full-fledged
mandate, from 1993 the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) played a crucial role in
achieving security. However, in 2009, UNOMIG was
discontinued due to the veto of a permanent member
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of the Council, thereby creating a very dangerous
precedent in the history of the United Nations.
The forceful termination of the UNOMIG mandate,
preceded by the cessation of the mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
created a total vacuum of international presence in the
occupied regions of Georgia and turned them into black
holes for human rights and “one of the most inaccessible
places on Earth”, as observed by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The Russian occupation has turned Georgia’s
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions into territories in
which there is no accountability for murder and torture,
as demonstrated by the brutal death of an internally
displaced Georgian civilian, Archil Tatunashvili,
which took place on 22 February. His body, however,
was released by occupying forces only a few days
ago so that he could be given a proper burial. An
investigation by forensic experts showed clear evidence
of torture. That situation speaks to the urgent need for
creating international security arrangements on the
ground as provided and mandated by the 12 August
2008 European Union-mediated ceasefire agreement
between the Russian Federation and Georgia. Progress,
or even a meaningful discussion on that issue, remains
elusive, while in the Council we face the reality that
the primacy of politics does not allow for the creation
of much-needed peacekeeping mandates in conflictaffected territories in which the host country is deprived
of its ability to exercise jurisdiction.
The 2016 landmark twin resolutions on sustaining
peace — resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262 — provide us with a foundation for
our work, and the Secretary-General’s reform agenda
provides us with an opportunity to institute changes at
the United Nations. We commend the Secretary-General
on efforts already under way and the recommendations
presented in his report on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace (S/2018/43). Streamlining the system, with
structural reforms and delegating responsibilities
through a holistic, cross-pillar approach affords the
Organization an opportunity to improve its delivery of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Lastly, we call for strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
to ensure sustainable peace, justice, respect for human
rights and development. We believe that regular
consultations and coordination between the United

S/PV. 8218

Nations and regional organizations, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
are indispensable to converging strategies to secure
sustainable peace on the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. González Parra (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I thank you, Sir, and the Kingdom
of the Netherlands for convening this open debate of
the Security Council on the topic of collective action to
improve United Nations peacekeeping operations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Ms. María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar, stated during a
debate on the reform of peace operations in September
2017, we in Colombia believe that the time has come
to ensure that United Nations peacekeeping operations
effectively respond to the pressing challenges that they
face in a world of changing threats. In that regard, I
would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
support for the concept of sustaining peace advocated for
by the Secretary General. We understand the reference
to “collective action” in the concept note (S/2018/184,
annex) for this debate as a call for findings synergies
in the implementation of that important concept. We
believe that reconfiguring the peace and security pillar
constitutes a crucial step in the transition from words
to actions. As the concept note aptly points out, that
concept is a shared responsibility of all stakeholders:
host nations, regional organizations, States Members,
including troop- and police-contributing countries,
and, of course, the Secretariat and the Security Council.
My delegation agrees with the concept note’s view
concerning the need for those actors to conceive of
their contributions in terms of precise and strategic
goals and a concrete perception of the outcomes to be
achieved on a case-by-case basis. Such collaborative
work cannot be limited to situational challenges, but
must constantly strive to satisfying the greatest of
aspirations — achieving peace — including through
strengthening national capacity and fostering the
conditions that enable countries to confront their
challenges independently, as well as to foster the
development and well-being of their people. The

18-0878971/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Secretary-General raised the issue with the greatest
clarity when he stated earlier today,
“Put simply, peace operations cannot succeed if
they are deployed instead of a political solution
rather than in support of one”.
The groundwork has already been laid with
important contributions, among which I would like to
highlight the report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(see S/2015/490), which rightly calls for overcoming
fragmentation in the implementation of mandates.
Moreover, the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) reminds
us that peacekeeping operations must maintain their
focus on people. Those assessments, together with
ideas on how to move forward, are judiciously reflected
in the report (S/2018/43) of the Secretary-General
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, which has
provided us with proposals to make the United Nations
effective in one of its fundamental mandates set out
in the Charter of the United Nations. We are also
encouraged by the draft report of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations for this year, as it calls for
avoiding fragmentation and emphasizes an aspect that
we consider crucial both for the effective deployment
and successful completion of a mission. First of all, it
allows us confront the long-standing absence of women
in peacekeeping operations. Women represent only
4.7 per cent of military experts in the field and 3.2 per
cent of troops. The level of representation of women
within the United Nations police is also low — only
16.9 per cent of its members are female. Secondly,
it is essential to provide added value to individual
experiences on the ground in terms of what does and
does not work and how to achieve better outcomes when
we consider the specific conditions of every particular
situation. For there is no magic formula that can be
applied to every situation.
Colombia has not only participated as a
police-contributing country in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti since 2006, in which we
have lent support to areas such as technical advice in
intelligence, the judicial police, anti-narcotics efforts
and community policing, as well as training their own
forces — an undertaking to which we will continue to
contribute together with the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in this new phase — but we have also
begun — thanks to the commitment of President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderón — the process of contributing
72/86

28/03/2018

personnel to other places, including our presence today
in the Central African Republic, Lebanon and Guinea
Bissau. Our goal is to strengthen training and increase
the number of Colombian police and military personnel
in peacekeeping operations. My country believes
that participation in that process is an unavoidable
responsibility as a Member of the United Nations and
as a nation committed to peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): I thank the
delegation of the Netherlands for organizing this timely
open debate on the collective action to improve United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
In the 70 years since the establishment of the
United Nations, the need for the Organization to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
has never been greater. In that regard, South Africa
reaffirms that United Nations peacekeeping remains a
flagship activity at the disposal of the United Nations to
contribute to the ideal of peace, security and stability.
Since the inception of the Organization, United Nations
peacekeeping has provided essential security and muchneeded hope to many people around the world, and the
necessary support to countries emerging from conflict.
Peacekeeping must be used to support political
processes and solutions to any conflict situation. South
Africa holds the view that we must undoubtedly aim
to strengthen the tools at our disposal in addressing
conflicts as they arise. We need to put emphasis on
the preventative approach, including mediation, in
addressing conflicts and their root causes so as to
prevent them. Our efforts must also focus on preventing
countries emerging from conflict from relapsing
back therein. Conflict prevention must therefore begin
with steps to prevent conflicts rather than to respond to
them after violence has already occurred.
Consequently, South Africa believes that global
peace and stability will remain elusive if we do not
address the nexus between security and development;
one cannot be achieved without the other. Sustainable
peace can be achieved only by building a just world in
a rules-based international order that is inclusive and
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

addresses the root causes of conflicts, such as poverty,
injustice and discrimination.
As the organ entrusted with the deployment of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, and in the
context of new emerging threats aimed at our troops and
United Nations personnel, the Security Council must
ensure that operations are fully resourced, entrusted
with the appropriate mandate to respond to the contextspecific environment in which they are deployed and
ensure that peacekeepers are adequately equipped to
protect themselves and defend their mandates.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
highlights the role of regional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. My
delegation supports the implementation of the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed
between the Secretary-General and Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, which emphasizes
preventing and mediating conflict and sustaining peace;
responding to conflict; addressing root causes; and the
continuous review and enhancement of the partnership.
While the primary responsibility for international
peace and security lies with the Security Council, it
is often regional organizations, such as the African
Union, that deploy early in order to stabilize crisis
situations. South Africa wishes to reiterate that the use
of United Nations assessed contributions will provide
the most reliable, sustainable and predictable avenue of
support for Security Council-mandated Africa Union
peace operations.
South Africa supports recommendations for
more realistic, tailored and flexible mandates, which
will contribute towards more efficient and effective
peacekeeping operations, and, ultimately, to more
successful outcomes in conflict resolution. Mandates
should be drafted in consultation with those who are
responsible for their implementation — for example,
the troop- and police-contributing countries. The view
of troop- and police-contributing countries should be
heard, as they have a unique perspective being on the
ground and understanding the specific challenges their
peacekeepers face in a particular environment.
As peacekeeping continues to evolve, the United
Nations must also evolve. That is important in view of
the increasing asymmetrical threats and acts of terrorism
directed against peacekeeping missions and violence
towards innocent civilians. My delegation notes the

S/PV. 8218

recommendations of the report on improving security
of United Nations peacekeepers, known as the SantosCruz report, and further requests that the SecretaryGeneral consults troop- and police-contributing
countries before and during the implementation
of those recommendations. As the report states,
peacekeepers need adequate equipment, especially
modern technologies. We therefore believe that modern
technology can help minimize harm and the loss of
life of our troops deployed in fragile and dangerous
environments. The use of information, communication
and technologies, including night-flying fighting
capabilities, should be adopted in order to ensure that
peacekeepers are ready to counter any attack by armed
groups and able to fight in all conditions.
The protection of civilians must be at the heart
of peacekeeping missions. In some cases, that may
require the use of force, in accordance with the mission
mandate and in compliance with the applicable legal
framework. In that regard, the deployment of the Force
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a credible example of what can be achieved to
address potential threats to a peace mission.
South Africa strongly condemns sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers. When
the very people charged with protecting civilians
become the violators, the trust established between
those communities and the United Nations missions is
betrayed and the credibility of the United Nations is
compromised. I wish to reconfirm that South Africa
is fully committed to a zero-tolerance policy against
sexual exploitation in peacekeeping operations. We
will continue to take strong, immediate and decisive
action against those found guilty of such abuses.
In conclusion, South Africa would like to pay
tribute to the men and women who continue to serve
in United Nations peace missions, including those who
paid the ultimate price in service of maintaining peace
in the challenging and often dangerous environments.
The number of peacekeepers who are lost to disease
during deployment remains too high, and it is in our
hands to adopt and implement policies to prevent that
from happening again.
The year 2018 has been declared the year of Nelson
Mandela in celebration of the centenary of his birth.
Former President Mandela dedicated his life to the
service of humankind and contributed immensely to

18-0878973/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the promotion of a culture of peace throughout the
world. It is my Government’s hope that he will be
remembered worldwide for his values and dedication
to the service of humankind in the fields of conflict
resolution, reconciliation and the promotion of peace,
which is the ultimate goal of all peacekeeping missions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
join other speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this timely open debate. We are grateful to
Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz, author of the report
on improving security of United Nations peacekeepers.
We also particularly welcome the presence of the
African Union Commission Chairperson, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, at today’s debate.
Building on the outcome of the 2015 High-level
Panel to review peace operations, the Santos-Cruz
report contains important recommendations aimed
at improving the effectiveness, safety and security of
current and future missions. Switzerland notes with
satisfaction that the Secretariat has already started
implementing key recommendations of the report. We
also welcome the envisaged creation of a single plan
of action to improve peacekeeping operations. I would
like to focus today on three priority issues.
First, let me underline the strategic importance of
securing sustainable and predictable funding for peace
operations, including in settings where the United
Nations is working in partnership with others. Further
enhancing cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations will contribute to designing more contextspecific and tailor-made mandates, which is one of the
key recommendations of the peace operations review
and the Santos-Cruz report.
Secondly, Switzerland would like to emphasize the
role of equipment in enhancing the safety and security
of United Nations peacekeepers. The equipment of
peacekeepers must be in line with the threat environment
and allow troops to prevent attacks, identify perpetrators
and eliminate threats accordingly. Access to up-to-date
and quality medical care capabilities is crucial to limit
the victims of attacks.
Thirdly, regarding the duty of care, some of our
personnel in the field are active in highly volatile,
hazardous or even intensely hostile areas. Member
States and the Organization itself are therefore
74/86

28/03/2018

morally and legally bound to ensure that duty-of-care
obligations are fulfilled. In order to mitigate the risks to
all deployed personnel, those obligations — including
certified predeployment training and other preparatory
work — must be met by all parties involved.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
numerous Blue Helmets who have lost their lives or
been injured recently. They are a tragic reminder
that the issue of safety and security remains vital and
begs our continued attention and action. While there
is increasing pressure to save costs in United Nations
peacekeeping, that must not come at the expense of
the courageous men and women who risk their lives in
fulfilling the mandates of the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): It is a pleasure to have you, Mr. President,
preside over this open debate and the Security Council
for this month.
Cuba fully supports the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s statement
and the briefings delivered by the briefers, as well
the proposals set forth to improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
To improve the security of peacekeeping operations
staff, the Secretariat should implement those measures
that fall within its authority, in consultation with
the Member States and with due consideration of
the relevant organs. We recall the leading role of the
General Assembly in developing concepts, policies and
strategies for peacekeeping operations and its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations — the only
United Nations forum mandated to consider the issue.
Ideas and approaches to peacekeeping operations
should be implemented only once agreed by Member
States in the appropriate organ.
In a context of increased risks to peacekeeping
operations due to the current environments in which
they are deployed, Cuba reaffirms that the basic
principles of such operations remain valid for guiding
the deployment of the Blue Helmets. The establishment
and deployment of peacekeeping operations must be
carried out in strict compliance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

especially respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of States and
non-intervention in their internal affairs. It is more
important than ever to respect those precepts, as well
as the basic principles established for the conduct of
peacekeeping operations, such as the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence.
Cuba deplores the loss of life of Blue Helmets and
expresses its concern about the increase in the number
of peacekeeping operations staff casualties over the
past year. Nevertheless, we are not convinced that the
Security Council’s approval of operations involving the
use of force beyond the basic principles I mentioned
can contribute to improving the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and the security of their
military, police or civilian personnel. The use of force
by peacekeeping operations has political implications
and can lead to unforeseen circumstances, including
increased risk of threats and attacks against United
Nations personnel. We note that peacekeeping
operations, by composition and character, are not
intended or equipped for counter-terrorism operations.
We reiterate that efforts to protect civilians should
be designed to support, rather than replace, the efforts
of national authorities. The protection of civilians
cannot in any way become a pretext for disregarding
the principles of the United Nations Charter.
Cuba believes that, in order to eliminate the impact
of threats on the security of peacekeeping operations
personnel and in order to improve their effectiveness,
such operations must have viable and realistic
mandates, concrete and clearly defined objectives and
the necessary resources to carry them out.
We call on all parties involved to give greater
impetus, increase the number and even improve the
effectiveness of the triangular consultations among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries. It is an important tool
that can provide a better understanding of the situation
on the ground and assist in the design, development and
renewal of mandates, as well as staff security.
Although new technologies can increase knowledge
of the environment and staff safety, legitimate concerns
have been raised regarding the deployment and use
of certain resources in peacekeeping operations,
particularly those related to the management of
collected information. The use of such information

S/PV. 8218

should be considered on a case-by-case basis and with
the consent of the host State.
In conclusion, we reiterate that peacekeeping
operations are not a substitute for addressing and
resolving the root causes of conflicts, and that they
should allow for the creation of a security framework
that makes it possible to implement a long-term strategy
for sustainable economic and social development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your successful
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March, and to thank you for convening this important
debate on collective action to improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
The United Nations was established with the
noble objective to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. Peacekeeping, peacemaking, and
peacebuilding have become among the most effective
instruments in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Peacekeeping operations are
about creating a safer tomorrow for those with little
hope; it is about rebuilding communities and creating
an environment for future generations to grow and
unleash their creativity. For that to happen, there is a
need to re-evaluate the level of coordination that exists
between the various agencies of the United Nations,
both here in New York and in the field, in designing
such operations. The Maldives proposes that we should
not lose sight of the fact that, while peacekeeping
and peacemaking operations can succeed in keeping
warring parties apart, an equally important priority
must be to address the root causes of the conflict and to
create the conditions so that the affected communities
can enjoy the dividends of peace.
For that to happen, we must construct an analytical
framework that enables the Council to consider the
necessary changes to United Nations peacekeeping
mission mandates. Such a framework can start by
establishing, at the inception level, greater coordination
and operational coherence between peacekeeping
operations and the United Nations country team on the
ground. The design stage of any peacekeeping operation
should take full account of the unique historical,
political and economic circumstances of the situation,
using the most relevant analytical tools available.
Such tools must be used to identify the underlying

18-0878975/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

set of issues and causes that led to the conflict in the
first place.
Situations that have given rise to conflicts are
often due to system-level failures that might have
resulted from the decaying social fabric that held the
communities together for several centuries, or it might
be the gradual weakening of the State’s capacity to
govern and maintain order. Any peacekeeping or
peacebuilding operation, in any intra-State conflict,
should aim to build the capacity of the State, first to
govern and then to foster a governing order that is
rooted in the principles of democracy, good governance
and inclusive development.
The Maldives also wishes to reiterate the need to
integrate the relevant aspects of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development in designing peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations. The 2030 Agenda makes
it clear that there can be no peace without sustainable
development and no sustainable development without
peace. There is enough empirical evidence to suggest
that poverty alleviation and inclusive economic and
social development promote the causes of peace.
Therefore, those factors should figure more prominently
in the design and implementation of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. The Maldives hopes to see
renewed emphasis on that point in the implementation
of the reform package of the Secretary General. The
United Nations should be able to act as one United
Nations in helping a country to sustain peace and, when
required, to keep the peace.
Efforts to improve peacekeeping operations
should, as a matter of urgency, review the coordination
mechanism between the United Nations and the regional
and subregional organizations that have assumed greater
responsibilities in peacekeeping operations. Regional
organizations need the political support, financial
resources and assets required to implement Council
decisions in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The collaboration between the Security
Council and regional organizations should be enhanced
and institutionalized with more predictable support.
The Maldives believes that the Security Council, in
collaboration with other agencies of the United Nations
system, can inspire and lead in bringing the necessary
reforms to peacekeeping missions, in designing such
operations and in implementing a set of strategies that
will sustain peace. The reforms must take a holistic
approach and must take into consideration the wishes
76/86

28/03/2018

to of every woman, man and child in conflict areas and
give hope for a better future. The Maldives believes
that the Security Council will not fail to provide the
necessary leadership to create a safer world for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): It has
been a long day, but I can assure the members of the
Security Council that it has been a productive one.
At the outset, on behalf of the delegation of Mali,
I would like to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on a
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month and on the outstanding manner in which you are
guiding the Council’s work.
I would like to highlight the contribution made
by your beautiful country, the Netherlands, a friend
of Mali, to the stabilization process under way in my
country. I also take this opportunity to welcome the
recent decision taken by the Government of Canada
to deploy an air task force to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).
The topic of today’s debate is of particular
importance to my country, which, as the Council knows,
is both a troop-contributing country and, above all,
now host to one of the most significant United Nations
missions, MINUSMA, both in terms of its personnel
and budget and its complex challenges.
The Government of Mali is fully aware of the scope
of the missions entrusted to the Blue Helmets — men
and women deployed to maintain peace and security
throughout the world, often in extreme conditions and
at risk to their lives. In that regard, I would like to pay
well-deserved tribute to all of the victims of the Malian
crisis — civilians and military personnel, foreigners
and Malians — who perished on the field of honour in
our country.
United Nations peacekeeping operations remain
an indispensable instrument for ensuring international
peace and security. Earlier today we heard soulful
pleas and strong demands and expectations from
my compatriot Fatimata Touré. She conveyed the
expectations the entire population of Mali has of the
United Nations. We must believe that the nature of
conflict has changed and that the complex situation
on the ground calls for collective responsibility on
our part to implement the bold and swift reforms
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

required to improve United Nations peace missions.
That collective responsibility lies with the Security
Council, the States Members of the United Nations, in
particular troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat
and regional organizations.
With regard to MINUSMA in particular, we
all agree that it does not operate in a traditional
peacekeeping environment. Asymmetrical attacks are
carried out by terrorist groups and drug traffickers of all
kinds who indiscriminately target civilians, the Malian
defence and security forces and the foreign forces of
MINUSMA, France and all partners on the ground,
including those of the European Union. That is why
the Government of Mali has asked that MINUSMA be
given a robust mandate, not to combat terrorism — we
know that is not in its remit — but, above all, to adopt
a more offensive stance in the face of imminent and
real threats, in order to protect itself and defenceless
civilians, as stipulated in its mandate. In doing so
MINUSMA would be more effective and credible in the
eyes of our people. We hope that the ongoing strategic
review of MINUSMA will recommend, inter alia, that
the strong opinions of Malians be taken into account
ahead of the Mission’s mandate renewal scheduled
for June.
Similarly, it is essential to strengthen the operational
capacities of peacekeeping missions, in particular
MINUSMA, so that they can fully and effectively
implement
their
mandates.
Troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat have a clear responsibility
in that area.
The delegation of Mali welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative to reform the peace and security pillar
of the United Nations and to enhance the effectiveness
and coherence of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, while paying particular attention to
preventive measures and sustaining peace. I would also
like to stress the relevance of the recommendations
made by Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos
Cruz in his report on improving the safety and security
of United Nations peacekeepers.
Finally, I would like to underscore the role of
regional organizations, in particular the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Group of Five States for the Sahel, in the stabilization
and development processes of Member States in crisis. It
is therefore essential that the United Nations strengthen

S/PV. 8218

its cooperation with regional organizations in order to
ensure the success of peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Dutch presidency of
the Security Council for its outstanding efforts during
the month of March and for convening today’s debate,
which contributes to coordinating efforts towards
improving peacekeeping operations.
Over the past few years, we have seen how
peacekeeping operations have been saddled with
unrealistic burdens and mandated with tasks that exceed
their ability in a way that ignores the political reality and
the situation on the ground. The deployment of some
missions has become a mere symbol of the inability
of the United Nations to achieve final settlement of
decades-long conflicts. Thus far, efforts to improve
peacekeeping operations have focused on addressing
operational and technical shortcomings, namely, the
readiness and adequacy of contingents and equipment
and the conduct and discipline of peacekeepers. In
addition, ensuring the physical protection of civilians
has been the only parameter according to which the
effectiveness of a mission is gauged. As important as
those aspects are, they are insufficient to achieve the
desired objective. In that regard, we would like to
underscore a number of points relating to the topic of
today’s debate.
First, partnerships among the main actors in
peacekeeping operations must be improved, including
the host country, troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Security Council, the Secretariat and
regional organizations. That would ensure joint
ownership of the missions at all levels, starting with
the strategic level, then formulating executable realistic
mandates and reaching practical implementation. In
that regard, we would like to underscore the importance
of regional organizations, in particular the African
Union, according to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Joint ownership and responsibility requires
improvement in existing traditional coordination
mechanisms. It is not enough to hold official meetings.
Coordination is required at the decision-making level in
order to design mandates. In that context, we underscore
the importance of the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which has become instrumental in

18-0878977/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

28/03/2018

enhancing the Council’s ability to design mandates that
address the root causes of conflict. We look forward to
an enhanced role for the Peacebuilding Commission in
the upcoming phase.

more flexible and capable of selecting the best-trained
and equipped troops. The selection process must be
based on the requirements of each mission. This is why
we need a smart and customized PCRS.

Secondly, we must avoid deploying United
Nations missions without taking into consideration
the general context of conflicts. We highlight the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/27) with regard
to the contribution of peacekeeping operations to
sustaining peace. That statement establishes seven
indicators to be taken into account when designing
or renewing mandates, including supporting national
ownership of political settlement processes; setting
clearly defined objectives towards sustaining peace;
conducting an integrated analysis within the missions
of opportunities and challenges to building national
capabilities; ensuring coherence between political
and operational tasks of a mission; establishing clear
responsibilities and integration of roles among the
missions and other United Nations agencies and
programmes to support national institutions; and having
mission exit strategy that enables national institutions
to sustain peace in the long run.

Fourthly and lastly, the safety and security issue of
peacekeepers cannot be addressed from an operational
and training perspective alone. There is an organic
connection between the safety of peacekeepers and the
overall political efforts carried out by the United Nations
in addressing the conflict in question. Accordingly, the
recommendations contained in the Cruz report and the
proposed action plan constitute commendable efforts.
However, those recommendations only address one of
the intertwined aspects of this issue.

Those indicators contained in the aforementioned
presidential statement contribute to assessing the
success of peacekeeping operations and their actual
impact. They enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations and reduce their costs, as well as decreasing
deployment times. To that end, tangible results in the
ongoing strategic review processes for a number of
missions must be achieved through the adoption by the
Security Council of those recommendations. Otherwise,
those reviews will be merely theoretical exercises with
no practical implications.
Thirdly, when assessing the performance and
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, we must
take into account the specificity of each conflict and
the operational, tactical and political conditions of
each mission. Performance assessments should not be
limited to operational aspects; they should also include
an assessment of the role of the mission as a whole in
settling conflicts.
With regard to the Organization’s ability to mobilize
potentials and forces, we have seen commendable
efforts undertaken recently to increase the number of
troop-contributing countries through the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System (PCRS). There must be a
qualitative shift in the work of PCRS so that it becomes
78/86

We stress that the prevailing mindset of the forces
is derived primarily from the mandate adopted by the
Security Council, which brings us back to the core
issues: partnership and joint ownership in designing
mandates, and the equitable sharing of responsibilities
among the Secretariat, the Security Council and the
troop-contributing countries. We do not consider the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of peacekeeping operations to be restrictive
with regard to the performance of forces. On the
contrary, they are the main guarantors of the safety and
security of peacekeeping personnel.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate Egypt’s commitment to contributing
effectively to peacekeeping operations. I express our
appreciation to those who have lost their lives while
defending the principles, purposes and mandates of the
United Nations. We must do our utmost to continue to
improve peacekeeping operations in order to honour
their sacrifice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Korneliou (Cyprus): At the outset let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on having organized
this timely debate and commend you, Sir, on your
presidency. We thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation and express our full support to his efforts
to strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping. Our thanks also go to the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Director of the Groupe de recherche, d’étude et de
formation femme-action for their contributions.
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the European Union and would like to add the following
remarks in its national capacity.
For my country, a discussion on this specific topic
in the Security Council is first and foremost a reminder
of our obligation to reiterate our utmost appreciation
and to pay tribute to the United Nations, the Security
Council and the countries that have contributed troops
and resources to the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP). As a country that has
relied on United Nations peacekeeping, we are all the
more conscious of our responsibility to do our share in
the collective effort to give the Blue Helmets the means
to effectively deliver the mandates entrusted to them by
the Security Council.
Even if the term “peacekeeping” is not explicitly
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations, it
should not escape our attention that its foundations are
enshrined in Chapters VI and VII of the Charter. That
is vital, given the fact that we sometimes run the risk
of losing sight of the actual purpose that peacekeeping
should serve.
Peacekeeping operations must have sound, realistic
and robust mandates. When a peacekeeping operation
has been deployed after the Security Council has
established the existence of a threat to international
peace and security, that peacekeeping operation ought
to have the support necessary to be able to respond to
that challenge for as long as the abnormality continuous.
That is the very essence of peacekeeping.
Peacekeeping operations should continuously
undergo modernization and renewal in order to
adjust to contemporary needs and challenges. While
acknowledging the wider need to undertake reviews
of the peacekeeping operations, we have to take into
consideration the specificities faced by each operation.
It is of paramount importance that the strategic reviews
are rigorous, evidence based and conducted in close
consultation with the host country, as was recently the
case with UNFICYP.
In conclusion, let me highlight that peacekeeping
plays an indispensable and catalytic role in ensuring the
necessary stability and security on the ground, which,
in turn, enables and facilitates the political process.
Peacekeeping operations are in place to contribute
to the creation of conditions that are conducive to
political processes, which could lead to viable solutions

S/PV. 8218

that would address the root causes of the conflict by
restoring law and order, based on international law.
That said, peacekeeping operations should not be
used as leverage in any peace process, since they are
meant to serve as the means through which the United
Nations and the international community persevere
in their efforts aimed at preventing the outbreak of
conflicts and ensuring stability, even more so in
the absence of a political process. We have a shared
responsibility to remain committed and to ensure that,
in the name of peace, our collective efforts will be put
on the right track.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for convening this very important open
debate. Our thanks also go to the Secretary-General,
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
Ms. Fatimata Touré for their comprehensive briefings.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Indonesia on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations.
Peacekeeping operations have been playing a
crucial role in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
It is a shared understanding that United Nations
peacekeeping operations need to be reformed to better
respond to unprecedented complex challenges. Allow
me to highlight a few points on what needs to be done
collectively to make peacekeeping operations more
effective and efficient.
First and foremost, it is crucial to clearly define
the mandate of each mission in conformity with the
realities on the ground and to provide missions with
adequate political support and necessary resources so
that they can fulfil their mandates.
Secondly, capacity-building and predeployment
training must be enhanced. This is of the utmost
importance, especially at a time when the safety and
security of United Nations personnel are increasingly
at risk. The recommendations of the Cruz report need
to be taken into serious consideration and implemented
adequately to improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers. At the same time, we stress the need to

18-0878979/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

prevent and eradicate the sexual exploitation, abuse
and any other misconduct by United Nations personnel
on duty. We strongly support the efforts made by the
Secretary-General in this regard.
Thirdly, the participation of women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations is to be encouraged.
Viet Nam’s first-ever woman peacekeeper, who began
her mission in South Sudan earlier this year, is to be
joined by many more women as part of the upcoming
opening of a level-2 hospital.
Fourthly, triangular partnership and consultations
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and the
troop- and police-contributing countries should be
promoted in an inclusive and transparent manner.
More attention should be given to cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations to make use of
their practical experience on the ground. We hope that
the Secretary-General’s initiative on the restructuring
of the peace and security pillar will help strengthen
coordination among different United Nations entities,
both at Headquarters and in field missions, and bring
about positive changes on the ground.
It is our principled position that respect for
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
including the principles of non-intervention into the
internal affairs of sovereign States, the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence or in defence of a mandate, should serve
as the foundation for all United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We share the view that greater focus should
be placed on preventive diplomacy and mediation in the
search for long-term political solutions to conflicts.
Since 2014, Viet Nam has been actively participating
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. At present,
we are in the final stage of the preparation for the
deployment of a level-2 hospital in South Sudan in line
with United Nations standards and requirements.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Viet
Nam will spare no effort to make further contributions
to this noble endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Ms. Vilde (Latvia): I would like to thank the Dutch
presidency of the Security Council for organizing today’s
important debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Director of the non-governmental organization Groupe
80/86

28/03/2018

de recherche, d’étude et de formation femme-action, for
their useful briefings today.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.
Peacekeeping is one of the key instruments available
to the United Nations in discharging its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, yet achieving
lasting peace in many places has been a tremendous
challenge. Peacekeeping environments have become
more complex and riskier than ever, and, regrettably,
attacks on peacekeeping missions and peacekeepers
have risen in recent years. Latvia pays tribute to all
the men and women who have served and continue to
serve in United Nations peacekeeping operations for
their courage and dedication, and we honour those who
have lost their lives in serving the cause of peace. Much
more needs to be done to bring the perpetrators of such
attacks to justice.
In the past few years since the major peace and
security reviews, much has been done to improve our
approach to United Nations peacekeeping. Latvia fully
supports efforts to make United Nations peacekeeping
more responsive to the challenges of the twenty-first
century. Yet our work and commitment to making
United Nations peacekeeping operations more adaptable
and relevant to the current complex challenges must
continue. It is especially important to bridge the gaps
in United Nations capabilities when it comes to rapid
deployment of peacekeeping missions. In this regard,
Latvia particularly welcomes the work on improving
cooperation with relevant regional actors, such as the
African Union and the European Union.
The ultimate goal of United Nations peacekeeping
reform must be peacekeeping missions with realistic
mandates that meet the practical necessities of the
host nation or area of deployment. Better planning,
equipment and training are essential to effective
mandate delivery, protection of civilians and security
of United Nations personnel.
Improving the security of United Nations
peacekeepers, as detailed in the report of former
United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General
Santos Cruz, is our shared responsibility. We all need
to invest in changes to improve leadership, operational
behaviour, the use of force, defensive posture, the
selection of peacekeepers, predeployment training and
equipment. Often the root of the problem lies in the
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

lack of situational awareness and localized intelligence
analysis especially when missions are exposed to
asymmetric threats.
We fully support United Nations efforts to better
integrate modern technologies and intelligence
capabilities into United Nations peacekeeping. Latvia
has contributed intelligence specialists to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) since early 2016.
Moreover, in recognition of the Mission’s critical need
for intelligence- and information-analysis capacities,
Latvia increased its contribution to MINUSMA
last year.
We also recognize the inherent value of the
involvement of women in peacekeeping. Latvia fully
supports the ongoing work to align United Nations
peacekeeping reform with the provisions of the women
and peace and security concept. We also commend the
efforts of the Secretary-General to eradicate sexual
exploitation and abuse in the United Nations system.
The pursuit of political settlements should be our
overall aim. However, to achieve lasting peace, United
Nations peacekeeping must be part of a larger approach
within United Nations conflict-prevention efforts.
We must strive to use all United Nations instruments
to ensure that all people can live in a more peaceful,
prosperous and secure world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): I would like at the outset
to thank the Kingdom of the Netherlands for convening
today’s timely and important debate. I also wish to
join the other speakers who took the floor before me
in thanking the Secretary-General, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat and Ms. Fatimata Touré for their briefings.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statements made
earlier by the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I
wish to add a few points in my national capacity.
Malaysia continues to believe that the United Nations
plays a pivotal role in the maintenance of international
peace and security through, inter alia, peacekeeping
operations. That is why Malaysia believes in the reform
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations to make
them fit for purpose and cost-efficient.

S/PV. 8218

Malaysia first participated in a peacekeeping
operation in 1960, and since then we have contributed
thousands of peacekeepers to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. At the moment, Malaysia is
participating in 6 out of 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations, contributing nearly 1,000 peacekeepers. I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
sacrifices of all peacekeepers — to the devoted men and
women serving with unwavering dedication and great
distinction in our common endeavour to keep peace.
Some have paid the ultimate price, with their lives.
Malaysia believes that the reform of United
Nations peacekeeping operations should focus on
the continuous strengthening and enhancing of the
capabilities of its peacekeeping missions so that they
may fulfil their mandates. This is to ensure that they
remain relevant and, more importantly, effective. In
addition, efforts also must be geared towards enhancing
the overall performance of peacekeepers through the
proper training.
We acknowledge that military, police and civilian
personnel deployed in volatile and perilous locations
must be equipped with the right aptitudes, strong
survival skills and unquestionable competencies. This
is due to more comprehensive peacekeeping mandates
that encompass the necessity to protect civilians,
address sexual violence and overcome human rights
challenges. We believe that providing a common
training module prior to their deployment is vital to
the safety and security of our peacekeepers. In that
context, I would like to mention that in 1966 Malaysia
established a peacekeeping training centre that has
trained thousands of peacekeepers, not only from
Malaysia but also from other countries.
Each peacekeeping mission is unique and distinct.
Therefore, we need to take into account various
challenges on the ground, such as the mission’s
components, the environment, suitable equipment
and coordination among various stakeholders, in our
collective efforts to enhance the overall effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations. In that regard, Malaysia
believes that it is important to strengthen cooperation
not just between the United Nations, Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries, but also with
regional and subregional organizations, as well as the
active participation of the host country.
In the context of the peacekeeping missions in
Africa, Malaysia welcomes the African Union’s resolve

18-0878981/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in taking up a more prominent leadership role in
increasing and enhancing peacekeeping capabilities
among its members. We believe that the African Union
would have a better understanding of the continent’s
own security challenges.
To conclude, Malaysia reaffirms its support for
enhancing and strengthening the United Nations
peacekeeping missions. We reiterate our full
cooperation with all stakeholders because we sincerely
believe that only by working together can we ensure that
all peacekeeping missions will fulfil their mandates, fit
for purpose and in a cost-efficient manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I thank the SecretaryGeneral; Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of
the African Union Commission; and Director Fatimata
Touré for their insightful briefings this morning and
their determination to strengthen peacekeeping. I
would also like to express my gratitude to the Kingdom
of the Netherlands for convening this critical debate.
We have convened in this Chamber countless times,
and after each meeting the feeling that remains is always
the same — will this be the meeting that changes our
course regarding peacekeeping operations? Given the
interest across the United Nations membership that we
have seen in today’s debate — and I was impressed to
see that I am the seventieth speaker — I believe that this
particular meeting and debate will make a difference.
Peacekeeping has been to date the most effective
United Nations contribution to peace and security.
There is, however, room for improvement. There have
been numerous reviews and reports, including on
ways to improve peacekeeping operations. I think that
today we can all agree that, quite honestly, we know
exactly what needs to be done by every peacekeeping
stakeholder to make this improvement a reality. So why
are the improvements that we are all calling for not
happening faster than we see today? We also believe that
we need the political commitments that are expressed
in this very Chamber to transcend beyond these halls
and materialize on the ground and in capitals.
Rwanda continues to play a critical role in
peacekeeping and, as one of the top five troop- and
police-contributing countries, with an unwavering
commitment to the protections of civilians, today we
82/86

28/03/2018

will speak from that point of view. I would like to make
eight brief points:
First, we need a unified understanding of the
protection of civilians. This is an absolute prerequisite
for the way forward. Having differing interpretations
of the protection of civilians is dangerous, and we have
witnessed its lethal consequences for civilians and
peacekeepers alike. September will mark the nineteenth
anniversary of the first mission with a protection of
civilians mandate. We have had 19 years to debate its
substance, so Rwanda really believes that it is time to
agree on what the protection of civilians is, and move
forward in a concerted manner.
The protection of civilians in United Nations
peacekeeping is defined as using
“all necessary means, up to and including the use
of deadly force, aimed at preventing or responding
to threats of physical violence against civilians,
within capabilities and areas of operations, and
without prejudice to the responsibility of the
host Government”.
The Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians
provide further guidance on this and, as a country with
peacekeepers, we apply them. We are happy to say that
when they are applied, as we do, they are lifesaving.
Second, we need to bolster our support for the
indispensable role police play in peacekeeping. We
turn to our police officers when we seek the trust of
local populations. We turn to them again when we seek
to strengthen a country’s rule of law. We turn to them
when we seek long-term peace and stability that ward
off a relapse into violent conflict. We therefore need to
support them accordingly.
Third — and we understand that this is a tall
order — the Secretariat should deploy only troops that
are willing to robustly implement mission mandates
and to be held accountable, both in the field and to
their mission leaderships. When there is a failure to
protect civilians, then we need accountability to apply.
Accountability is very clear. Accountability does not
lie only with the troops. It lies with the entire chain
of command. But we need accountability to start being
applied seriously if we are to improve peacekeeping
operations. That will ensure that we have the best Blue
Helmets serving on the ground. This is key, both for
the operational and tactical success of peacekeeping
missions and for the reputation of the United Nations
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and the legacy it strives to leave behind. This is a
collective reputation.
Fourth, we need to deploy more female
peacekeepers. We have heard this point made a number
of times this morning. We also emphasize this point,
and we agree fully with those who made it earlier.
Evidence shows that women increase the effectiveness
of missions with a protection of civilians mandate, in
particular the protection of women and children, who
are more vulnerable to violence in situations of conflict.
The victims of sexual and gender-based violence and
sexual exploitation and abuse also find it much easier
to interact with female peacekeepers.
Fifth, we need the right capabilities and equipment
to meet the challenges we face on the ground. That is
an endeavour that cannot fall short of adapting to new
technologies that modernize our ways.
Sixth, we need the right capabilities to provide our
peacekeeping missions with reliable and accurate data,
particularly in situational awareness, to inform all our
operations. For this to happen, again, we know what
to do. We know that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
regional organizations and the field missions need to
work much more closely together and exchange critical
information in a timely manner. This is not just a
matter of knowing what happens; it is the potential to
significantly minimize threats, reduce casualties and
keep our peacekeepers from serving blindly in the field.
Seventh, we need to deepen, institutionalize and
operationalize our partnership with the African Union.
We have been discussing this partnership for a few
years now. Last year, we saw an important improvement
through the framework that was entered into by the
Secretary-General. We know what to do. We need now
to institutionalize and operationalize this framework.
Lastly, we must remove the bureaucratic barriers
that further bury us in age-old ways that hamper
our ability to be nimble and flexible. The SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to reform the peace and security pillar
target many of these pitfalls. Let us support him in this
pursuit. Rwanda supports his efforts and will be more
than happy to work with any other Member that would
like to see improvements in peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, I would just like to say in a sobering
manner: Let us stop talking about peacekeeping in an

S/PV. 8218

abstract manner. Peacekeeping is operational; it saves
and protects real lives. We speak from our experience
of a peacekeeping failure, but we also speak today
from our experience of the success of peacekeeping
operations. We have seen both sides of peacekeeping.
So let us instead talk about what is and is not working
on the ground. Let us talk about the specific effects
it has on the women, children and men where armed
conflicts are taking place. Let us talk about what we can
do in each mission to minimize the violence towards
civilians and protect them, and to minimize violence
against our own peacekeepers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): Let me express my
gratitude to you, Madam President, and the Kingdom
of the Netherlands for organizing today’s open debate
on this important issue.
Serbia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, but I would like to
make some comments in my national capacity.
The consequences of the increasing number of
conflicts and interconnected crises are often farreaching and fraught with social tensions and instability,
resulting in threats and challenges that are ever more
complex, uncertain and disruptive of the future. Peace
has always been at the core of the Organization, but
the complex nature of today’s challenges calls for
innovative ways of thinking and adjustments on the part
of mechanisms and systems to find common solutions.
To that end, we must strengthen multilateralism and
the role of the United Nations, including by adapting
its system to the needs of our time. We believe that
peacekeeping operations are one of the key pillars
and instruments for achieving the substantive role of
the United Nations in maintaining international peace
and security.
We believe that it is necessary to reform United
Nations peacekeeping missions, as their mandates are
much more diversified today and, in addition to conflict
prevention and peacekeeping, include also post-conflict
reconstruction and long-term development. After all,
the multidimensional role of the missions — which,
alongside their mandates to safeguard peace and
protect civilians, contribute to political processes, the
bolstering of security, the organization of elections,
the protection and promotion of human rights and the
re-establishment of the rule of law — is of paramount

18-0878983/86

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.8218

importance for
lasting stability.

consolidating

and

maintaining

The mobilization of additional and concrete
capacities is needed in order to improve mission
activities in the field. Political and security conditions
being in constant flux, we must make sure that the
existing financial and human resources within the
United Nations system are used in a timely and
optimum way. We also agree that it is necessary to carry
out further institutional reforms in order to improve
missions’ effectiveness and operability.
In this regard, the reform of the United Nations
peacekeeping architecture, as proposed by SecretaryGeneral Guterres, is an important step forward, and we
welcome his comprehensive report on restructuring the
United Nations peace and security pillar (A/72/525).
Furthermore, we also welcome his efforts specifically
in the field of conflict prevention, in the belief that
a coherent approach and the strengthening of the
institutional structure of the United Nations will create
greater efficiency in addressing crises around the world.
Let me take this opportunity to reiterate Serbia’s
commitment to the efforts of the United Nations aimed
at promoting and maintaining international peace and
security through active participation in the system
of collective security. In that context, I recall that
we have contributed in a concrete way to furthering
global and regional security, maintaining our longlasting tradition of participation in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Currently, around 330 Serbian
personnel are deployed in five United Nations and
four European Union peacekeeping missions, making
Serbia the leading troop-contributing country in
South-Eastern Europe and the tenth-largest European
contributor. Our peacekeepers proudly fly the United
Nations banner in Lebanon, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Cyprus, the Central African Republic
and the Middle East.
In its commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, Serbia is motivated also by the fact that
it is a host country to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), deployed
under resolution 1244 (1999). We have reiterated many
times our staunch support for the activities of UNMIK
in order to allow it to respond to all the demands
mandated by the Security Council and to address
ongoing and new challenges. In this regard, we have
stressed the paramount importance of ensuring that
84/86

28/03/2018

Mission’s needs for adequate human and financial
resources are met in order to ensure its effectiveness
and continuous active engagement.
Recent events in Kosovo and Metohija, including
the unjustified arrest of a senior Serbian official and the
chief negotiator with Pristina, as well as the 26 March
brutal beating of innocent civilians by the so-called
Kosovo Police Force, serve as yet another reminder of
the numerous challenges and the overall very complex
political and security situation in the province. Today’s
reality is a clarion call on us to maintain our focus on
the quest for a compromise and sustainable solution to
the issue of Kosovo and Metohija and to fully support
not only preserving but also strengthening UNMIK’s
presence and activities on the ground, as it is absolutely
essential to promoting and achieving stability.
In conclusion, we are all aware that the challenges
are numerous, that security situation in many parts
of the world is volatile, and that our continuous
commitment and hard work are needed to address
them, including those pertaining to peacekeeping. For
its part, Serbia stands ready to make a contribution
towards the achievement of these goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Daunivalu (Fiji): Let me thank you, Madam
President, and the Kingdom of the Netherlands for
organizing this open debate on peacekeeping operations.
We pay tribute to all United Nations peacekeepers,
and particularly to those who have lost their lives in the
service of global peace.
As a troop- and police-contributing country for
around 40 years, Fiji takes great pride in its participation
in United Nations peacekeeping missions. For a small
island developing State, the Fijian men and women
deployed to the various peacekeeping missions globally
represent our contribution to the goal of achieving
international peace and security, as stipulated under
the Charter of the United Nations. I would like to make
three key points as our contribution to the discussion
on ways to collectively improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
The first concerns adequate resources and support.
We believe that there is a need to provide peacekeeping
forces with adequate resources in order to deliver
effectively on their mandate. We accept that targeted
training, capacity-building and proper equipment
18-08789

28/03/2018

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8218

are vital to support United Nations peacekeepers in
the various peacekeeping missions. While budgetary
considerations are relevant, they should not be the
primary factor for determining the participation of
a country that provides peacekeepers to a mission.
Indeed, it should not be relied upon at the expense of
the lives of United Nations peacekeepers.

I close by assuring members of the Council
that Fiji will continue to work closely with all
relevant stakeholders to ensure the effectiveness
and success of the Blue Helmets and United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

The lack of funding to support a United Nations
peacekeeping mission also should not be used to
disadvantage a troop- or police-contributing country.
Rather, an overall review of the mission mandate should
be the basis of determining the size, operation, focus
and objectives of a mission. In this regard, we do not
believe that independent mission reviews commissioned
by the Secretary-General give the Secretariat a
blanket approval or unilateral scope to determine
the participation of a troop- or police-contributing
country in a mission. As Member States and troopcontributing countries, we expect the Secretariat to
provide us with options and recommendations that
are holistic in nature and take into account the overall
objectives of the mission and the interests of troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate the Dutch presidency on
its able leadership of the Security Council during the
month of March and for its choice of this very important
topic for our debate.

Secondly, we underline the importance of an
effective political process as a key factor in achieving
the goal of a peacekeeping mission. This is essential in
order to effectively resolve conflicts and bring a swift
and successful conclusion to a peacekeeping mission.
The important role that the Secretary-General plays in
engaging with all parties to a conflict, and the efforts
of regional and subregional organizations through
dialogue, negotiations and national reconciliation, are
all necessary to support peace operations.
Thirdly, as has already been mentioned today,
peace is best pursued in partnership. Cooperation
among the host country, Member States, troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Security Council
and the Secretariat is necessary. As a troop- and
police-contributing country, we expect to be fully
consulted by the Secretariat on the work that it does to
support Member States and troop- or police-contributing
countries in delivering on peacekeeping mandates,
especially where it affects our ongoing participation
in a mission. Host countries should also be consulted
closely to ensure that any operational or strategic change
in a mission does not hamper the swift achievement of
peacekeeping goals for that mission.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his valuable briefing this
morning. I further thank Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for his
detailed statement, and Ms. Fatimata Touré.
The Sudan associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
My country’s delegation would like to express
its deep appreciation for the peacekeepers who
have sacrificed their lives to protect civilians and
implement the noble mandate of achieving peace and
stability throughout the world, particularly in our
African continent, which hosts the greatest number of
peacekeeping missions.
Cooperation with regional organizations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations is
highly manifested in the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which has
been operational since 2008. In strong coordination
with the African Union (AU), the Sudan and the United
Nations, this joint mission participated in political
mediation until the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur was achieved in 2011. This answers the question
of how we can reach political solutions and uphold
strategic cohesion.
Proceeding from our practical experience in Darfur,
we affirm that the joint efforts that led to peace there
and the gradual and smooth withdrawal of UNAMID
from the Sudan, where the second phase will be
concluded in June, resulted from the intensive work and
strong political resolve of the Sudan and the unlimited
support of the AU, the United Nations, the State of
Qatar and other partners. This proves that the desired
goals will never be achieved without the concerted

18-0878985/86

S/PV.8218

United Nations peacekeeping operations

efforts of all stakeholders — be they national, regional
or international — to maintain, build and sustain peace,
particularly in the post-conflict phases of recovery and
reconstruction, with stabilization and peacebuilding
projects. In that regard, my delegation reaffirms the
need for the international community at large to bring
pressure to bear on all parties that refuse to join the
peace process. It must deny them shelter and support,
and instead push them towards peace so as to alleviate
the suffering of those affected by war and to achieve
comprehensive peace.
Allow me to provide some preliminary suggestions,
based on our practical experience, on how to promote
the work of peacekeeping missions in the future.
First, peacekeeping operations must be given
appropriate mandates, which should be reviewed
regularly in the light of developments on the ground.
Second, appropriate training should be provided to
peacekeepers, be they military, police or civilians.
Third, partnership should be promoted among all
stakeholders, particularly the host country, the
United Nations — either through the Secretariat,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Field Support, the Security Council
or the United Nations country team — other relevant
regional and subregional organizations, and the troopand police-contributing countries. Fourth, in light of the
organic link between peace and development, we must
strive to promote development in regions and countries
that suffer from conflicts. Fifth, we should give greater
priority to efforts to resolve conflicts by political means.
In this vein, we support all reconciliation efforts, led
by Secretary-General António Guterres, to focus on
preventive diplomacy, mediation and reconciliation.
Sixth, we should promote strategic partnerships
between the United Nations and the AU in the field of

86/86

28/03/2018

peacekeeping. Seventh, we must design an exit strategy
for the missions once the troops are deployed.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to cooperating with the United Nations,
the African Union and all other partners in order to
ensure a better future for peacekeeping operations, so
that they can achieve the desired goals of maintaining
international
peace
and
security,
protecting
civilians and contributing to the reconstruction and
development process.
The President: As this is the last scheduled meeting
of the Council for the month of March, I would like
to express the sincere appreciation of the delegation
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the members of
the Council, especially the Permanent Representatives
and their respective staff, and to the secretariat of the
Council for all the support they have given us.
Indeed, it has been a busy month and one in which
we have rallied to consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done it
alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat, as well as all relevant conference
service officers, interpreters — who have done a
tremendous job — and security staff. We are very
grateful for all their tireless support, professionalism
and flexibility. They are always there for us and we
can always count on all of them, including the media
services. It is really tremendous how many people are
here to help the presidency do a good job. I offer them
all a very heartfelt thank you.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of Peru good
luck in the month of April.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

18-08789
