192

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

practice of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Welcoming the decision of the Commission on Human
Rights, in its resolution 1986/50 of 13 March 1986, to extend for one year the mandate of the Special Rapporteur
to examine questions relevant to torture, 31
t. Takes note with appreciation ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on the status of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; 120
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the number of States that
have signed or ratified the Convention since it was opened
for signature, ratification and accession on 4 February
1985;
3. Requests ali States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the Convention as a matter of priority;
4. Invites ali States, u pon ratification of or accession to
the Convention, to consider the possibility of making the
declarations provided for in articles 21 and 22 of the Convention;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Commission on Human Rights at its forty-third session
and to the General Assembly at its forty-second session a
report on the status ofthe Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
6. Decides to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral at its forty-second session under the item entitled
"Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/135.

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of
Torture

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which states that no one shall be subjected to
torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, 2
Again recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,12 1
Recalling also its resolution 39/46 of to December 1984,
by which it adopted and opened for signature, ratification
and accession the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
Recalling further its resolution 36/ 151 of 16 December
1981, in which it noted with deep concern that acts oftorture took place in various countries, recognized the need
to provide assistance to the victims of torture in a purely
humanitarian spirit and established the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,
Convinced that the struggle to eliminate torture includes
the provision of assistance in a humanitarian spirit to the
victims and members of their families,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 122
1. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to those
Governments, organizations and individuals that have al-

120A/41/511.
121 Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.
122 A/41/706.

ready contributed to the United Nations Voluntary Fund
for Victims of Torture;
2. Calls upon ali Governments, organizations and individuals in a position to do so to respond favourably to requests for initial as well as further contributions to the
Fund;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Board ofTrustees of
the Fund for the work it has carried out;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the support given to the Board ofTrustees ofthe Fund;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make use of ali
existing possibilities, including the preparation, production and dissemination of information materials, to assist
the Board ofTrustees ofthe Fund in its efforts to make the
Fund and its humanitarian work better known and in its
appeal for contributions.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/136.

Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/138 of 13 December 1985, in
which it, inter a/ia, requested the Secretary-General, in
co-operation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, to continue to organize and implementan effective programme of educational and other appropriate
assistance for student refugees from Namibia and South
Africa who have been granted asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia,
Having considered the report of the High Commissioner
on the assistance programme to student refugees from
South Africa and Namibia,123
Noting with appreciation that sorne of the projects
recommended in the report on assistance to student refugees in southern Africa have been successfully completed,
Noting with concern that the discriminatory and repressive policies which continue to be applied in South Africa
and Namibia cause a continued and increasing influx of
student refugees into Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and
Zambia,
Conscious of the burden placed on the limited financia!,
material and administrative resources of the host countries by the increasing number of student refugees,
Appreciating the efforts of the host countries to deal with
their student refugee populations, with the assistance of
the international community,
t. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Expresses its appreciatio'n to the Governments of
Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for granting
asylum and making educational and other facilities available to the student refugees, in spite of the pressure which
the continuing influx of those refugees exerts on facilities
in their countries;
3. Also expresses its appreciation to the Governments
of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the cooperation which they have extended to the High Commissioner on matters concerning the welfare of these refugees;
4. Notes with appreciation the financial and material
support provided for the student refugees by Member
121 A/41/55.1
