S/PV.8057

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8057

th meeting
Wednesday, 27 September 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Biagini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Aviation security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-30061 (E)
*1730061*

S/PV.8057

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Aviation security
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Fang Liu and Ambassador Amr
Abdellatif Aboulatta, Permanent Representative of
Egypt, who will speak in his capacity as the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism.
I now give the floor to Ms. Fang Liu.
Ms. Fang Liu: On behalf of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), I am pleased to join
his Excellency Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, in briefing the Security
Council today.
Since its establishment in 1944, ICAO has fulfilled
its central role in strengthening aviation, as mandated
by the Convention on International Civil Aviation,
commonly referred to as the Chicago Convention.
ICAO provides leadership and support to our member
States and industry groups as they work with us to
develop the international civil aviation Standards and
Recommended Practices and related policies. We have
gratefully fulfilled that role for more than 70 years now,
while achieving important progress in all aspects of
international air transport.
Resolution 2309 (2016) is the first of its kind to
focus on civil-aviation security, and also highlighted
ICAO’s role. Under ICAO’s guidance and leadership,
extensive progress has been made since then in
enhancing aviation security. In that regard, I would in
particular like to note the following. The ICAO Global
Risk Context Statement has been updated based on the
latest threat information. Sector-wide emphasis on land2/21

27/09/2017

side security, explosives detection and cybersecurity
has been increased through the adoption of amendment
15 to annex 17 of the Chicago Convention, and security,
and will be further increased through draft amendment
16. Material for a risk-management workshop has been
developed to help member States produce their own
distinct risk assessments. Guidance material has been
revised to reflect the latest best practices. Capacity
development projects have taken place in locations
designated through our No Country Left Behind
initiative, with the help of voluntary funding from
member States.
In addition to those developments, the adoption
this year of the Advance Passenger Information (API)
standard, which becomes effective on 23 October
2017, will make it harder for foreign terrorist fighters
to move between States. Our collaboration with the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), with
additional participation from the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) entities, ensures
this important programme is at the forefront of
States’ priorities.
A natural outcome arising from our leadership role
in aviation security has been the development of the
new ICAO Global Aviation Security Plan (GASeP).
This pivotal document, which focuses extensively on
the threat of terrorism to civil aviation, has benefitted
from extensive inputs on behalf of Governments and
industry alike. It is currently expected to be approved
by the ICAO Council at its next session in November.
Member State enthusiasm and support for the Global
Aviation Security Plan were clearly demonstrated
during the recent Regional Aviation Security Ministerial
Conference on Africa and the Middle East regions,
held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt. By the conclusion of
that three-day meeting, participants had developed a
regionally focused road map that is fully aligned with
the Global Aviation Security Plan objectives, and which
includes monitoring objectives to ensure that this
progress remains consistent and accountable.
The Global Aviation Security Plan’s core objective
is to enhance the effectiveness and sustainability of
global provisions and the sustainable implementation
of preventative measures. To help accomplish this, it
sets forth five key priorities aimed at enhancing risk
awareness and response; establishing a better-defined
security culture; improving technological resources
and fostering innovation; improving oversight and
17-30061

27/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

quality assurance; and lastly, increasing cooperation
and support.
The objectives of the Global Aviation Security
Plan reflect those of resolution 2309 (2016). Once
finalized, the Global Aviation Security Plan will be the
primary tool by which the aviation security community
fulfils its roles, as defined in the resolution. ICAO will
carefully analyse indicators and monitor progress in
achieving these milestones, but of course the ultimate
results will be largely dependent on the dedication and
actions of States and industry operators. It will only
be by virtue of sustained political will, especially at
the highest levels of Government and industry, that
the Global Aviation Security Plan will succeed. I shall
come back to that challenge in a few minutes.
Many other challenges lie ahead. To meet the
security targets identified in the Global Aviation
Security Plan and regional road maps, capacitydevelopment and technology-assistance programmes
must expand significantly. States must also be willing
to accept help in strengthening their counter-terrorism
postures and in resolving vulnerabilities, and once
help is received, States must be dedicated in following
through with what they have learned and what they
have received, whether it is equipment and technology,
or training and mentoring.
The Global Aviation Security Plan establishes a
mechanism to enable member States to confidentially
request assistance as a result of our audit or through
their own self-generated risk assessment. ICAO will
be proactive in comparing all such requests with
other States’ competencies, and then recommending
partnerships where appropriate.
Another challenge that persists for us regards
the sharing of key information. For instance, many
actionable details regarding recent aviation security
events are still unavailable to ICAO and member
States. We must find a way to identify and judiciously
share essential elements of information necessary to
implementing appropriate measures at the proper level.
Resolution 2309 (2016) reinforces that point, and States
have acknowledged it, and it is our hope that through
the Global Aviation Security Plan, ICAO, States and
industry can improve their sharing of information.
Looking now to the attack methods discussed
in the special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), held this past July, although some
of them are not new, terrorists have made progress

S/PV. 8057

in exploiting vulnerabilities and circumventing the
countermeasures in place. Landside security gaps,
for example, have been exploited to some extent for
decades now, but with recent amendments to annex
17 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation,
on security, we are now capturing the attention and
participation of all stakeholders involved in effectively
mitigating these risks. Amendment 15 to annex 17 of
the Chicago Convention, which became applicable in
August, emphasizes the identification of landside areas,
the development of security measures aligned with a
risk assessment, and coordination among the relevant
actors. That new emphasis is now helping to bring
together law enforcement agencies, security forces,
airport authorities and even vendors.
Similarly, the threat from improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) in portable electronic devices is not a
new one in air transport, having first emerged when
such a device was concealed in an unaccompanied
suitcase and brought down Pan Am flight 103 over
Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988. Effective and affordable
countermeasures for increasingly sophisticated
concealment methods have been discussed in numerous
ICAO working roups, task forces and conferences,
and new and more detailed screening requirements
specific to IEDs have been incorporated into the draft
amendment 16 to annex 17 of the Chicago Convention.
Of the threats we discussed in July, aviation’s
rapid cyberconnectivity growth is certainly the newest.
The more we rely on computers and information
technology, the more exposed we are to cyberthreats.
Again, ICAO has recognized that challenge and is
already cooperating with member States and industry
to determine the extent of vulnerabilities and the most
effective countermeasures. This topic will definitely
remain high on our list of concerns.
Similarly, the use of projectiles against aircraft,
such as man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS),
has proven to be of increasing concern, especially in
conflict zones. Effective MANPADS countermeasure
procedures are available to industry and member
States through the ICAO secure portal. Each of these
threats potentially generates a new layer of technology
requirements, which become costly not only in terms of
equipment purchase but also in building renovations,
training and maintenance requirements, slowdowns in
security procedures, and other effects on operations
and facilitation.

17-300613/21

S/PV.8057

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Technology innovation was extensively discussed
during the recent ICAO Global Aviation Security
Symposium, which we organized earlier this month,
in collaboration with Airports Council International,
with the active participation of CTED and some other
United Nations counter-terrorism actors. Participants
recognized, and explored in detail, the need for
innovation and synergies throughout the security
system. This, too, is a priority action in the Global
Aviation Security Plan.
As we look together now at the way forward, I
would like to offer some insights on the current aviation
security outlook.
Terrorist groups continue to view aviation as an
attractive target, with the aim of causing substantial loss
of life, economic damage and disruption to connectivity
between States; the risk of terrorist attacks against civil
aviation may affect all regions and Member States.
Therefore, the key element of the implementation
of resolution 2309 (2016) and the Global Aviation
Security Plan is States’ commitment to ensuring the
implementation of effective and risk-based measures
that reflect the ever-evolving threat picture and ensure
that such measures are in accordance with ICAO
standards and recommended practices.
The Global Aviation Security Plan provides the
foundation for enhancing aviation security worldwide,
consistent with the objectives of resolution 2309 (2016).
In that context, States and ICAO should continue to
work and cooperate together, along with the civil
aviation industry and other relevant stakeholders, to
effectively address threats to civil aviation.
Therefore, all States are encouraged to strengthen
their support for ICAO’s work on aviation security,
ensure the implementation of the Global Aviation
Security Plan as a matter of high priority, and
cooperate at the global, regional and national levels
to raise the level of effective implementation of global
aviation security.
This is an area in which the Security Council,
along with the relevant United Nations entities, can
assist ICAO. Security experts and aviation authorities
understand the importance of the Global Aviation
Security Plan and its implementing actions, but they
need determined support — including legislative and
operational authority, financial backing, appropriate
4/21

27/09/2017

resources and statements of commitment — to fulfil
their responsibilities.
Through key mechanisms such as resolution 2309
(2016) and its supplemental undertakings, we must
therefore continue to work together to encourage
decision-makers to support these endeavours.
Obtaining financial support in particular is
another major area where United Nations entities
can assist ICAO. Member States capable of doing so
must be willing to participate in ICAO initiatives to
bolster security worldwide, whether through the loan
or donation of technology, the provision of training
in basic procedures or best practices, the provision of
mentors, or via direct financial support for ICAO’s
capacity-building
and
assistance
programmes.
Increased contributions from Member States would
enable a much earlier implementation of the robust
assistance regime envisaged in the Global Aviation
Security Plan road map.
ICAO, Member States and other stakeholders will
then pursue further opportunities to enhance counterterrorism capabilities in the locations that need them
most. This will include enhanced risk awareness and
response, a wider understanding of the threats and risks
facing civil aviation, monitoring new and emerging
threats to civil aviation, maintaining an updated ICAO
Global Risk Context Statement and reviewing the
measures set out in annex 17, on security, of the Chicago
Convention and related ICAO guidance material.
The use of Advance Passenger Information System
data, along with Passenger Name Record information,
will greatly assist us in identifying air travellers who
may pose a threat to aviation. We must also remain
vigilant, however, to keep an appropriate balance
between the necessary level of security, the passenger
experience and facilitation objectives.
The importance of an accurate risk assessment,
based on an equally accurate threat assessment, cannot
be overemphasized. All facets of national and local
activities should be focused on understanding applicable
risks. Although the terms “security risk assessment” and
“threat assessment” have been in annex 17, on security,
of the Chicago Convention for many years, there
remain varied levels of understanding, development
and implementation of viable risk assessments among
Member States.
17-30061

27/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

ICAO’s continued attention to the Global Risk
Context Statement, along with our new Risk Management
Workshop, intends to address this concern.
The ICAO Global Aviation Security Symposium
2017 highlighted the strong commitments by all members
of the air-transport community to the principles and
goals contained in resolution 2309 (2016). I remain
confident that through our continued collaboration,
we will persevere and be successful in reducing the
likelihood that an act of unlawful interference will be
committed against aviation. The recently established
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism will be an
important ally with which I look forward to working.
In particular, I would like to highlight the
cooperation between ICAO and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force on the delivery of technical
assistance and capacity-building in the field of aviation
security. ICAO personnel are extensively trained and
experienced in understanding the myriad ways in which
compliance can be achieved in the aviation regime, and
our participation in these evaluations also contributes
to our own understanding of best practices.
We are currently exploring an arrangement with
CTED in order to enhance our cooperation. Other
United Nations agencies can also be valuable partners.
The Security Council may wish to consider
allocating a portion of counter-terrorism funds
and to encourage Member States to increase their
contributions to aviation security projects, in particular
for capacity-building and training, so as to enhance
the effective implementation of ICAO standards by all
Member States.
The Global Aviation Security Plan is a major
milestone for civil aviation security, contributing to
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Consequently, I call on the Security Council to support
and promote the Global Aviation Security Plan so as to
facilitate its implementation by all Member States.
In summary, I believe that resolution 2309 (2016)
and the Global Aviation Security Plan will provide a
globally accepted foundation upon which stronger
aviation security postures can be achieved.
As the Council is aware, aviation, which represents
50 per cent of international tourism and 35 per cent of
international trade by value, contributes significantly
to the sustainable development of all States Members
of the United Nations and to the implementation of

S/PV. 8057

the Sustainable Development Goals. This recognition
of aviation’s importance with respect to the threats
posed by terrorism enables ICAO and the other entities
charged with mitigating terrorist acts to press ahead
with the improvements necessary in all areas of our
strategies and operations.
I thank the members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to brief them on the latest developments in
aviation security, and I remain at their disposal for any
future updates on this or any other matter relating to
international civil aviation security.
The President: I thank Ms. Fang Liu for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Representative of
Egypt in his capacity as Chair of the Committee pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): In my capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, I have the
honour to brief the Council, together with Ms. Fang
Liu, Secretary General of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), on the outcomes of the
Committee’s special meeting on terrorist threats to
civil aviation.
The special meeting was held at Headquarters on
7 July, as requested by the Council in resolution 2309
(2016). It is clear that the global and interconnected
nature of the international civil aviation industry
exposes States Members of all regions to potential
terrorist attacks. Attacks against international civil
aviation cause substantial loss of life, economic
damage and disruption. There is a growing awareness
of the global terrorist threat to civil aviation. However,
we must work together urgently to further strengthen
Member States’ implementation of the obligations and
commitments aimed at addressing the threat. In doing
so, we must work together to assist those States that
lack the capacity to do so effectively.
Resolution 2309 (2016), adopted in September last
year, outlines a number of priority steps to be taken by
Member States to strengthen their implementation of
ICAO’s security-related Standards and Recommended
Practices (SARPs). Like the resolution, ICAO’s new
global aviation security plan also calls on States
to strengthen coordination and cooperation among
relevant national departments and agencies. I welcome
the security plan. I also welcome the current initiative
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive

17-300615/21

S/PV.8057

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Directorate (CTED) and ICAO to enter into a formal
cooperation agreement aimed at further harmonizing
and strengthening their long-standing partnership.
ICAO, of course, plays a central role in developing
and monitoring international aviation security
standards. CTED plays a central role in supporting
and implementing the policy decisions of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) and the Council in
assisting them to define the international counterterrorism agenda and assessing States’ efforts to
prevent and counter terrorism, including in relation
to civil aviation. It does so notably through the
assessment visits conducted to Member States on the
Committee’s behalf, through its analyses and through
its identification of gaps, challenges, trends and good
practices. Whenever possible, ICAO takes part in the
Committee’s country visits, while playing a vital role
in the evaluation of aviation-security measures. The
visits and the resulting recommendations made to the
Committee are thereby in full compliance with ICAO’s
work and audits.
As the Committee’s assessments and analyses make
clear, many States lack the capacities and resources
required to implement effective measures to strengthen
civil aviation security. In a global environment marked
by a number of new and emerging terrorist threats and
rapid technological change, we must encourage and
support all Member States to continue strengthening
implementation of good aviation practices, in particular
those set forth in paragraph 6 of resolution 2309 (2016).
Those practices include enhancing screening and
security checks, ensuring appropriate resources and
effective quality controls, and promoting an effective
security culture.
It cannot be stressed enough that gaps in basic
aviation-security measures result in vulnerabilities that
can easily be exploited and circumvented by terrorists.
New, updated and revised guidance materials developed
by ICAO should be fully used, and threat and risk
assessment methodologies should be regularly updated
and amended. Member States are often not sufficiently
engaged in dialogue with all the relevant actors
involved in the implementation of aviation-security
measures. Many fail to perceive the need to adopt a
risk-based approach and apply a common methodology
to assess the risk. In that regard, Member States can
avail themselves of the risk context statement provided
by ICAO.
6/21

27/09/2017

However, there remains a need to strengthen
mechanisms for the sharing of threat information at the
international and national levels, including by frontline
aviation security staff, who often lack access to critical
information or the knowledge and expertise required to
handle and act on such information. Many States also
lack access to the relevant databases, including those of
INTERPOL and the sanctions lists of the Monitoring
Group of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities.
Moreover, as CTED’s assessment and analysis
work reveals, only 57 States have introduced an
advance passenger information (API) system. The low
level of API implementation represents a major security
gap. Resolution 2178 (2014), adopted in 2014, requires
Member States to ensure that airlines operating in
their territories provide an API in order to detect the
departure from their territories, or attempted entry
into or transit through their territories, of individuals
designated by the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions
committees. I should note that CTED is involved in the
project of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
to help Member States establish API systems. The
project includes regional workshops, capacity-building
consultations and the development of a national API
implementation road map.
A further major concern is the lack of protection
in landside airport areas. Unlike security-restricted
areas, landside areas are accessible to the public and
often managed by a broad range of agencies. Particular
challenges in that regard are the actions of lone
gunmen, as with the Fort Lauderdale attack of January
2017; mass-casualty explosive devices, as with the
2016 attacks carried out in Brussels and Istanbul; and
attacks involving improvised explosive devices (IEDs)
carried by passengers. The use of information and
communications technologies for malicious purposes
and the potential vulnerability of aircraft and airport
information technology systems also require our
urgent attention.
Allow me to make a few brief proposals for further
action by the Council and the Committee aimed at
addressing the terrorist threat to civil aviation.
The Council and the CTC should intensify their
efforts to raise awareness of and promote the SARPs
17-30061

27/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and the guidance material developed by ICAO. They
should urge States to make the relevant national
agencies aware of those tools, including by ensuring
the provision of appropriate training for all relevant
actors, in particular the frontline staff responsible for
implementing security controls. I would note in that
regard that the CTC recently reviewed the updated
Technical Guide to the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2009) and other relevant
resolutions so as to reflect the provisions of recently
adopted resolutions, including resolution 2309 (2016),
as well as the tools and instruments developed by
ICAO. The Guide is intended as a comprehensive
reference tool to help States assess the progress of their
implementation efforts.
The Council and the CTC should incorporate the
relevant Council resolutions into the civil aviation
security framework. For example, States should be
encouraged to take into consideration the provisions
of Council resolution 2341 (2017) on protecting
critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks, and
incorporate them into their national civil aviation
security programmes. There is also a need to increase
understanding of that growing threat.
The Council and the CTC should promote the
establishment of risk-management processes at all
airports, including risk assessment, the implementation
of the relevant mitigation measures and efforts to
ensure that such measures are effectively implemented
by security personnel. The Council and the CTC should
urge States to enhance the protection of airport landside
areas. The new ICAO standards and guidance material
covering the protection of landside areas should be
taken into consideration.
States should be urged to address the use of
information
and
communications
technologies
for malicious purposes, as well as the use of
sophisticated IEDs. The Council and the CTC should
urge States and industry actors to regard aviation
security audits as an opportunity to identify best
practices, as well as capacity-building and technical
assistance needs. States should be urged to strengthen
their capacity to identify low- and high-risk passengers,
while taking into account the need to facilitate travel.
Especially urgent, in that regard, is the introduction
and effective implementation of both Advance
Passenger Information systems and Passenger Name
Record systems, as a means to identify terrorists and

S/PV. 8057

foreign terrorist fighters. The Council and the CTC
should encourage States to step up their efforts to
populate INTERPOL databases, including by ensuring
connectivity to and the active use of, and expanded access
to its I-24/7 global police communications system.
In conclusion, I encourage the Council and the
CTC to continue to address aviation security-related
issues, including by promoting the implementation of
resolution 2309 (2016) by member States. This topic
will continue to be considered by the Committee,
including through regular briefings provided by CTED
and ICAO. I also urge the Council and the Committee to
continue to support closer cooperation between ICAO
and the Committee. The CTC and CTED will continue
to enhance their cooperation in that area with the Office
of Counter-Terrorism. It is my hope that the Office will
fully utilize the assessment, analysis and expertise of
the Committee and CTED in this area, including within
the framework of technical assistance facilitation.
The President: I thank Ambassador Aboulatta for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I thank
Secretary General Liu and Ambassador Aboulatta for
their briefings, which were both informative. I thought
that they contained some important recommendations
of which we can all take note.
A year ago, the Security Council met to adopt its
first-ever resolution on the terrorist threats facing civil
aviation (see S/PV.7775). Through that unanimous
adoption, we showed our joint resolve to protect our
citizens from a shared and escalating threat, and we
started a global discussion on how together we would
improve aviation security standards. We therefore
welcome the good work that has followed over the past
12 months. It speaks volumes about the momentum
created by resolution 2309 (2016) that the Global
Aviation Security Plan was completed two years ahead
of the original schedule. And we look forward to the
plan being endorsed later this year by the International
Civil Aviation Organization Council (ICAO). We
believe that the Security Council should then add its
endorsement and call to action.
And yet, one year on from 2309 (2016), it is clear
that the threat facing civil aviation has not diminished;
instead, it has evolved. Members will recall the plot to

17-300617/21

S/PV.8057

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

smuggle bombs inside laptops, which led the United
Kingdom and the United States to ban larger electronics
from the cabins of aircraft for several months this year,
or the failed attack at Sydney’s international airport
just two months ago — a sophisticated effort that would
have claimed hundreds of innocent lives. Those are but
two examples of the terrorists’ unrelenting desire to
bring death and destruction to our skies. Those plots
should remind us all that we cannot relent in our efforts
to keep our citizens safe.
Instead, we need to maintain the resolve we found
a year ago. That means each and every ICAO member
State turning its commitment to the global aviation
security plan into real action. Lip service is simply no
deterrent. Those who believe their airports and carriers
are somehow immune from terrorist targeting are not
just wrong; they are also irresponsible, shirking both
their obligations and the common responsibility we
have to protect the global industry and our peoples who
use it.
Aviation is part of the lifeblood of our economies. We
recognize that implementing ICAO’s agreed Standards
and doing so on the basis of recommended practices
validated by robust verification is a challenge for some,
no matter how good their intentions. Let us therefore
support each other through technical cooperation and
capacity development, as spelled out in 2309 (2016).
The United Kingdom has recently tripled its budget for
such assistance and has an active programme, working
alongside dozens of fellow Member States. I call upon
other Council members to do the same.
It is not just ICAO members that can do more. I
see three ways for the United Nations, together with
ICAO, to work better to ensure that aviation security
remains at the top of the agenda, getting the attention
it requires. First, threats to aviation security should
be routinely included in United Nations reporting
related to terrorism. We encourage the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities to make sure that it asks States
about threats to aviation security and that those threats
are properly assessed in the team’s regular reporting.
Secondly, we welcome the close corporation
that has developed between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and ICAO.
Those two agencies already work together closely and
8/21

27/09/2017

are developing a cooperation agreement. We encourage
continued collaboration on CTED country assessments,
but also on sharing information, research and analysis
about the emerging trends in terrorist threats to civil
aviation, and on cutting-edge ways in which they could
be mitigated.
Thirdly, we encourage the new United Nations to
work closely with ICAO and make capacity-building
in aviation security a priority. We encourage them
together to identify and deliver appropriate capacitybuilding projects, in line with the actions and tasks set
out in the global aviation security plan.
In conclusion, the first anniversary of 2309 (2016) is
a moment, in part, to reflect on what has been achieved
over the past year; but it needs to be far more than that.
It should also be a moment when we ask how we sustain
the momentum created by 2309 (2016), putting into
practice what we have committed to on paper.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Secretary General Liu and Ambassador Aboulatta for
their briefings.
“We have some planes.” That was one of the first
radio transmissions air traffic controllers heard on
11 September 2001. More than 16 years later the pain of
that barbaric act of terrorism remains. We continue to
mourn the victims and honour their memories. Across
the United States, Americans remember vividly exactly
where they were and what they were doing when they
got word that a plane had struck the World Trade Centre.
None of us will forget.
Just as we never forget what the victims of 9/11
suffered that day, we must never forget the lessons we
learned. We know that terrorists are determined to
target civil aviation. They want to attack the links that
connect our countries and bring down the infrastructure
that is the backbone of modern society. Despite the
many improvements made to aviation since 9/11, the
threat is still all too real.
The threat of civil aviation continues to evolve at
a rate that challenges even our best efforts to secure
the global aviation system and recent terrorist attacks
against aircraft in Egypt and Somalia make that clear.
At the same time, a reliance on airplanes to facilitate
the movement of people and goods continues to grow.
As the global economy continues to be more and more
reliant on aviation, keeping that system secure becomes
more and more important.
17-30061

27/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Last year, through resolution 2309 (2016), the
Security Council recognized the importance of aviation
security in our global counter-terrorism efforts. The
resolution was built on previous work to strengthen
global standards to address the terrorist threat.
Resolution 2309 (2016) highlighted the importance
of mobilizing more resources and deepening our
cooperation to respond to changing threats. We
welcome the work of the global aviation community in
response to resolution 2309 (2016), including through
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
ICAO has developed the Global Aviation Security
Plan, and the United States calls on the ICAO Council
to endorse that plan as soon as possible. It is a vital
next step towards increasing international cooperation
on aviation security. Once the global aviation security
plan is approved, it will be up to Member States to
work with ICAO to make sure its recommendations are
implemented and progress is monitored.
United Nations counter-terrorism offices should
focus on helping Member States follow through on
ICAO’s plans. However, ultimately, keeping air travel
safe requires each Member State to do its part. Just
one weak link in the sprawling international system
can become a catastrophic vulnerability. Consistent
with resolution 2341 (2017), the United States calls
on all Member States to strengthen the protection of
critical infrastructure, such as airports. Member States
must also be vigilant about preventing foreign terrorist
fighters from travelling across borders.
The United States has helped to lead efforts
in expanding information-sharing on known and
suspected terrorists and improving border security
through enhanced traveller screening. However, we
have more to do to counter the foreign fighter threat.
That is especially true as fighters from the battlefields
in Syria and Iraq try to return home or move to other
war zones.
Despite the progress we have made, the terrorist
threat to aviation, airports and air travellers remains.
Many countries still struggle to consistently implement
and adhere to international security standards and
practices. As Member States, we must hold each
other accountable to ensure that international security
standards are both rigorously implemented and
adequate to meet new threats. No country should be left
behind. We must continue expanding intelligence and
law enforcement information-sharing and accelerate

S/PV. 8057

efforts to implement advance passenger information
and passenger name record collection analysis and
sharing to identify terrorists and criminals.
It is up to each of us to recognize our unique
vulnerabilities. We must take a hard look at current
threats and anticipate future ones. The United States
will continue to take a hard look at our system of
air travel to make it stronger. We look forward to
continuing our work with fellow Member States and
United Nations entities to ensure the security of the
global aviation system.
Above all, we cannot forget the fundamental role
that air travel plays in our lives today. The fact that
leaders from around the world gathered here at the
United Nations last week is a timely reminder of that.
It is simply impossible to imagine the modern world
without aviation. We all rely on the knowledge that
when we board a plane, we will reach our destination
safely. If we were to think for a moment about the stakes
of keeping aviation safe, we would all agree that there
is no time to waste in strengthening that vital system.
That should push us to deepen our cooperation. The
United States stands ready to help.
Mr. Biagini (Italy): First of all, I wish to thank
the Ethiopian presidency for convening this meeting.
I also thank the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism — Ambassador
Aboulatta — for his briefing. In particular, I thank the
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, for the great
accuracy and significance of the organization’s work in
raising the level of safety in civil aviation. She has the
full support and backing of Italy.
One year has passed since the Security Council
adopted resolution 2309 (2016). In the meantime,
as we have heard, the terrorist threat has evolved. It
has been addressed but is still present. The danger
of terrorists infiltrating into civil aviation passenger
flows has previously been related primarily to foreign
terrorist fighters, as was highlighted in resolution 2178
(2014). Currently, terrorist detection is mainly focused
on returnees and new forms of threats. However, we
must remember that civil aviation is still vulnerable to
that previous kind of threat. Therefore, we call on the
international community to strengthen cooperation,
information-sharing and security measures at,

17-300619/21

S/PV.8057

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and within, airports, according to updated and
shared standards.
On 26 May, in the Taormina statement on the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism, the leaders
of the Group of Seven confirmed their commitment
to strengthening cooperation among border agencies
and supporting the expansion of the use of advance
passenger information (API) and passenger name
records in traveller screenings. We acknowledge that
many countries in several regions need capacitybuilding projects to enhance the effectiveness of their
fight against terrorism. With specific reference to
aviation security, there are objective constraints for the
technological transition from pre-existing information
systems to the current API system. That transition
takes time and means managing different systems
for a certain period, but the critical importance of
API as an effective tool in the fight against terrorism
is undeniable.
Ensuring the safety of international flights and
passengers, helping to prevent terrorist attacks and
strengthening the effectiveness of law enforcement and
judicial action are the essential goals of resolution 2309
(2016). Implementation is now key. We are dealing with
a global threat, and it is therefore necessary to not only
share international standards but also expertise and
best practices in implementation. In that regard, the
assistance and technical support provided by ICAO
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate are fundamental.
Finally, we look forward to broad agreement among
Member States on the approval of the Global Aviation
Aecurity Plan as a further significant step forward for
the security of civil aviation. Italy will continue to
support the optimal implementation of all the necessary
requirements to enhance effectiveness in preventing
terrorist attacks, bearing in mind that the security of
airports and flights is a civil right and a fundamental
reaffirmation of our collective freedom.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, we
thank Ambassador Aboulatta, in his capacity as Chair
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and Ms. Liu,
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization, for their briefings.
Once again, Bolivia reiterates its categorical
condemnation of all terrorist acts in all forms and
manifestations, as they are criminal and unjustifiable,
10/21

27/09/2017

regardless of their motivation, wherever or whenever
they may be and whoever commits them. Terrorism
constitutes one of the most serious threats to peace,
social coexistence and international security. Terrorist
acts that are related to civil aviation security are not
only a threat to the safety and confidence of people, but
also to the economy and trade between States.
The need for cooperation among States is clear, so
as to avoid any attempt by terrorist groups to capitalize
on possible safety deficiencies at airports. We therefore
reaffirm the need to evaluate whether or not current
international standards are effective when it comes
to their implementation. At the same time, due to the
nature of terrorist acts, those standards must evolve and
adapt to current situations.
We highlight the progress made to date since the
adoption of the Chicago Convention on International
Civil Aviation, through various international
instruments, such as the 1988 Protocol to the Montreal
Convention Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, which expands
its provisions to include terrorist acts committed
in airports providing services to international civil
aviation, the 2010 Protocol to the Beijing Convention
on the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Relating to
International Civil Aviation, as well as resolution 2309
(2016), which encourages further coordination with the
International Civil Aviation Organization.
As set out in resolution 2309 (2016), Bolivia, in
coordination with the International Civil Aviation
Organization, is implementing effective national
mechanisms to adequately enforce aviation safety
measures to counter such threats. Our national criminal
code categorizes terrorism as any act that aims to
provoke a state of alert or collective panic among the
population. It also stipulates that appropriating an
aircraft or vessel through violence, threat or any other
form of intimidation is an act of terrorism.
In that vein, we have worked on implementing
the national civil aviation safety programme, which is
intended to establish the various responsibilities and
levels of coordination among different institutions,
public or private companies and State security bodies
regarding anything related to the permanent safety
of civil aviation, in order to prevent acts of illicit
interference, crimes and violations that infringe upon
the normal development of aviation activities.
17-30061

27/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The contexts in which terrorism arises, both locally
and globally, are the challenge that the international
community faces. In order to overcome that challenge,
we call on the Security Council to join forces in the
fight against the scourge of terrorism through greater
international coordination, while respecting the
Charter of the United Nations and the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States within
the framework of international law.
Finally, we express our support for the ongoing
work being done by both the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, as well as the International Civil
Aviation Organization.
It is a fact that there are still challenges for States,
but we are sure that besides holding dialogue on aviation
security and cooperation with respect to information
exchange, only through capacity-building will we be
able to guarantee the well-being of the population with
respect to the use of civil aviation services.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Ethiopia for
its able leadership this month and for highlighting
the importance of aviation security. I also express
my appreciation to the Secretary General of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
Ms. Fang Liu, and the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta,
for their informative briefings. I would especially
like to express my gratitude to Ms. Fang Liu for her
official visit to Kazakhstan last month. Her meetings
with officials of my country augur well for our close
collaboration in the future.
Kazakhstan is committed to aviation security
and protecting civil aviation facilities and critical
infrastructure for combating international terrorism
from terrorist attacks, in the light of the complex and
innovative methods used by terrorist organizations.
My country’s relevant competent authorities have
intensified their interaction with the relevant regional
and international organizations and taken vigorous and
prompt measures to eliminate threats to international
flights, in accordance with resolution 2309 (2016),
which calls on Member States to take immediate
measures to eliminate any gaps or loopholes.
In 2016, the Executive Directorate of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTED) carried out an assessment
of Kazakhstan’s implementation of the basic counterterrorism resolutions of the Security Council and found

S/PV. 8057

them to be quite effective. The European Commission
also carried out a technical safety assessment in
Kazakhstan and confirmed that the country was
effectively implementing ICAO standards.
In addition, in accordance with the national
transport law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, our civil
aviation committee is considering the installation and
maintenance of an information system for collecting
and processing air passenger data. We are working to
introduce the Advance Passenger Information System
and carrying out a study of the capabilities of the
Interactive Advance Passenger Information System,
which is becoming the new standard. We are undertaking
that exercise with the assistance of experts from CTED,
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism. In the
near future, intend to ratify the Convention on the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts Relating to International
Civil Aviation.
Because the nature of attacks on civil aviation
infrastructure is constantly changing, Kazakhstan
believes that it is necessary to constantly review,
harmonize and consolidate legislation and actions with
neighbouring and regional countries that share constant
flow of air traffic. That applies to the international
sphere, as well.
We call for the development of an active exchange of
information between Member States and international
organizations on new methods and practices in the
field of aviation security. Special vigilance is called
for with regard to preventing direct attacks, smuggling
explosives onto aircraft, using drones to carry
lethal materials or vehicles laden with explosives,
the hijacking of planes and attacks with mortars of
short- and long-range anti-tank missiles. All of that
requires thorough screening, the creation of stand-off
security zones, clear operational roles between armed
forces, special security and the police and situational
crisis training of civilian populations. In order to help
countries fight those challenges, comply with norms
and establish uniform procedures, capacity-building
will be necessary by way of well-qualified personnel,
training, equipment for detection and destruction and
early warning.
In conclusion, we reaffirm Kazakhstan’s
commitment to implementing effective measures to
counter and mitigate terrorist attacks against civil

17-3006111/21

S/PV.8057

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

aviation by strengthening partner relations and applying
the norms and standards established by ICAO.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to begin
by thanking Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and
Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, for their comprehensive
and informative briefings.
Japan co-sponsored resolution 2309 (2016) with a
view to enhancing aviation security together with the
international community. Civil aviation has been an
attractive target for terrorists over the past decades,
as we witnessed with the attacks in the United States
of 11 September 2011, and more recently in Brussels
and Istanbul last year. Terrorists will use all available
methods to attack civil aviation. We therefore need to
use all available tools to prevent them from doing so.
While aviation security covers a wide range of areas of
activty, information exchange is among the most basic
and effective.
As the briefers pointed out, advance passenger
information (API) and passenger name record (PNR)
systems should be introduced in order to detect foreign
terrorist fighters, in accordance with resolutions 2178
(2014) and 2368 (2017). ICAO’s API guidelines and
PNR reporting standards demonstrate how useful
such systems can be. API includes passport and flight
information, while PNR includes passengers’ booking
information, including itineraries, the names and
nationalities of travelling companions and payment
methods. That information helps the authorities analyse
and detect possible foreign terrorist fighters before they
arrive at airports.
However, as Ambassador Aboulatta pointed
out, according to the March report of the Executive
Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, only
57 out of 193 Member States have introduced API
and only 15 use the PNR system. Japan calls upon
all Member States to employ those systems as soon
as possible, as encouraged by relevant resolutions.
In order to support such efforts, Japan has provided
$2.24 million of assistance to the Asia-Pacific region
to promote API and PNR for aviation security. We hope
that other Member States will also promote support for
the wider use of those systems.
Moreover, API and PNR systems will not be
enough. We must collect information on terrorists in
order to be able to match the information obtained
12/21

27/09/2017

by API and PNR. Therefore, updating the sanctions
lists on the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Al-Qaida and populating INTERPOL databases,
including stolen and lost travel documents databases,
is important. Those databases should be extended
to airports and border checkpoints. If those areas do
not have access to the databases, terrorists can sneak
across borders unnoticed due to the lack of timely
notice. However, more than 100 out of the 190 member
States of INTERPOL do not use that powerful database
to screen travellers at airports and border checkpoints.
Therefore, I urge Member States to extend access to
INTERPOL databases to airports and other front-line
checkpoints in accordance with resolution 2322 (2016).
With regard to aviation security,I would like to
take this opportunity to strongly condemn the series of
ballistic missile launches carried out by North Korea in
flagrant violation of Security Council resolutions. We
demand that North Korea immediately cease all such
actions. Those ballistic missiles were launched without
any prior notification. They could have catastrophic
consequences and pose a threat to aviation security.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of moving towards implementation. Japan is always
ready to work closely with other countries to enhance
their capacities in counter-terrorism, including
aviation security. We must unite against terrorists
by implementing resolution 2309 (2016) and related
resolutions and further enhancing our counterterrorism measures.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on civil aviation security
and counter-terrorism. Our thanks also go to the two
briefers — Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and
Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).
Civil aviation is important to connectivity,
political and cultural exchanges, trade and economic
cooperation among nations. In recent years, terrorist
organizations have been targeting civil aviation in
terror attacks, jeopardizing the safety and security of
people and property and undermining the stability and
socioeconomic development of the countries affected.
Guided by the notion that humankind is a community
with a shared future, the international community
should scale up international cooperation in civil
17-30061

27/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

aviation and take practical and effective measures to
protect the global civil aviation system from the threat
of terrorist attacks. In that context, I would like to
highlight the following three points.
First, a harmonized set of standards should be
upheld to guard against and combat acts of terror against
civil aviation. All countries should be consistent in
their zero-tolerance and non-discrimination approach
towards terrorism — that is to relentlessly suppress
terrorist activities regardless of the countries they
target or the means they employ. International counterterrorism operations must fully leverage the leadership
of the United Nations in general, and in particular
that of the Security Council, adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
strengthen effective coordination, develop a united
front against terrorism at the international level and
keep the heat up on terrorists — fighting them with an
iron hand.
Secondly, as this is a Member State-led process,
strengthening developing countries’ capacity-building
should be prioritized. Developing countries face more
challenges in capacity-building to ensure civil aviation
security. The international community’s priorities in
that regard include airport security screening, safety
and security risk assessment and on-site response.
Developing countries should receive assistance to
enhance their civil aviation protection capacity.
Meanwhile, it is necessary to respect the sovereignty
of the recipient countries and to help them address
practical challenges with concrete measures.
Thirdly, the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council should be implemented in good faith to
scale up international cooperation in protecting civil
aviation from terror attacks. In September 2016, the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2309 (2016).
Pursuant to the resolution, all parties should strengthen
the sharing of civil aviation security intelligence and
step up cooperation in border control and enforcement.
ICAO should encourage States to improve and refine
their civil aviation security measures and encourage
the international community to invest more in civil
aviation security, continue to work closely with the
CTC and the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
under the Security Council and the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and assist Member States
in enhancing capacity-building in the relevant fields.

S/PV. 8057

China is an important member of the international
counter-terrorism community. China will continue
to promote anti-terror cooperation in civil aviation
and raise our standards of civil aviation security, in
accordance with our counter-terrorism law, national
civil aviation security legislation and international
conventions. During the Belt and Road Forum for
International Cooperation that was held in Beijing in
May, the Civil Aviation Administration of China and
ICAO signed a memorandum of understanding on
cooperation. China is ready to work with ICAO to scale
up international cooperation in areas such as aviation
safety and security management.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes the convening of this
briefing, one year after the Security Council’s adoption
of the historic resolution 2309 (2016) of 22 September
2016. It gives us an opportunity to deepen our thinking
on the possible solutions to counter the threats to
international peace and security that constitute the
growing number of terrorist attacks against civil
aviation. The special meeting on the same topic that
took place in July had already laid the groundwork for
our discussion today. That brings me to congratulate
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and our colleague
Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), for their excellent briefings.
It is encouraging to note, in particular in the light
of the outstanding briefing made by the Secretary
General of ICAO, that the basis of international
legislation for aviation security provided for in the
Chicago Convention of 7 December 1944 is subject
to regular updates by ICAO to adapt to the new
security context that is characterized by constantly
changing terrorist threats. The crucial role of ICAO in
developing international civil aviation safety standards
and in pursuing their effective implementation must
be strengthened by the joint efforts of Member States,
specialized agencies and the aeronautical industry,
because when the terrorist threat affects a sector as
sensitive as air transportation, it becomes elusive and
difficult to prevent. Therefore, constant vigilance and
monitoring, based on an awareness of each country and
region’s own specific context and internal geopolitical
environment, become fundamental.
In that regard, in order to be effective, any
action taken to combat that phenomenon must be
complemented by a strengthening of regional and

17-3006113/21

S/PV.8057

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international cooperation in the areas of information
sharing and border control, as well as technologies for
recording, security control and boarding.
Airport facilities such as terminals, cargo areas,
baggage handling areas, parking zones and areas for
take-off and landing are all targets and vulnerable
areas for terrorist attacks. Safeguarding those areas
is therefore a major challenge. Similarly, control
procedures for passengers and other users is another
equally sensitive domain where any failures could
provide terrorist groups with an opportunity to plan
and implement dangerous acts.
At the national, regional and international levels,
Senegal is specifically implementing the Global Civil
Aviation Security Plan and its road map, which the
Secretary General described. That is the case because
Senegal is a regional hub for both civil aviation
and counter-terrorism. My country serves as the
headquarters for aviation security in Africa, which has
led us to cooperate in airspace management, with a
jurisdiction covering an airspace of 16,005,000 square
kilometers — one and a half times that of Europe.
Senegal is also responsible for managing one of the
six African flight information regions — the South
Atlantic Coastal Region. My country also hosts the
headquarters for the African Commission for Civil
Aviation, a specialized agency of the African Union, as
well as the regional office of ICAO. The African Civil
Aviation Commission’s mission is to promote civil
aviation and ensure that it is safe, secure, profitable and
sustainable and respects the environment in Africa. It
also implements the ICAO Integrated Air Transport
System and develops rules and regulations that are
aligned to conform with current international civil
aviation legislation.
In line with ICAO provisions, which affirm that
every State is responsible for ensuring the effective
implementation of all security measures aimed at
protecting aviation from unlawful interference, the
State of Senegal has been working for a number of years
on a major programme designed to strengthen civil
aviation security on its territory and in its airspace. The
policy enabled the National Assembly to adopt a new
civil aviation code through its enactment of Act 2015-10
on 4 May 2015, and to establish aviation regulations as
a basis for the operational implementation of security
measures and procedures. At the national level, this
regulatory framework was considerably bolstered by
the implementation of the provisions of annex 17 to the
14/21

27/09/2017

Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation
and the ICAO Universal Security Audit Programme.
Moreover, Senegal’s adoption of aviation
regulation 9/2016, on advance passenger information,
has made it the second most advanced African country
on the issue. We have therefore created a platform for
exchanging and sharing sensitive information with
other States in order to be able to present a solid and
united front in dealing with the appearance of new
threats and attempts at illicit attacks that make use of
aircraft or airports. In that regard, and pursuant to its
2015/1969 decree of 21 September 2015, Senegal has
set up a system for monitoring civil aviation security
based on the ICAO provisions. It is being effectively
enforced and will ensure air transport security in our
territory by establishing national civil aviation security
programmes. In 2016, Senegal also adopted a national
maritime security strategy.
At the subregional level, the State of Senegal has
ratified the provisions of the West African Economic
and Monetary Union (WAEMU) relating to air
transport, including Regulation 10, on civil aviation
security, and Decision 11, on the implementation of
safety practices and procedures within the WAEMU
member States. Each member State reserves the right
to apply more stringent measures in order to respond to
specific demands arising from the results of a national
threat analysis.
West Africa and the Sahel are seeing an increase
in terrorist and cyberattacks, alongside an enormous
quantity of arms and ammunition in circulation,
including rocket-propelled grenades, which is a terrible
threat and a source of concern for the subregion.
Along with arms smuggling, it is also a threat to the
stability of the entire Sahel-Sahara region. If we are
to prevent Africa from becoming the soft underbelly
of air security, we should ensure the provision of
major, multidimensional technical assistance in terms
of training of human resources as well as equipment
and technology — as provided for in paragraph 7 of
resolution 2309 (2016) and as Secretary General Liu
called for this morning. In that regard, Senegal reiterates
its support for better cooperation among ICAO, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, including its Executive
Directorate, whose human and financial resources
should be strengthened, as Mr. Aboulatta, the Chair of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, has rightly said.
17-30061

27/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In conclusion, at a time when Senegal will be
opening its state-of-the-art Blaise Diagne Airport in
a few months, my delegation would like to encourage
further consideration of resolution 2309 (2016), but
especially its implementation, in perfect harmony
with the other relevant Security Council resolutions on
combating terrorism.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation would like to thank
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and Mr. Amr
Aboulatta, Chai of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), for their assessments and their informative
contributions to our discussion.
Our delegation played an active part in the dialogue
on the issue of threats to civil aviation security held
in July in the forum of the CTC. In the course of that
meeting, the Deputy Minister of Transport of the
Russian Federation made a presentation on my country’s
best practices for implementing international civil
aviation security standards. In our view, the CTC’s July
special meeting gave us food for thought, in particular
regarding the remaining gaps in States’ fulfilment
of the requirements for preventing terrorist acts and
strengthening cooperation between States in that area.
The fact is that all of these elements are reflected in the
Council’s counter-terrorism resolutions, starting with
the foundational resolution 1373 (2001).
Among the new challenges in this area we are
again seeing the issue of foreign terrorist fighters,
incidents at airports caused by the actions of insiders
and airport staff, the use of increasingly sophisticated
improvised explosive devices, and the danger posed by
cyberattacks. The previous arrangement affirmed that
when formulating and implementing in practice rules
and methods for ensuring aviation security, States
should rely first and foremost on work carried out within
the framework of ICAO, the international organization
competent in these matters. In that context, it will be
helpful to be able to rely on ICAO’s Global Aviation
Security Plan, currently being considered, along a
road map for its implementation and accompanying
programmes and projects.
As we see it, our job, in discussing this topic in the
Council, and that of the relevant work in the CTC, is,
without duplicating any efforts, to ensure that States
are helped to comprehensively implement the relevant
standards and recommendations, while taking into

S/PV. 8057

account the gaps that have been identified in their national
counter-terrorism arrangements. We look forward to
continued fruitful cooperation between the Security
Council’s counter-terrorism bodies and ICAO. We will
also be interacting on the issue with the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities. This process
will undoubtedly also involve the newly established
United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism, which is
mandated to strengthen the coordination of technical
assistance both within and beyond the United Nations.
Our ultimate goal should be to create a sustainable
system for protecting international civil aviation from
acts of illicit interference, and the most effective means
to that end is the coordinated action of States and
international bodies within their respective mandates.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Ethiopian presidency
of the Security Council for holding today’s important
meeting in response to paragraph 11 of resolution 2309
(2016). I should also like to extend my appreciation to
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), for her briefing today.
The meeting held on 7 July by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism (CTC) on terrorist threats
to civil aviation was one of the most important meetings
held by the CTC in 2017, given the importance of the
topic. As we have heard, that meeting resulted in an
important outcome that should be fully respected and
implemented.
In that vein, I note the relevance of resolution 2309
(2016), which stresses the important and pivotal role
of the International Civil Aviation Organization in
the implementation of that resolution and in all areas
related to civil aviation and in the implementation
of the Convention on International Civil Aviation to
protect civil aviation against terrorist risks and threats.
The resolution welcomes the work of ICAO to protect
civil aviation. It calls on ICAO, within its mandate, to
continue and enhance its efforts to establish compliance
with international aviation security standards through
effective implementation on the ground, and to assist
Member States in this regard.
We underscore the need for States to comply with the
implementation of resolution 2309 (2016), including all

17-3006115/21

S/PV.8057

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

its provisions, such as guarding against the use of civil
aviation as a tool to transport foreign terrorist fighters.
It stresses the need for all States to protect the security
of their nationals from terrorist attacks targeting civil
aviation, in accordance with international law. We also
reiterate the need for all States to do what it takes, in
accordance with international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, to prevent and combat terrorism,
including terrorism that targets or uses civil aviation.
In that regard, Egypt has been taking internal
measures to protect its people and territory against any
terrorist attack that could target civil aviation. Egypt is
pursuing its close cooperation with friendly countries
and ICAO. Recently, we conducted a comprehensive
review of practices in Egyptian airports to ensure
the implementation of global security standards, in
accordance with the Chicago Convention.
Additionally, Egypt is implementing effective
measures to assess risks in Egyptian airports with a view
to strengthening security screening and audits, as well
as the security of facilities, and detecting and deterring
terrorist attacks against civil aviation. Egyptian
authorities conduct regular and comprehensive reviews
and assessments of those measures to ensure that they
manage evolving threats and that they are in line with
the ICAO Standards and Recommended Practices.
In that respect, the ICAO aviation audit team has
given Egypt a positive assessment for its application
of the standard security procedures set forth in the
Chicago Convention. Egyptian authorities received a
formal letter on 17 August from the Chair of the ICAO
audit team, indicating the progress made by Egypt in
reaching the highest standards of aviation security.
To conclude, Egypt underscores the need to secure
the financial resources required by ICAO to enhance
its ability to carry out its functions and assist States
in the implementation of the Chicago Convention
and the Global Aviation Security Plan. We may also
consider that the Fund for Counter-Terrorism finances
the projects carried out by ICAO in different States to
protect civil aviation from terrorist risks and threats.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, and Ambassador
Aboulatta for their insightful briefings.
In light of evolving terrorist threats throughout the
world, the enhancement of aviation security worldwide
16/21

27/09/2017

is critical to keeping aircrafts and travellers safe and
secure. Today’s missile attack on the Kabul International
Airport only highlights the need for the advancement of
new standards of aviation security. It is not just timely,
but necessary. Yet, not all needed improvements to
aviation security can be made overnight, especially
given that their implementation requires a phased
approach and the active engagement of all States.
Among the urgent tasks are the enhancement
of overall security with the Advanced Passenger
Screening System; the heightened screening of personal
baggage, in particular electronic devices, to prevent
improvised explosive devices from being taken in the
air; the introduction of increased security protocols
around aircraft; and the establishment of additional
pre-clearance locations.
Resolution 2309 (2016), which Ukraine co-sponsored,
sent a strong message to ICAO to further develop its
cooperation with the Security Council, in particular
with the CTC and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED). That entails a systematic exchange
of information on terrorist threats, incidents, trends
and mitigation efforts, as well as providing capacitybuilding assistance where it is needed most.
In that regard, we take positive note of the CTC
special meeting held in July and the most recent 2017
ICAO Global Aviation Security Symposium, held this
month. Both events facilitated strategic international
collaboration in addressing the threat posed by terrorists
targeting civil aviation by reinforcing, strengthening
and promoting the international framework of
aviation security standards. Their findings should be
well reflected in national and international terrorism
prevention strategies. We therefore encourage ICAO
and CTED to continue such cooperation, with the
active involvement of the new United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism.
Driven by the requirements of resolutions 2309
(2016) and 2341 (2017), Ukraine updated its State
programme on civil aviation security in March, in
conformity with the recent amendments of the ICAO
Standards and Recommended Practices. It establishes
a mechanism for risk assessment at both the national
and the airport levels, introduces extensive measures
related to the protection of civil aviation from acts of
unlawful interference, and in that regard enacts the
provision of specialized training for security personnel
17-30061

27/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

to promptly and effectively identify and eliminate
threats to civil aviation.
Since a single cyberattack could deal even
more damage to the civil aviation system than any
other terrorist attack, a special focus under the State
programme is given to the protection of critical airport
infrastructure from cyberthreats, as envisaged by
ICAO Assembly resolution 39-19. A dedicated division
has been created within the State aviation service of
Ukraine to coordinate cybersecurity strategies, policies
and plans with airline companies and share respective
information to help identify critical vulnerabilities that
need to be addressed.
To check travellers’ information against the terrorist
sanctions lists, Ukraine has become a participant in the
Advance Passenger Information System and supports
its universal implementation. In that vein, we have
also introduced ICAO-compliant biometric travel
documents and equipped our airports with automated
systems for their check-in.
The gravity of acts threatening the safety of
international civil aviation, especially terrorist
attacks, makes them a matter of concern for the entire
international community. States should therefore
spare no effort to cooperate diligently with the aim of
thoroughly investigating those crimes and holding their
perpetrators to justice.
One of the examples I must mention is the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 in Ukraine’s
occupied Donbas. Five countries — Australia, Belgium,
Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine — are already
working together in the Joint Investigation Team (JIT)
on the criminal investigation of that heinous crime. The
investigation is still under way. Resolved to prosecute
those responsible for this atrocious crime under the
most authoritative body, Ukraine and its partners
attempted to establish an international tribunal through
the Security Council. Yet all our attempts were blocked
by the Russian Federation.
This summer, the JIT countries decided that the
prosecution and trial of the suspects would take place
in the Netherlands. Ukraine and the Netherlands signed
a bilateral treaty on international legal cooperation in
relation to the downing of Flight MH-17. The treaty
constitutes the legal basis for transferring the criminal
proceedings from Ukraine to the Netherlands.

S/PV. 8057

Last week, on the margins of the seventy-second
session of the General Assembly, the Ministers of the
JIT countries signed a memorandum of understanding
regarding political support for prosecuting the
perpetrators of the downing of Flight MH-17. By
signing the agreement, we pledged to continue working
in partnership to implement the demand of resolution
2166 (2014) that those responsible for this incident be
held to account.
Together with other JIT countries and with broad
support from the international community, we will
continue working tirelessly to ensure justice for the
victims and accountability for all responsible for this
crime — those who supplied the missile system that
shot down Flight MH-I7, those who gave that criminal
order, those who pushed the button and those who
supported and funded terrorists then and continue to
do so until now. We count on the backing of all States
in this just cause.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting, one
year after the Security Council adopted resolution 2309
(2016). I also welcome the presence and participation
of the Secretary General of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, and thank
our colleague Ambassador Aboulatta for his briefing
on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
The lives of thousands of people flying around the
world on a daily basis depend upon the implementation
of effective security measures in all aspects of civil
aviation. Terrorist attacks against air transport and
its connected infrastructure can have devastating
consequences and have serious collateral effects on
various aspects of life for States and their peoples.
The global nature of air transport means that States
increasingly depend upon one another in order to
implement effective security measures. Cooperation and
concerted action are ultimately indispensable elements
in order to achieve a reliable and safe environment
for civil aviation. States must do their very best to
implement the ICAO Standards and Recommended
Practices, which requires political will.
However, it is worthwhile indicating that, on
many occasions, political will is not enough. Many
countries simply do not possess the infrastructure,
technical capacity, know-how or financial and human
resources to comply with the standards. Cooperation
therefore becomes essential in their implementation.

17-3006117/21

S/PV.8057

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We greatly value the assistance provided by ICAO and
its No Country Left Behind campaign. We recognize
the importance of the support that some countries are
able to provide through technical assistance, training
programmes and technology transfer.
We note that international civil aviation security
involves a long chain of actors, institutions and States
cooperating with each other — it is just as strong
as its weakest link. In faithful compliance with the
international obligations that we have undertaken,
Uruguay has established a national civial aviation
security committee and has in place a national
programme for the same.
In terms of implementing resolution 2309 (2016),
Uruguay’s national civil aviation and aviation
infrastructure authority highlights the importance of
training on the issue of security, including monitoring
practices, security checks, quality control, strengthening
the exchange of information on international threats
and, in particular, front-line aviation security personnel,
who do not always have access to critical information
or the knowledge and training required to manage it.
We believe that safety audits are a useful instrument to
identify best practices, as well as the need for technical
assistance and training. Furthermore, new technologies
used for passenger control and checking travel
documents, especially what is known as the Advance
Passenger Information System, are important elemenst
in combating potential acts of air terrorism.
During her visit to our country in April, ICAO
Secretary General Fang Liu was able to appreciate
the efforts made by Uruguay to implement the ICAO
Standards and Recommended Practices. Ms. Liu took
that opportunity to indicate that Uruguay had raised its
grade in the ICAO Universal Safety Oversight Audit
Programme by over 30 per cent with regard to the
previous year, including resolving all the significant
concerns that had been highlighted previously.
Uruguay will continue working with respect for the
Charter of the United Nations and international law to
respond to terrorist threats to civil aviation, for we are
aware that only a collective effort will make it possible
to overcome these new and growing challenges.
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): Let me join
others in welcoming to the Security Council the
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Lui. I thank her for her
informative briefing. Let me also thank Ambassador
18/21

27/09/2017

Aboulatta for his briefing as Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee.
We sit in a city that will forever stand testament
to the vulnerability of civil aviation to terrorism and
to its tragic consequences. Since the beginning of civil
aviation, terrorists have found it to be an appealing
target. In the past century, the hijacking of airplanes
and the taking of innocent passengers as hostages for
ransom or to achieve political gains was one of the most
well-known manifestations of terrorism. However, the
attack of 11 September 2001 brought about a new and
unimaginable manifestation — the use of commercial
airlines to commit the mass murder of civilians, both
in the air and on the ground. Since then, we have
increasingly seen attacks on the aviation industry that
seek to spread fear and disruption.
At the same time, international civil aviation
is essential. Interconnectivity contributes to the
globalization that has spread prosperity and greater
understanding between different nations and cultures.
Yet with this greater interconnectedness comes
interdependence. That is particularly true when it
comes to aviation security. Ensuring that aviation is
safe and secure for all is truly a common task among
nations: we are only as safe as our weakest link.
Aviation security is an area where significant
international cooperation is already taking place.
We commend ICAO for its role in this work, not
least in providing capacity-building and technical
assistance to States. We welcome the improvements
in the implementation of ICAO’s Standards and
Recommended Practices. We also welcome the ongoing
work on the development of a new Global Aviation
Security Plan that will support collective action in
support of aviation security.
We appreciate the efforts of ICAO, the CounterTerrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to work together to
find synergies among their respective areas of expertise.
We need to support each other in effectively enhancing
our aviation security. That includes operational
cooperation and information exchange, not least on
information specifically related to terrorist threats to
civil aviation. Further capacity-building in this area
is essential.
For the European Union (EU), as for so many others,
the attacks of 11 September 2001 were a watershed
moment. The new reality led to enhanced joint efforts
17-30061

27/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

on aviation security within the EU. A common
legislative framework is now in place across the EU,
which incorporates ICAO standards as well as annex
17 of the Chicago Convention on International Civil
Aviation. That legislative framework covers, inter alia,
the screening of passengers, airport security, aircraft
security checks, as well as other types of screening.
The EU also provides support for capacity-building as
part of its development cooperation policy. Partnerships
with national and regional authorities play an important
role in our efforts to build capacity in this area.
Attacks in recent years, including those on airports
in Brussels and Istanbul, have shown that there is no
room for complacency. We need to redouble our efforts
and constantly improve the level of aviation security.
Our work on aviation security must dovetail with our
efforts to ensure effective and secure border control,
airport security and cargo security. In addition, more
work is needed to address emerging areas of potential
vulnerability, including the landside security of airports
and how to deal with new cybersecurity threats. Sweden
is committed to working at home and together with
our EU partners to ensure that our contribution to the
global chain of aviation security is strong.
The aim of aviation security is, first and foremost,
preventative. Today’s discussion on aviation security is
an important contribution to our collective efforts to
counter and mitigate the direct threats terrorism can
pose to civil aviation. In the broader context, we also
need to ensure continued work, in compliance with
international law, to prevent radicalization to violent
extremism and terrorism in the first place, in line with
our common United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy as well as the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism. The newly established United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism will be instrumental in
their implementation.
We should not forget that, for generations, aviation
has created a sense of adventure and opportunity
for millions. Terrorist attacks and threats seek to
undermine that sense of wonder, and replace it with
fear and distrust. By working together, we can ensure
that they do not succeed.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first and foremost, to express my sincere thanks
to the Secretary General of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, for her
thorough briefing. I am pleased to see her again at the

S/PV. 8057

Security Council table, one year after the adoption of
substantive resolution 2309 (2016). I would also like to
thank my colleague Ambassador Aboulatta, Permanent
Representative of Egypt, for his briefing on behalf of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
International civil aviation continues to be a prime
target for terrorist groups because of both the potential
for human and economic damage and its impact on the
media. Without going back over the striking examples of
the past, several events this year once again illustrated
the seriousness of the threat. One recent such example
occurred at the end of July, when the Australian
Government thwarted a terrorist attack that was likely
targeting a plane.
In the face of such a serious threat, France has
continued to work over the past year to strengthen
systems in place and its response. At the national
level, the measures we have taken to enhance air
transport security include enhanced capacity to detect
new explosives; enhanced and more rapid response
capabilities to airport attacks; the setting up of
intelligence cells dedicated to airports; the development
of a new management system for background checks;
and the adoption of a risk assessment programme for
flights passing through third countries. Within the
European Union, France recently strengthened its
cooperation with the European Aviation Safety Agency
through a cooperation agreement reached a few days
ago. One of the stipulated areas of cooperation is the
security of air transport.
Internationally, France is particularly active
in ICAO, where it works on a daily basis under the
leadership of my colleague, Philippe Bertoux, who
is here today, in order to improve the Standards and
Recommended Practices, strengthen international
audits and to provide requesting States with targeted
technical assistance. France has also assumed the
chairmanship of the ICAO Council’s Committee on
Unlawful Interference, where it will actively contribute
to the work of strengthening aviation security. My
country is also committed to supporting the work of
ICAO and has shown its commitment by providing
two experts from the French administration to the
ICAO — one in Montreal to support the team in
charge of audits and the other at the regional office in
Dakar to support the African Aviation Security and
Facilitation Plan.

17-3006119/21

S/PV.8057

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Against that backdrop, the Security Council has
an important role to play in calling on all States to
meet their obligations in this arena and to promote the
implementation of the standards set out in the Chicago
Convention. The adoption of resolution 2309 (2016) last
year was an important moment to give new impetus to
the efforts of the international community to evaluate
the risk that terrorism poses for international civil
aviation. We welcome the progress that has been made,
but we must, and can, still do better.
I would therefore like to take this opportunity
to highlight the importance of close and effective
cooperation between ICAO and the United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies, particularly the CounterTerrorism Committee. The special meeting organized
jointly by the CTC and ICAO in July was an excellent
opportunity for enhancing dialogue between Member
States and the relevant international and regional
organizations and for identifying ways to promote the
implementation of international standards in the field of
aviation security. France hopes that this cooperation will
continue and hopes to see the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
participate in the work of ICAO in Montreal, once she
takes office.
Let me conclude by reiterating the importance
that France attaches to this issue and by highlight the
breadth of France’s engagement on what it considers to
be a top priority. It is imperative that the international
community as a whole continue to mobilize to ensure
the safety of air transport. Today’s meeting marks a
new milestone in that regard.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as representative of Ethiopia.
I would like to express my appreciation to
Ms. Fang Liu for her presence here today and for her
comprehensive briefing on aviation security. I also
wish to thank Ambassador Aboulatta for his excellent
leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and for his presentation highlighting what the CTC has
been doing in relation to aviation security. We thank
the United Kingdom for the initiative of convening this
meeting, which marks the one-year anniversary of the
adoption of the landmark resolution 2309 (2016), on
aviation security.
The aviation industry has often been the primary
target of terrorists and a series of measures have
already been put in place to enhance aviation security.
20/21

27/09/2017

However, it remains vulnerable to attacks as terrorists
continue to perceive civil aviation as an attractive target
and to seek to exploit real or perceived vulnerabilities
in the system. That is why aviation security should
remain a high priority agenda for Member States and
for the international community. It is also why there is
a need for greater international cooperation in closing
any loopholes that could be exploited by terrorists. That
is what resolution 2309 (2016) calls for.
In that regard, we appreciate the briefing we
received today on the implementation of this important
resolution, which deals specifically with terrorist
threats to civil aviation. The resolution affirms States’
responsibility to ensure the safety of air services
operating within their territory and calls on all
States to work within the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) to ensure that international
security standards are reviewed, updated, adapted and
put in place based on current risks, pursuant to the
Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation.
However, as all colleagues mentioned earlier, it is
very clear that not all Member States have the same
level of capacity to implement those provisions of the
resolution that have resource implications and require
more sophisticated technical know-how. Therefore,
assistance in the delivery of effective and targeted
capacity-development, training and other necessary
resources, technical assistance, technology transfers
and programmes are needed to enable all States to
achieve the objectives set out in the resolution.
There is no doubt that no single Member State, big
or small, can carry out the responsibilities outlined in
the resolution, given the globally interconnected nature
of aviation and the magnitude of the threat posed. That
is why strengthening cooperation and collaboration and
sharing experience in regards to developing securitycheck technologies and regional and international
cooperation on border control, law enforcement and
criminal justice continue to be extremely critical.
In this context, the close cooperation between
ICAO and CTC and between ICAO and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) is
very important. It is encouraging to note that aviation
security issues have been continuously addressed in
CTC/CTED country assessments and reports. We
also commend the special meeting of the CounterTerrorism Committee on terrorist threats to civil
aviation, held in July, which afforded the opportunity
17-30061

27/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

to look into existing good practices, identify gaps
and vulnerabilities relevant to aviation security,
and consider the responsibilities of ICAO, Member
States and international and regional organizations in
promoting the effective implementation of resolution
2309 (2016).
We believe that today’s meeting will enable us
to reflect on the progress made in implementing the
resolution and applicable ICAO standards, and on
challenges and opportunities in relation to aviation
security, and to explore possibilities for more tangible
collaboration and cooperation, at both the regional and
the international levels. We sincerely hope that States
will continue to develop partnerships aimed at building
capacities and facilitating technical assistance delivery,
and that ICAO, CTC, CTED and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force will also continue to
strengthen their cooperation in that regard.
As Ethiopia is living in a volatile neighbourhood
that is facing threats of terrorism and violent
extremism, attacks against civil aviation by terrorists
are not remote possibilities for us. They are real threats
and they have already happened in our region. Having
one of the biggest airline groups in the region, Ethiopia
attaches great importance to aviation security. I wish
to express our firm commitment to cooperating with
other States and to working with all the relevant
stakeholders in the contexr of regional and international
cooperation frameworks.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Ms. Fang Liu to respond
to comments.

S/PV. 8057

Ms. Fang Liu (spoke in Chinese): I again thank the
Security Council for its invitation to our organization
to brief members on international ciil aviation security.
I thank all representatives for their remarks, their
attention to civil aviation, security measures, their
recognition of our work and their support.
I concur with the remarks made today concerning
the importance of civil aviation security and the need for
international cooperation in that regard. We also need
to implement resolution 2309 (2016) effectively. We
need to invest more in aviation security, in particular in
technical support and training for developing countries,
so that all countries can effectively implement the civil
aviation standards of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) in order to better safeguard
aviation security.
We also recognize the need to support ICAO’s Global
Aviation Security Plan and its implementation. ICAO
will continue to play a leading role in international civil
aviation security and further enhance its cooperation
with the United Nations, the Security Council, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and the new
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism so that
Member States can be better equipped and positioned
to fight terrorism, implement the ICAO civil aviation
security standards. I am ready to further engage with
the Security Council on aviation security and to brief
members on new developments.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

17-3006121/21
