United Nations

A/RES/56/202

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 99 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/56/562/Add.2)]

56/202. Economic and technical cooperation among developing
countries
The General Assembly,
Stressing that South-South cooperation, as an important element of
international cooperation for development, offers viable opportunities for
developing countries in their individual and collective pursuit of sustained economic
growth and sustainable development, in accordance with relevant General Assembly
resolutions and recent United Nations conferences, and for ensuring their effective
and meaningful participation in the newly emerging global economic system,
Recognizing that developing countries have the primary responsibility for
promoting and implementing economic and technical cooperation among
themselves, and reiterating the need for the international community to support the
efforts of the developing countries to expand South-South cooperation through the
modality of economic and technical cooperation among developing countries,
Reaffirming its resolution 33/134 of 19 December 1978, in which it endorsed
the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical
Cooperation among Developing Countries, 1 resolution 46/159 of 19 December 1991
on technical cooperation among developing countries, resolution 49/96 of
19 December 1994 on a United Nations conference on South-South cooperation and
resolutions 50/119 of 20 December 1995, 52/205 of 18 December 1997 and 54/226
of 22 December 1999 on economic and technical cooperation among developing
countries, as well as other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council on economic and technical cooperation among
developing countries,
Recalling the principles and objectives embodied in the Caracas Programme of
Action, adopted at the High-level Conference on Economic Cooperation among
Developing Countries, held at Caracas in May 1981, 2 the San José Declaration and

_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,
Buenos Aires, 30 August–12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A.11 and
corrigendum), chap. I.
2
A/36/333 and Corr.1, annex.

01 49303

A/RES/56/202

Plan of Action, adopted by the Group of 77 at the South-South Conference on Trade,
Investment and Finance, held at San José from 13 to 15 January 1997, 3 the Bali
Declaration and the Bali Plan of Action on Regional and Subregional Economic
Cooperation of the Developing Countries, adopted by the Group of 77 High-level
Conference on Regional and Subregional Economic Cooperation of the Developing
Countries, held in Bali, Indonesia, from 2 to 5 December 1998, 4 and the Declaration
of the South Summit and the Havana Programme of Action, adopted by the South
Summit of the Group of 77, held at Havana from 10 to 14 April 2000, 5 which
accorded South-South cooperation high priority in order for developing countries to
meet new development challenges, as well as other relevant declarations and plans
of action,
Taking note of the Ministerial Declaration adopted by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the States members of the Group of 77 at their twenty-fifth
annual meeting, held in New York on 16 November 2001, 6 in which the increased
importance and relevance of South-South cooperation was emphasized,
Taking note also of the Tehran Consensus, adopted at the Tenth Meeting of the
Intergovernmental Follow-up and Coordination Committee on Economic
Cooperation among Developing Countries of the Group of 77, held at Tehran from
18 to 22 August 2001, 7 which called for consolidating the South-South platform,
building stronger South institutions at the global level, bridging the knowledge and
information gap, building broad-based partnerships and mobilizing global support
for South-South cooperation,
1.
Endorses the report of the High-level Committee on the Review of
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries on its twelfth session 8 and the
decisions adopted by the High-level Committee at that session; 9
2.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
the state of South-South cooperation; 10
3.
Notes with satisfaction the significant increase and expanded use of
South-South cooperation by developing countries as an important and effective
instrument of international cooperation, and in this connection urges developing
countries in a position to do so to intensify technical and economic cooperation
initiatives at the regional and interregional levels in areas such as health, education,
training, agriculture, science and new technologies, and in particular information
and communication technologies;
4.
Reiterates that South-South cooperation should be viewed not as a
substitute for but rather as a complement to North-South cooperation, and, in that
connection, notes with appreciation the increasing number of developed countries
and development foundations supporting South-South cooperation activities through
a variety of triangular arrangements, including direct support or cost-sharing

_______________
3

A/C.2/52/8, annex.
A/53/739, annexes I and II.
5
A/55/74, annexes I and II.
6
A/56/647, annex.
7
A/56/358 and Corr.1, annex.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 39 (A/56/39).
9
Ibid., annex I.
10
A/56/465.
4

2

A/RES/56/202

arrangements, joint research and development projects and third-country training
programmes;
5.
Emphasizes the need for concerted action by developing countries and
their development partners, including relevant international organizations, with a
view to strengthening cooperation and collaboration among developing countries at
the subregional, regional and interregional levels;
6.
Notes with appreciation the contributions made by a number of countries
to the Voluntary Trust Fund for the Promotion of South-South Cooperation and to
the Perez-Guerrero Trust Fund for Economic and Technical Cooperation among
Developing Countries, and invites all countries to contribute to the trust funds in
support of a revitalized South-South platform that is designed to benefit developing
countries, especially the least developed, landlocked and small island developing
countries;
7.
Recognizes the need to strengthen institutions of the South, including
policy research and development institutions and centres of excellence, especially at
the regional and interregional levels, with a view to making more effective use of
the institutional capacity of the South through, inter alia, improved South-South
knowledge-sharing, networking, capacity-building and flow of information and
policy analysis and coordination among developing countries on major development
issues of common concern;
8.
Requests all organizations and agencies of the United Nations
development system to make concerted and intensified efforts to effectively
mainstream the use of South-South cooperation by giving such cooperation
appropriate consideration in the design, formulation and implementation of their
regular programmes;
9.
Calls upon all relevant United Nations organizations and multilateral
institutions to consider increasing allocations of human, technical and financial
resources for South-South cooperation, and in this context takes note of
decision 2001/2 of the Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Population Fund, 11 in which the Board requested
the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to consider
reviewing, in the context of the successor programming arrangements, the allocation
of additional resources for activities involving technical cooperation among
developing countries, taking into account the overall financial situation and the need
for appropriate resources for other activities;
10. Recognizes the need for raising public awareness of and support for
South-South cooperation as a dynamic form of international development
cooperation which can give real content to the concept of ownership and
partnership, and, for this reason, takes note of the Tehran Consensus proposal to
launch the first international decade on South-South cooperation and the United
Nations day for South-South cooperation; 12
11. Requests the Secretary-General, through coordination of the Special Unit
for Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries of the United Nations
Development Programme and in consultation with relevant organizations and
agencies of the United Nations system and other relevant institutions in the South,
_______________
11

12

See DP/2001/11, para. 155.

See A/56/358 and Corr.1, annex, sect. 5.

3

A/RES/56/202

to include in the report to be submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh
session concrete measures for promoting and facilitating South-South cooperation,
taking into account all relevant initiatives and proposals in this regard;
12. Reiterates its request to the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to ensure that the separate identity of the Special Unit for
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries is maintained and that the Unit
is supported so that it may fully implement its mandate and responsibilities as a
focal point of the United Nations system for South-South cooperation;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session
the sub-item entitled “Economic and technical cooperation among developing
countries”, and requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the Special
Unit for Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to submit to it at that session a
comprehensive report on the state of South-South cooperation and the
implementation of the present resolution.
90th plenary meeting
21 December 2001

4
