UNITED NATIONS

’

SECURITY

COUNCIL

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2118/Rev.

1) . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1

The situation in South-East Asia and its implications
for international
peace and
security. [Letter dated 22 February 1979 from the representatives of Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America to the President of the Security Council (S/13111)]

1

Adoption

of the agenda

S1PV.2118

... -*i u..-.‘ ). .".*-..

NOTE

Symbols‘of Unitek Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with 2igures. Mention’ of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document. ,I’ ,‘,.I, ‘,
1 &&en’6
of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Si@@n~nt~ bf.tiie OflciaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indkafes the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted iiP196$;~&~ p@ished in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted bef;re 1 &mtary
.I r’ ‘I’, !1965,
> became fulIy operative on that date.
; ‘,.
- 1-I_ L.

2118th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,28 February 1979, at 6 p.m.

President: Mr. Abdalla Yaccoub BISHARA

Lau (Viet Nam) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

(Kuwait).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

2. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Democratic Kampuchea. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and -to make his statement.
3. Mr. THIOUNN
(interpretation

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2118/Rev.l)
1. Adoption

PRASITH

(Democratic Kampuchea)

jiom French): Mr. President, first of all I

should like to thank you most sincerely for having
allowed me to speak for the second time. This shows the
importance you attach to the situation in my country, the
result*of the aggression and invasion of the Vietnamese
armed forces.

of the agenda

2. The situation in South-East Asia and its implications
for international peace and security. [Letter dated 22
February 1979 from the representatives of Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America to
the President of the Security Council (S/13 11l)]

4. With the exception, of course, of the representative
of Viet Nam and his companions, who have all come to
sing the same refrain-incidentally
with different degrees
of conviction-all
representatives of independent and
sovereign States who have spoken in the debate in the
Council over the last few days have been unanimous in
saying that the deep-lying and fundamental cause of
the aggravation of the present situation in Kampuchea
and the aggravation of the threat of war which it poses to
the whole of South-East Asia derives from the invasion
and occupation of Democratic Kampuchea by the colonialist Vietnamese armed forces.

The meeting was called to order at 6.45 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in South-East Asia and its implications
for international peace and security. [Letter dated 22
February 1979 from the represeptatives of Norway, Portugal, tbe United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America to the President
of the Security Council (S/13111)]

5. The criminal activities of Viet Nam, its arrogance
and its inveterate perfidy are the sole causes of the situation currently prevailing in Kampuchea and throughout
South-East Asia. The representative of Viet Nam has
come before the Council to weep here and pretend that
his country is the victim, but that does not mislead
anyone.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the previous meetings, I invite the representatives of Angola, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Cuba,
Democratic Kampuchea, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Japan, the Lao Peoples Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mongolia, New
Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Singapore,
Thailand, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. Viet Nam has sent troops to invade Democratic
Kampuchea in flagrant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, the principles of non-alignment and
international law. This crime has been condemned by the
whole world. Viet Nam has allowed itself to get caught up
in violence and war. It should disengage itself, it should
withdraw all its armed forces from Kampuchea in accordance with the demands of all peoples that love peace,
justice and independence throughout the world and the
solution would be easy. Peace, security and stability
would be restored in South-East Asia. The Vietnamese
people themselves would then be able to live in peace
finally because they would no longer have to serve as
cannon-fodder to satisfy the expansionist and annexation& ambitions of their unbridled leaders. But Viet
Nam persists in pursuing its criminal acts which are now
familiar to everyone.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Anderson (Australia) Mr. Kostov (Bulgaria),
Mr. Barton (Canada), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Thiounn
Prasith (Democratic Kampuchea), Mr. Florin (German
Democratic Republic), Mr. Hollai (Hungary), Mr. Jaipal
(India), Mr. Anwar Sani (Indonesia), Mr. Abe (Japan),
Mr. Sangsomsak (Lao People’s Democratic Republic), Tan
Sri Zaiton Ibrahim (Malaysia). Mr. Dashtseren (MongoIia), Mr. Francis (New Zealand). Mr. Naik (PakrStan),
Mr. Yang0 (Philippines), Mr. Jaroszek (Poland), Mr. Koh
(Singapore), Mr. Guna-Kasem (Thailand), Mr. Ha Van

1

7. In my statement of 24 February [2115th meet&? I
said that Viet Nam was the only country in the world
capable of combining arrogance, perfidiousness and
criminality to a degree which far transcended the level
achieved by Nazi fascism. The Security Council, the United
Nations and all peoples that love peace and justice, particularly those in South-East Asia and Asia, have learnt
that. They are perfectly well aware that Viet Nam lied to
them and cruelly deceived them by pretending, in spite of
obvious evidence, that there were no Vietnamese troops
in Kampuchea, and in pledging in front of all the leaders
of South-East Asia to respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries of SouthEast Asia. Yesterday evening the representative of the
Vietnamese colonialists had the audacity once again to
display arrogance and contemptuous scorn for the Council, not only by the gross slanders, calumnies and lies
against the people and Government of Democratic Kampuchea that he uttered for a full half-hour but also by his
distortion of history to the point where certain representatives here must have blushed or been forced to laugh,
particularly those who were perfectly aware of the animosity and age-old hatred always felt by the people of
Kampuchea for the Vietnamese invaders, aggressors and
annexationists. For those who do not yet know, or are
imperfectly aware of the history of relations between
Kampuchea and Viet Nam, I should like to give them an
explanation which will show that the representative of the
Vietnamese colonialists is nothing but a criminal and an
arrant liar.

delta. That is part of the present territory of South Viet
Nam and is made up of the western region of the rivers
Donai and the delta of the Mekong, formerly called
Cochin China. That territory had been an integral part of
Kampuchea for more than 2,000 years. The Vietnamese
began to encroach on that territory from the very beginning of the seventeenth century so that by the time of the
Second World War they had annexed about 65,000
square kilometres of southern Kampuchean territory,
known as Kampuchea Krom, and absorbed about 1 million inhabitants of Kampuchea. In South Viet Nam right
now those inhabitants number more than 4million.
9. Those are the acts of aggression and annexation committed by the Vietnamese in the past. At the present time,
in the twentieth century, the Vietnamese are continuing
to act in the same way. Like a python, Viet Nam is
swallowing up certain countries, territories and peoples,
like Laos for example, and trying to do the same thing
with Kampuchea. Just as in the time of the feudal lords,
the colonialists and the imperialists, and right up to the
time of Ho Chi Minh, that is, up to the present time, the
Vietnamese have not changed their true nature: they are
aggressors, annexationists and swallowers of others’
territories.
10. Kampuchea, a victim of acts of aggression and
annexation by the Vietnamese that has successively lost
important tracts of its territory and of its population in
Kampuchea Krom, harbours profound national hatred
of the aggressive Vietnamese, the annexationists and
swallowers of territory.

8. In the first place, the representative of the Vietnamese colonialists spoke of “idyllic” relations between the
people of Kampuchea and the people of Viet Nam. However, everyone knows that the two peoples have nothing
in common. Their civilizations, their language, their customs, their habits and their beliefs are totally different.
The people of Kampuchea has an age-old civilization and
customs and habits which are more akin to those of the
Thai, the Burmese and the Lao peoples. With Viet Nam,
the people of Kampuchea has only one thing in common:
by the dictates of history it came under the domination of
the same colonial Power and, subsequently, under that of
the same imperialist Power because, geographically,
Kampuchea is contiguous with Viet Nam. There are two
things we cannot choose in life-our parents and our
geographical neighbours. The people of Kampuchea has
always had an implacable hatred for Viet Nam because
the Vietnamese have aggressive natures and are annexationists and swallowers-up of the territory of others. The
annexation by Viet Nam of the Kingdom of Champa and
the territory of Kampuchea Krom belonging to Kampuchea is testimony to this. The Kingdom of Champa,
founded in the second century, had an ancient and brilliant civilization in South-East Asia. The Vietnamese
hordes from the north committed aggression and gradually annexed that territory. In 1471 the Vietnamese conquered the capital of Champa, which at that time was
known as Vijaya, and they gave it the name of Bin Din. In
1693 they swallowed up Champa completely after having
annexed the region of Phan Thiet. The Champa nation
and people were exterminated by the Vietnamese and
today there is no longer a Champa nationality. Viet Nam
has formed the present Central Viet Nam out of what was
formerly Champa. After the absorption of Chamua, the
Vietnamese norcies couunued their expa&ou towards
the territories of Kampuchea situated in the Mekong

11. The people of Kampuchea are very familiar with the
perfidy, subterfuge and hypocrisy of the Vietnamese. We
bear them a very serious grudge. To maintain its vigilance, therefore, the people of Kampuchea has an expression which it keeps fresh in its memory. That expression is
“Be careful you don’t spill the boss’s tea”:That expression recalls the barbarous crimes of the Yuon-as the
people of Kampuchea called the Vietnamese at that time.
“Yuon” means savage. The names of “Viet Nam” and
“Vietnamese” are very recent and are very little used by
the people of Kampuchea. That expression recalls the
barbarous crime of the Yuon, committed in 18 13 near the
Vaico canal. The Yuon buried Khmer-s .alive up to the
neck and on their heads lit fires of kindling over which
they boiled tea for their chiefs. The victims in their pain
would shake and move their heads in agony and it was
then that the Yuon torturers would say to them “Be
careful you do not spill the boss’s tea”.
12. All those bitter and painful experiences which have
been accumulated by the people of Kampuchea have
taught them to discern clearly the insatiable expansionist
and annexationist ambitions of the Vietnamese, their political manoeuvrings, their military and diplomatic subterfuges and their efforts at seduction. But what are the
factors which prompted the Vietnamese to pursue a policy of expansion and annexation? There are three.
13. The first factor is an economic one. Viet Nam is a
poor country economically. Central Viet Nam has an
area of roughly 148,Wu
square kilometres but only possessessmall sandy piains along the sea coast. Away from
the sea, there are only rocks and mountains along the
frontier with Laos. That region is therefore very poor.
2

like the Americans. But east exnerience has shown that
the Vietnamese, by directly penetrating the countries
concerned, have carriedout political and espionage activities and have created their own armies in those very
countries. In Kampuchea, for example, they have on
several occasions created an army composed of Khmers
in their pay, to be used as a tool for their policy of
annexation. They have acted thus not only in Kampuchea
but also in other countries, there where they have nationals and there where they have been able to win the sympathy of the local population. Their objective is to create
an armed organization devoted to their cause, and with
such an armed organization in those countries they can
gradually develop their activities and subsequently introduce their own forces from the outside, depending on the
circumstances of the time. The Vietnamese acted in that
way during Ho Chi Minh’s time and at present they are
continuing to act in this way.

Tonkin, or North Viet Nam, covers an area of more than
100,000 square kilometres. It is also poor. There are
plains along the Red River and in its delta, but their area
is small compared to the size of the population. Furthermore, North Viet Nam has to face national disasters like
floods, droughts and typhoons, and its land is not very
fertile so it needs a lot of fertilizer. The Ho Chi Minh
regime was unable to overcome the floods and other
catastrophes and, 15 years after the departure of the
French, only one or two provinces can reap more than
seven tons per hectare of paddy. As for draught animals,
there is an average of one ox and one water-buffalo for
four families. In Kampuchea, on the other hand, each
peasant family has about live hectares of land and one to
two pairs of oxen or water-buffalo. With 18 1,000 square
kilometres and 8 million people, Kampuchea can feed 15
to 20 million. That is why our country is coveted by the
Vietnamese; that is why the Vietnamese want to seize the
territories of other countries, In the north they are confronted with one stronger than they are; there are mountains to the west; consequently they came towards the
south. After having swallowed up Champa, they came to
Kampuchea Krom. After having swallowed that they
went towards the north-west, that is to say, towards
Kampuchea.

16. It is after having properly identified these factors
that one can understand that the cause of the conflict
between Viet Nam and Kampuchea lies in the policy of
expansion and annexation systematically pursued by the
Vietnamese by every possible means-by gentle and surreptitious means, such as taking over parties, the army
and State power, and by cruel and barbarous military
means, as they are doing now.

14. The second factor is the political one. This factor is
to be found in Viet Nam’s history from feudal times, but
it is a muchmore weighty factor at present. After their
revolution, the Vietnamese enjoyed a certain prestige in
South-East Asia. At that time the international community gave them aid and support. Europe supported them;
China helped and supported them. The Vietnamese at
that time took advantage of that aid and used it as
political support with a view to putting into effect their
plans for expansion and annexation. They wanted to
dominate the whole of Indo-China. They wanted to pose
as Big Brother in Indo-China. In their country the Vietnamese obliged everyone, whatever their age, to call Ho
Chi Minh “Uncle Ho”. In Kampuchea they also had the
people calling him “Uncle Ho”. That fact, although it
seems a minor detail, highlights the fact that at the time of
Ho Chi Minh the ambition of the Vietnamese to dominate Kampuchea was even stronger than in feudal times.
The Vietnamese want to seize Kampuchea to use it as a
spring-board for their expansionism in South-East Asia.
They have stated that after liberating Kampuchea and
Laos they will also liberate South-East Asia. That voracious ambition is inculcated in all Vietnamese, whether
they are officers, simple soldiers or mere civilians and as a
result they all talk the same way. The Vietnamese want to
satisfy their ambitions progressively because they have
nationals in Kampuchea, Laos and Thailand. They want
to swallow up Laos and Kampuchea so as to become a
great Power and then extend their influence to SouthEast Asia. They are trying to create propitious conditions
for dominating those countries through parties and by
their control over the armed forces.

17. In the second place, I should like to speak of the
Indo-Chinese federation and Viet Nam’s criminal activities aimed at setting it up. The Vietnamese party was set
up in 1930 under the name of “The Indochinese Communist Party’*. First, the name given to the Indochinese
Communist Party makes it clear that it was a party for the
three countries of Indo-China. The choice of name for a
party has political significance. Lenin did not call his
party “the European Communist Party”, as far as I
know. So the name given to the Vietnamese party signifies that that party was both Vietnamese and for Laos and
Kampuchea too. The choice of such a name reveals that
the goal aimed at was the domination of the three countries. Secondly, the status of the Indo-Chinese Communist Party stipulates that that party was to build a totally
independent Indo-China. The Party’s slogan was to fight
for an independent Indo-China with a view to creating an
Indo-Chinese federation. Consequently, the strategic
political programme of the Vietnamese Party was the
creation of the Indo-Chinese federation, whose mission
was to lead Kampuchea, Laos and Viet Nam in the
struggle against French colonialism, to liberate the three
countries, to build a federation with a political, economic
and military entity; in other respects too it would constitute an entity built by a single Party, the Indo-Chinese
Communist Party-which
means just one country, one
people and one army.
18. In the 195Os, since such an ambition could not be
realized at one fell swoop, Viet Nam sought to present the
problem in the guise of special solidarity and friendship,
to be celebrated in agreements or treaties of special cooperation, without any limitation in all fields of domestic
and external policy, in the military, economic and cultural fields. In other words, frontiers would be abolished so
as’ to join Kampuchea to Viet Nam within an IndoChinese federation under the yoke of the Vietnamese. In
that way, Viet Nam would take over the Party, the power,
the army, the economy and the domestic and foreign
policies of the country to the point that Kampuchea

15. The third factor is the military one. This factor
flows from the economic and political factors. The Vietnamese want to have a powerful military base in IndoChina on which they can rely in order to carry out their
ambitions in South-East Asia. They have organized and
gradually built up their forces and their military bases for
the purpose of satisfying their political and economic
ambitions. It might be objected that the Vietnamese are
not able to build military bases because they are not rich
3

-

_

would become an integral part of Viet Nam and the
people of Kampuchea a national minority which would
gradually disappear like the Chams. That is what Viet
Nam is aiming at in Laos and what it is trying to do in
Kampuchea.

Kampuchean revolution. But in fact, the Viet Cong could
not remain in South Viet Nam because of the policy of
strategic villages carried out by Ngo Dinh Diem on the
advice of Robert Thompson.
22. Thus, the Viet Cong benefited in Kampuchea
---first, from sanctuary, which included sanctuary for the
committee directing the revolution in South Viet Nam;
secondly, from economic factors, for in fact the Vietnamese depended totally on Kampuchea in this field; and
thirdly, from the fact that communication lines to the
north-east and east of Kampuchea were linked to those
coming from Laos and the seaport of Kompong Som.
The transport of arms and munitions from that port in
one month was equivalent to what had been transported
in three years over the Ho Chi Minh trail through Laos.
I
23. The Viet Cong had installed in Kampuchea their
armed forces, their hospitals, their artists’ groups, their
transport and support services and ail leading organs,
from the Central Committee down to the provincial and
district committees. For example, the provincial committee of Quang Due was installed at Koh Nhek in the
province of Rattanakiri. In 1970 the number of Viet Cong
installed in Kampuchea varied between 1.5 and 2 million
men. There were 80,000 wounded Vietnamese ‘who were
cared for permanently in Viet Cong hospitalsinstalled on
./’ ‘.
Kampuchean territory.
, *
24. The people and the revolution of Kampuchea were
always the benefactors of the Vietnamese. They always
accorded them aid and assistance, hid them,and gave
them refuge, food, rice and so forth. They acted in that
way because they believed that the Viet Cong were friends
and revolutionaries. But, in installing themselves in Kampuchea, the Vietnamese had not left behind ‘their ambition of swallowing up Kampuchea
through the
Indo-Chinese federation. To that end, they secretly
organized agents whom they infiltrated into the ranks of
the Kampuchean revolution, secretly created a State
power against the leadership of the Kampuchean revolution, attacked and constantly vilified the Kampuchean
revolution because it was independent and .refused to
subjugate itself to them and sabotaged the economy of
Kampuchea, particularly through smuggling, corruption
and the pillaging of natural resources. They created disorder and strife everywhere and carried out espionage
and sabotage. From 1967 on, the people and cadres of
Kampuchea vigorously opposed all the criminal activities
of the Viet Cong, because the latter used their presence in
Kampuchea and the so-called special solidarity propagated by them to implement their strategy for an IndoChinese federation. Thus, in spite of the difficult
situation in which they found themselves at that time, the
Viet Cong had not abandoned that strategy.

19. What exactly is the meaning of the Indo-Chinese
federation? It is nothing more than the application of the
famous doctrine of limited sovereignty, that is to say, the
subjugation of small States by a large world or regional
Power. Thus, the struggle which has always been going
on between Kampuchea and Viet Nam, particularly since
1930, is the struggle between, on the one hand, the people
of Kampuchea to defend and safeguard its national independence, its sovereignty, its territorial integrity and its
right to decide its own destiny, to defend the honour and
national dignity of the nation as well as the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of non-alignment, and,
on the other hand, the Vietnamese policy of annexation,
of an Indo-Chinese federation, of limited sovereignty, of
expansion in South-East Asia, the Vietnamese ambition
to become a great regional Power and the brazen violation of the Charter and the principles of non-alignment.
Since 1930 the Vietnamese have done everything in their
power and have undertaken all kinds of activities-sabotage, infiltration, murder, attempted coups d’etat, open
aggression and invasion such as that which is taking place
now-in order to achieve their goal, namely, the setting
up of an Indo-Chinese federation under Vietnamese
domination
and, using that spring-board, to aim at
South-East Asia as a whole.
20. In the third place, I should like to offer some explanations of the so-called assistance given by the Vietnamese to the Kampuchean revolution. I do not want to
take up too much time and shall therefore confine my
remarks to the major facts which have occurred since
1954. After the Geneva Agreements,’ Ngo Dinh Diem
exerted fierce repression against the members of the Vietnamese party and eliminated about 70 per cent of them in
1957-1958. The Vietnamese revolution had practically
lost control of the situation and many present Vietnamese leaders at that time took refuge in Kampuchea,
which was neutral and which became a base where they
could hide out and cross over to Hong Kong or Canton,
China. In 1957, Le Duan himself, the present head of the
Vietnamese colonialists, escaped with his life only
because of the refuge he was able to find in Phnom Penh
and because he was able to pass through Kampuchea
with the assistance of the Kampuchean revolution.
21. In order to escape total annihilation, the Viet Cong
arrived and installed themselves in the Khmer territory
along the Kampuchean frontier from Kamong Trach, in
the province of Svay Rieng, up to Snuol, in the province
. of Kratie. In 1965 there were 150,000 Viet Cong installed
in Kampuchea to a depth of from 2 to 5 kilometres from
the frontier, from Romeas Hek, in the province of Svay
Rieng, to Rattanakiri, in the region called the Naga’s tail,
in the extreme northeastern part of Kampuchea. The
Vietnamese continue to utter lies everywhere in order to
have it believed throughout the world that they have won
“crushing victories’*. In fact, they were already on the
territory of Kampuchea. Those who were unaware of this
_ reality thought that the Viet Cong had eome to “help” the

‘25. All those experiences were very harsh for the people
of Kampuchea. From 1965 on, the struggle between the
people of Kampuchea and the Viet Cong became very
hard and bitter, because in coming to Kampuchea the
Vietnamese not only wanted to live there but also were
preparing the strategic forces to overthrow the revolutionary power at the right time and to swallow up Kampuchea. In 1970, when the coup d’ttat took place in
Kampuchea, the Viet Cong, instead of fighting the American army and the Saigon army, fled like a tidal wave and
took refuge even deeper in Kampuchean territory. They

’ Agreements on the Cessation of Hostilities in Indo-China.

4

practically invaded Kampuchea. Their headquarters
were installed on the west bank of the Mekong, to the
west of the city of Kratie. At that time the Kampuchean
army was not strong enough to resist them. In the course
of their invasion, the Viet Cong literally pillaged everything in their path.

of negotiations taking place in Kampuchea, near the
Stung Chinut River, and on several other occasions after
liberation.
30. Along.with their actions aimed at having the leaders
of the Kampuchean Communist Party assassinated and
their activities aimed at setting up a puppet army and
State power, the Vietnamese committed criminal acts of
an extremely Fascist kind against the people of Kampuchea. In July 1973, in the south-west region, in the village
of Sre Knong, district of Chhuk,province of Kampot, the
Viet Cong arrested the Chairman of the village and, when
the inhabitants demonstrated to demand his liberation,
they beat up the demonstrators, arrested Buddhist
monks, women and children, shut them up in a single
house with the Chairman of the village and burned down
the house, thus burning alive six persons. When they saw
the Vietnamese burning these inhabitants alive, the guerrilla units of the village and the people of the locality
counter-attacked. The population and the revolutionary
army of Kampuchea, having learned of the crimes of the
Vietnamese, rose up and attacked them everywhere until
the Vietnamese took flight.

26. For the duration of the war of liberation of 1970, the
Viet Cong incessantly carried out manceuvres and activities with the aim of profiting from their presence in
Kampuchea to prepare for the annexation of the country
after liberation. Yesterday, the representative of Viet
Nam spoke of the military operations of Chen La which
took place at the end of 1970 and claimed that Kampuchea had appealed to the Vietnamese army for assistance.
That is another new and big lie. In fact, the Vietnamese
army which had invaded Kampuchea in 1970 and 1971
conducted itself as if it were at home. It had to defend
itself against the attacks of the Americans and Lon Nol.
We told the Viet Cong army to go and fight in Viet Nam,
but they were frightened of the American army and of the
Saigon army. We needed two years of effort and patience
before we could prevail upon them to go and fight in
Viet Nam. a
Ir
27. Indeed, .the fundamental position of the Kampuchean revolution was that the revolution in each country
must be carried out by the people of that country, without
outside intervention. That is a position of independence,
sovereignty and self-reliance. This position was always
resisted by Viet Nam because it always ran counter to its
own doctrine of limited sovereignty and its strategy for an
Indo-Chinese federation. That is why in that period from
1970 to 1975 the Viet Cong used every means and manceuvre to force Kampuchea to accept the creation of
Kampuchea-Viet
Nam joint military commands and
joint organs of power. Viet Nam wanted to force us to
accept Vietnamese personnel at all levels of our military
units and organs of power. The goal was clear: to benefit
from the difficult time Kampuchea was going through, in
order to take over the army and State power in Kampuchea and to prevail upon Kampuchea to join the IndoChinese federation. We refused, in spite of great pressure
and assassination threats from the Vietnamese.

31. In the course of the 1970-1975 war ofliberation, the
People’s Republic of China gave us much military assistance: arms, munitions and vehicles. But they accumuiated along the Sino-Vietnamese frontier because the
Vietnamese allowed them through at a mere trickle.
Throughout that five-year war, from 1970 to 1975, more
than 80 per cent of the arms and munitions used by our
army came from captured war supplies. Here is an
instructive example: in 1974, with a view to preparing for
the general offensive of 1 January 1975, we asked Viet
Nam to transport to us 40 million cartridges for AK rifles.
In exchange for this we supplied Viet Nam with tens of
thousands of tons of rice. They gave a verbal promise that
they would carry out this transportation in good time.
But, in actual fact, when did we receive these munitions?
Only in 1976, that is, one year after the liberation of the
country. The Vietnamese did everything they could to
prevent the revolution of Kampuchea from being able to
liberate Phnom Penh before Saigon was liberated.
32. From 1970 to 1975, the revolution in Kampuchea
saved the Vietnamese who were drowning and on the
point of going under. The revolution in Kampuchea successfully defended the soil of Kampuchea; we offered
refuge and provisions to the Vietnamese so that they
could regain their strength and go and fight in their own
country. But the Vietnamese are more ungrateful than
crocodiles!

28. After that refusal, the Vietnamese organized
secretly in Kampuchea a parallel State power and a parallel army composed of Vietnamese nationals in Kampuchea and a few traitors that they were able to corrupt. The
Kampuchean revolution had to resist them by violent
struggle in order to make Viet Nam dissolve this parallel
State power and army, which constituted intolerable
intervention in the internal affairs of Kampuchea. Also,
taking advantage of the sanctuaries they had found in
-Kampuchea, the Vietnamese stealthily created military
and medical training schools in Kampuchea for the
agents whose job was to serve them later on within the
framework of the Indo-Chinese federation. Here again
we had to fight to force the Vietnamese to close those
schools.

33. Orally and in letters the Vietnamese always expressed to the leaders of Kampuchea-Prince
Norodom
Sihanouk, the Chairman of the State Presidium, Khieu
Samphan, and Prime Minister Pol Pot-their
“infinite
and eternal gratitude for the immense aid which Kampuchea had given to Viet Nam”. But, despite this verbal
gratitude and thanks, the Vietnamese were feverishly
bent on destroying the Kampuchean revolution and
annexing Kampuchea. Thus, at the very time when the
revolution of Kampuchea was saving them from total
collapse, they wanted to bring it down in order to take
over Kampuchea. They opposed everything which could
make the Kampuchean revolution independent. That is
why on the battlefields there were often fights between

29. In the face of the resistance of the people and the
revolution in Kampuchea against the attempts at domination of the country, the Vietnamese planned to assassinate our leaders because they were unable to win them
over to their cause for an Indo-Chinese federation. Thus,
in November 1970, they tried to poison them in the course
5

the revolutionary army of Kampuchea and the Viet
Cong. The Kampuchean fighters could no longer tolerate
them, in spite of the recommendations constantly being
made by the leaders of Kampuchea that they should
strive to preserve solidarity with the Vietnamese because
at that time we were lighting a common enemy.

sovereignty of Democratic Kampuchea**. The present
invasion is sufficient proof that Viet Nam was lying.
37. In the fourth place, the representative of Viet Nam
raised the frontier problem. I do not want to expatiate on
that problem; I would merely like to say the following.
38. The present frontier between Kampuchea and Viet
Nam is the ,disastrous result of acts of aggression and
annexation perpetrated by the Vietnamese reactionaries
and feudal lords. Because of these acts of aggression and
annexation, Kampuchea lost 65,000 square kilometres of
its territory to Viet Nam, as well as several islands and a
major portion of its territorial waters. But the frontier
between Kampuchea and Viet Nam exists, and the people
of Kampuchea wish only to live in peace, as masters of
their territory and their territorial waters, within their
present frontiers, which are delimited in historic documents-texts and maps. By the solemn declaration of the
Central Committee of the National Liberation Front of
South Viet Nam dated 31 May 1967, and by the solemn
declaration of the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam dated 8 June 1967, Viet Nam successively stated that it recognized and committed itself to
respect the present frontiers of Kampuchea.,Why, today,
does Viet Nam no longer wish to respect its commitments? It is true that everyone now knows that the commitments undertaken by the Vietnamese are only scraps
of paper.

34. After the liberation of Kampuchea, the Vietnamese,
in May 1975, began to invade and occupy an island of
Kampuchea, Koh Way. Furthermore, they refused to
leave the Kampuchean territory where they had come to
take refuge, claiming that that territory belonged to
them. Everywhere along the frontier they created endless
provocations, launching incessant attacks against the
troops of the revolutionary army of Kampuchea. Furthermore, they sent many Vietnamese nationals to take
up their abode on the territory of Kampuchea, for example, at Pean Chor, in the province of Prey Veng. At Kaam
Samnor, province of Kandal, the Vietnamese attacked
Kampuchean troops right after 17 April 1975.
35. Why did the Vietnamese launch these attacks and
create these incidents along the frontiers and why did
they take over Kampuchean islands? Vietnamese agents
who had infiltrated the ranks of the Kampuchean revolution and were arrested by the revolutionary power in 1976
said that the Vietnamese exerted this pressure along the
frontiers for three reasons: first, so that the Government
of Democratic Kampuchea should not be able to consolidate its power; secondly, to see to it that Kampuchea was
unable to defend itself and to create conditions that
would enable it as time went by to take over parts of
Kampuchean territory; thirdly, to encourage their agents
that had infiltrated the ranks of the Kampuchean revolution. The Vietnamese acted with the purpose of permitting their agents to take over revolutionary power in
Kampuchea and, according to their plan, when their
agents had legally taken over power they would send as
many troops to Kampuchea as they wanted.

39. In the tifth place, the representative, of Viet Nam
spoke yesterday evening of so-called genocide in Kampuchea. I would first ask him whether he is not ashamed of
himself, for everyone is aware of the following facts:
First, the Vietnamese people are at the present time
dying of hunger. Officially, the Le Duan-Pham Van
Dong clique admits that Viet Nam needs 5 million tons of
rice for the year 1979. Each Vietnamese can have only
7 kilograms of rice a month, when he really needs at least
20 kilograms. How many hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese are going to die of hunger every day?

36. Along with these attacks on the frontiers, Viet Nam,
through its agents, fomented many attempts at coups
d&at, all of which failed. The last was that of May 1978;
it was also perhaps the most significant attempt because,
that time, the plan for the coup d’etat had been prepared
directly by the Political Bureau of the Vietnamese Party
and by the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam. This last attempt at a coup d&tat fomented by Viet
Nam was designed to overthrow the Government of
Democratic Kampuchea. Among the Vietnamese who
received the order to penetrate Kampuchea _..directly from
-the Political Bureau of the Vietnamese Party there were
the following names: Hay So, member of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Viet Nam, Pham
Trung Hieu, alias Ba Hai, assistant, Central Committee
of the Communist Party of Viet Nam and former adviser
at the Embassy of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam at
Phnom Penh, and four other persons-Nguyen
Gia
Dang, alias Tu Cam, Ba Ha, Bai Mab and Mai Viet-all
belonging to the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Viet Nam, as assistants. In a word, Viet Nam
continued to utter lies and to protest that it wanted “to
negotiate with Kampuchea in order peacefully to solve
the problem”. It said that “Viet Nam has no intention of
forcing Kampuchea to enter the Indo-Chinese federation” and “Viet Nam respects the independence and

Secondly, the Vietnamese authorities are massacring
the people of South Viet Nam, and in particular the
national minorities, including the Khmers Krom who, at
the present time, along with the other national minorities
of the highlands within their organization, FULRO, are
fighting Vietnamese oppression, weapons in hand. The
Le Duan-Pham Van Dong clique is bombing the towns
and villages of the Khmers Krom and massacring these
people, and it accuses the revolutionary army of Kampuchea of these crimes. How could the very powerful Vietnamese army permit the army of Kampuchea to
penetrate so deeply into Vietnamese territory, to the
point where it could destroy entire towns? The representative of the Vietnamese colonialists takes us for fools.
Thirdly, because of the famine and the oppression,
thousands of Vietnamese refugees are fleeing their country. The Le Duan-Pham Van Dong clique does not shrink
from cashing in on this organized flight. Miss Holtzman,
a member of the United States House of Representatives,
who has just come back from Viet Nam, has spoken of a
veritable “racket” organized by the Le Duan-Pham Van
Dong clique which has already brought that clique about
$30 million. Each refugee has to pay $2,800 to $3,400 to ,
6

leave his country. How many more tens of thousands of
Vietnamese will be forced to use these sordid methods in
order to have some hope of remaining alive? And how
many more are going to be drowned during their flight?

Dong clique? The reason is that the people of Kampuchea
are determined to defend the rkgime which they freely
chose and to defend their national soil, their civilization
and their national identity. Even Khmer nationals
abroad are united with the people of Kampuchea and the
Government of Democratic Kampuchea in opposing and
wishing to drive out all Vietnamese from Democratic
Kampuchea, and, as in the past, they will certainly drive
them out.

Fourthly, the South Vietnamese accuse the North Vietnamese of coming to exploit and oppress them. Indeed,
corruption, debauchery and degeneracy reign in the
North as well as in the South.
40. Such .are the rights which the Le Duan-Pham
Dong clique grants to the Vietnamese.

45. In the sixth place-and this is the last point I have to
make-1 should like to give you the most recent example
of the charlatanism of the Vietnamese.

Van

41. With regard to Kampuchea, I invite the representatives to give some thought to the following questions.

46. For two months now, for the needs of their invasion
of Kampuchea, the Vietnamese and their allies have often
spoken of someone called Heng Samrin, the alleged
leader of the so-called People’s Revolutionary Council
installed by the Vietnamese occupation troops at Phnom
Penh, which they have temporarily occupied.

42. To begin with, Kampuchea is a small country, a
country of 181,000 square kilometres, with a population
of 8 million. But every farming family has an average of
5 hectares of land-that is to say, it cannot work all of its
land. Furthermore, Kampuchea has emerged from a devastating war which destroyed 70 to 80 per cent of its rice
paddies, fields, plantations, factories and infrastructure
and which left 1,200,OOOdead or wounded, that is, 15 per
cent of the total population. What reason would we have
to decrease the number of our population when we have
an urgent need of manpower to reconstruct and develop
our ravaged country? Quite the contrary, we have united
all the social strata to that end; we have improved the
health of the people and increased the birth rate. Democratic Kampuchea is probably the only country in the
world where there is no family planning. The representative of the Vietnamese colonialists was not happy yesterday, certairily because we have eliminated all the
Vietnamese agents who had infiltrated our ranks and
were oppressing our people.

47. Permit me today to introduce that person to the
Council. Heng Samrin was born in the village of Anlong
Kreus, in the commune of Daun Tey, in the district of
Ponhea Krek, province of Kompong Cham, in eastern
Kampuchea. Among the whole Kampuchean people, you
can ask if anyone has ever heard of this name Heng
Samrin alias Rin or Weuk. No one knows him. But if we
ask the same question of the brigands along the
Kampuchea-Viet Nam border and among the gangsters,
everyone knows Heng Samrin alias Weuk.
48. In 1955, this Heng Samrin became head of a gang
which stole cattle from the people of Kampuchea to sell in
Viet Nam. They smuggled goods of various kinds from
Viet Nam to Kampuchea.

43. Next, during these three and a half years of national
reconstruction, we solved the fundamental problem of
food supplies; we have begun to export rice once again,
while famine is ravaging Viet Nam. We have improved
the living conditions of the people. American journalists
who visited our country just before the Vietnamese invasion were unanimous in stating that all the people had
enough to eat;‘were living in increasingly comfortable
houses, were quite well dressed and were obviously
healthy because they had adequate health care. Can
anyone think that we could have achieved these results
without the unanimous and enihusiastic participation of
the people?

49. In 1960, the Viet Ceng, which were carrying out
activities along the Kampuchea-Viet Nam border, near
the commune of Daun Tey in the district of Ponhea Krek,
got in touch with this gang leader and entrusted him with
the task of collecting rice, poultry and cattle for them.
They even gave him a carbine so that he could do the job.
With that rifle and the support of the Viet Cong, Heng
Samrin intensified his robberies and his thefts of rice,
poultry and cattle from the people of Kampuchea in
order to supply the Viet Cong, who named him chairman
of the economic committee entrusted with the provision
of food.
50. In 1960 there was a movement of Khmers along the
Kampuchea-Viet Nam border stealing the rice from the
people. As he was already a gang leader, Heng Samrin
immediately declared himself head of the Khmer Serei
movement near the commune of Daun Tey and intensified his crimes along the frontier, killing people and
stealing their rice, poultry and cattle, which he then used
to supply the Viet Cong. Satisfied with the services rendered by Heng Samrin, the Viet Cong brought him into
the Workers’ Party of Viet Nam.

44. Lastly, if the people were really unhappy and had
risen up against our Government, why is the present light
against the Vietnamese colonialist occupation waged by
our people under the leadership of the Government of
Democratic Kampuchea becoming ever more intense
with the passing of each day? How are the people of
Kampuchea and the revolutionary army of Kampuchea
able to eliminate, on the average, 200 to 300 Vietnamese
invaders a day? Why are the Vietnamese colonialists
unable to control either the population or the countryside, and why are they still walled up in towns besieged
and encircled by our people and our army? Why do the
people of Kampuchea continue to combat the Vietnamese invaders and why have they not fled abroad like the
hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese who can no longer
tolerate the oppressive yoke of the Le Duan-Pham Van

51. In 1970, at the time of the coup d&at in Kampuchea, with the revolutionary movement of Kampuchea
on the upsurge, Heng Samrin, who had contracted an
enormous blood debt to the people of Kampuchea, was
frightened of punishment by the people and enlisted in
the Viet Cong army. The Viet Cong hid him, defended
7

him and had him carry out activities against the Kampuchean revolution and the National United Front of Kampuchea right up to the liberation of Kampuchea in April
1975.
52. In 1977 the Le Duan-Pham Van Dong clique used
its armed forces to launch large-scale attacks in order to
take over Kampuchea, and they sent this Heng Samrin to
carry out sabotage activities within the revolutionary
army of Kampuchea and to gather information along the
frontier. In November 1977 Heng Samrin’s activities
were exposed, but he succeeded in fleeing to Viet Nam
before the Government of Democratic Kampuchea was
able to capture him.
53. Since they could find no one who would agree to
become a lackey or a traitor, the Le Duan-Pham Van
Dong clique, crooks as they are, got Heng Samrin, the
former chief of the frontier brigands, and set him up to
play the part of the so-called chairman of what they term
the Revolutionary Committee.
54. This was a tine alliance! A gang leader, a frontier
cattle-rustler, Heng Samrin, alias Weuk, had become the
lackey of the head of the brigands and swallowers of
territory, the Le Duan-Pham Van Dong clique! Since we
know the conduct of the lackey, we can easily recognize
the conduct of his master, which is the Le Duan-Pham
Van Dong clique. In all languages there exists the saying,
“Birds of a feather flock together”. Everyone knows that
axiom.
55. In conclusion: the scene played by the representative of the Vietnamese colonialists yesterday in the Council would have been a very ridiculous farce, a piece of
comedy; it would have been a simple melodrama, or a
vulgar tragicomedy, were it not for the fact that behind
the macabre masquerade are tens of thousands of dead,
vast devastation and immeasurable sufferings which the
Vietnamese invaders have inflicted and continue to inflict
on Democratic Kampuchea in order to annihilate the
nation and people of Kampuchea and transform Kampuchea into a Vietnamese nrovince through the Vietnamese
“Indo-Chinese federatibn”. The representative of the
Vietnamese coionialiZsZ%d~hat
it was with this gang
leader, Heng Samrin, and his gang that the PhamVan
Dong clique claimed to have signed a so-called treaty
which supposedly permitted the Vietnamese invading
force indefinitely to occupy Kampuchea and to continue
to massacre the people of Kampuchea. To accept such a
macabre farce would be to reward the aggressor, the
invader; it would be to encourage the colonialism and
imperialism of Viet Nam and its aim to step up and
expand its war of expansion in South-East Asia, a war
that will inevitably engulf the whole world.
56. This sinister Vietnamese masquerade exposes the
total contempt with which the Vietnamese and their allies
treat the Security Council, the Secretary-General, the
United Nations, the non-aligned movement and all countries throughout the world that love peace, justice and
independence. Viet Nam has actually dared shamelessly
to take a gang leader, a cattle-rustler, and try to pass him
off as a head of State. It is this gang leader and his gang
that Viet Nam and its allies want to force the United
Nations, the non-aligned movement and all the countries
-_ of the world to recognize as the legitimate Government of

Kampuchea. This too shows the arrogant scorn and contempt which they have for the heroic people of Kampuchea. Indeed, Viet Nam is cynical enough to combine
perfidy, arrogance and criminality to an unprecedented
degree. On that score, it could be given the heroic medal
which all its allies think it should be awarded.
57. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to make a short
statement on behalf of the delegation of KUWAIT.
58. I am grateful to all members of the Council and to
those who are not members for their kind words and
expressions of encouragement and for the support that
has been demonstrated in a most .constructive manner
during the current deliberations of the Council. I am
indebted to all the members of the Council for their
co-operation, understanding, constructive approach and
sense of accommodation which have enabled the Council
to proceed smoothly in dealing with one of the most
complicated items it has ever faced in recent years.
59. I am also indebted to the Secretary-General for his
support, encouragement, guidance and advice, without
which matters would have been more difficult. To him I
am grateful. I am also grateful to the Under-SecretaryGeneral and to his dedicated staff for their valuable
assistance.
60. The Government of Kuwait opposes any foreign
interference in the domestic affairs of any other State. In
January, Kuwait joined with other non-aligned members
of the Council in sponsoring a draft resolution [S/
130273 that never got off the ground because ofthe power
of the veto. We opposed the action taken by Viet Nam in
Kampuchea. We maintain that position of opposition.
The recent developments that have complicated the situation in Indo-China as a result of the Chinese invasion of
Viet Nam are unacceptable to us. We firmly opposed
China’s action against Viet Nam. In no circumstances
can we accept its talk of “teaching lessons’*. We call upon
China to withdraw its forces from Viet Nam and to put an
end to its __---intensified
-.- campaign of military invasion.
We believe that Chma’s-action is inconsisteiit withit&
Charter of the United Nations.
61. The issue is complex. It cannot be viewed in isolation from the situation in the rest of the region. China’s
action against Viet Nam cannot be separated from the
action of Viet Nam in Kampuchea. The Government of
Kuwait opposes China’s action as it opposed the involvement of Viet Nam in Kampuchea. The imperative now is
to secure the withdrawal of all foreign troops to their own
respective countries.
62. Though we deplore the human rights record of the
Pol Pot regime, we do not believe that Viet Nam is
justified in resorting to force in order to correct it. No
Government should take the law into its own hands. The
world would not be a safe place in which to live if States
felt free to interfere in the domestic affairs of others.
63. I should like to make some observations in my
capacity as PRESIDENT.
I have seen what is beautiful in
the work of the Council and what is not. The presidency
of the Council is crippling and restrictive and at times
generates a sense of loneliness and frustration. Some
speakers asked why the Council did not act speedily. That

is easier said than done. The work of the Council generates its own momentum. It is wise to move when the time
is ripe. I have tried to bridge the gap between views that
are poles apart. I drafted four working papers in the hope
of reaching a consensus. Regrettably, none of them
obtained the required consensus. The threat of veto shot
them all down in flames. The Council is therefore
crippled for the moment. I resisted pressure to act in a
manner that could have been counter-productive. I was
addressed in language that I would not have accepted had
I not been restricted by the presidency. I have seen how
the Security Council has been unfairly treated. I might
say that it has been abused and misused. The expression
“teaching a lesson” has been overused in this debate. One
of the lessons I have been taught and learnt is to be
prepared for surprises. Nevertheless, I must stress in the
positive sense the spirit of co-operation that I have
received from all members, particularly those directly
involved. It is my feeling that the President of the Council
can be surprised, but he may not surprise members.

66. It is important to draw a line between firmness and
leniency. It is also important to note that too much
patience produces confusion and too much firmness
creates antagonism. I have noted with appreciation the
concern of members and non-members over the situation
in South-East Asia. This concern is legitimate and justified. But we should not be selective in our concern about
issues that threaten peace and security in the world. We
must strive to place international interests above our
narrow national interests if we want to be faithful to the
provisions of the Charter. It is also wise to draw a line
between impartiality and passivity. Impartiality must be
strictly observed. Passivity is helplessness. The work of
the Council gets more complicated if passivity finds a
shelter behind impartiality.
67. My final observation is that I feel that the presidency of the Council at a time of crisis such as the one we
are facing entails being denied basic human rights such as
physical comfort and freedom of movement. It is physically restrictive, totally monopolizing
and sometimes
unbearable.

64. I have tried to be fair to every side. I have held
consultations with every member. Unfortunately, I was
forced to give up because I felt that I was trying to square
the circle, to reconcile the irreconcilable.

68. It is very fortunate that 1979 is not a leap year.
February of 1979 is usual in the number of its days, but
unusual in terms of the gravity of the issue facing the
Council, an issue that will remain in the lap of the Council
for a long time.

65. I see no harm in the fact that I was mildly criticized
as President for taking initiatives that did not tally with
the views of some members. In such a situation there
must be someone to be a scapegoat. I do not mind being
mildly criticized. I feel that I have tried my best to obtain
a compromise. I leave the Council presidency with a clear
conscience.

69. I thank members for their patience.
The meeting rose at 8 p.m.

9

I

,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
i Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your
bookstore

LES

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont en vente
dans
les librairies
depositaires
du mondc
entier.
Informer.-vous
aup&
de votre
libraire
B : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes,
New York ou &n&e.
ECAEC IIOJIY9&iTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHHX

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Section
de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

OPrAHFi

3AUHiZI

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price:

W.S.

OWbEAUHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAUHR

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerias
a su librero
o dirfjase

1.50

et les agences
ou adresses-vous

y casas distria: Naciones

79-7OCdJ2-Lkccmber

1981-2.250
