S/2008/66

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 February 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 1 February 2008 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I refer to my letter dated 21 January 2008 drawing the attention of the Security
Council to the critical fuel crisis facing the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE). As indicated in that letter, I also sent a letter to Isaias Afwerki,
President of Eritrea, on 21 January, as a last resort, appealing for his personal
intervention to facilitate the resumption of fuel delivery to the Mission, which was
completely stopped by the Eritrean authorities on 1 December 2007.
I regret to inform you that I have yet to receive a response to my letter to
President Afwerki, and the fuel supply has not been reinstated. In addition, UNMEE
has not been granted the authorization to import fuel directly or from the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan. Consequently, the operations of the Mission are
grinding to a halt. UNMEE daily patrols, for instance, have been reduced from some
60 on average before the fuel stoppage to around 20. At the same time, I am also
deeply concerned about the safety and security of UNMEE personnel, particularly
those deployed at remote sites, where they are solely dependent on generators for
energy to power communications and to preserve food and medical supplies.
The Mission’s current fuel stocks will run out in the coming few days, leaving
only the strategic reserves, which are intended exclusively for emergency
evacuation purposes. I therefore wish to inform you that if the Eritrean authorities
do not reinstate the fuel supply by 6 February 2008, I will be compelled to instruct
UNMEE to begin relocating the Mission’s personnel and equipment from Eritrea in
order to avoid total immobilization of the Mission and endangerment of the safety
and security of United Nations personnel.
Under the UNMEE contingency plan, some of the Mission’s troops would
have to be temporarily relocated to the Ethiopian side until a decision is taken on
the longer-term presence of the Mission, while other troops may be concentrated in
Asmara for onward temporary evacuation to their home countries. A technical
assessment mission led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations will travel
on an urgent basis to Eritrea and Ethiopia to work with UNMEE and the Eritrean
and Ethiopian authorities on developing options and recommendations for the future
direction of the Mission. In this regard, should Eritrea insist on maintaining
restrictions that would endanger the safety and security of UNMEE personnel, I
would have to consider the total withdrawal of the Mission and recommend the
termination of the Mission’s mandate.

08-22658 (E) 040208

*0822658*

S/2008/66

I should emphasize that the Mission’s fuel reserves are sufficient only for the
emergency relocation of UNMEE personnel. Consequently, the removal of all
equipment will require additional fuel and time. It will therefore be essential to
secure the full cooperation of Eritrea in this regard. I will keep the Security Council
informed of developments regarding the temporary evacuation of the Mission.
I should be grateful if you would bring this urgent matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

08-22658
