United Nations

S/PV.6363

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6363rd meeting
Wednesday, 21 July 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Mr. Takasu
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-45871 (E)

*1045871*

S/PV.6363

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, Cuba, Egypt, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Malaysia,
Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 20 July 2010
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which has been issued as document
S/2010/391 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Wednesday, 21 July 2010, on the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

2

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take a seat at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
It is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 16 July 2010 from His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, in which he requests to be
invited, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, to participate in the consideration of
the item on the Council’s agenda. If I hear no objection,
I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lynn Pascoe. I now give the floor to
Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: We are once again at a critical
juncture in the effort to move to serious Israeli-

10-45871

S/PV.6363

Palestinian negotiations aimed at achieving a two-State
solution. These talks are essential for ending the 1967
occupation and the conflict and for resolving all core
issues between the parties, including Jerusalem,
borders, refugees, security, settlements and water, as
prescribed in the resolutions of the Council and
agreements between the parties.
Six rounds of proximity talks have now been
facilitated by United States Envoy Mitchell, and both
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu have
visited Washington, D.C. President Abbas, Prime
Minister Netanyahu and Special Envoy Mitchell each
met Egyptian President Mubarak in Cairo on 18 July.
The Secretary-General met Prime Minister Netanyahu
in New York on 7 July, and Special Coordinator Serry
saw President Abbas in Ramallah earlier today.
It remains the shared goal of the Quartet to bring
about direct negotiations facilitated by the United
States as soon as possible. This should take place in a
framework of respect by the parties of their obligations
as well as the requisite commitments regarding
negotiations. Intensive discussions are continuing. I
note that the Arab League follow-up committee is due
to meet on 29 July to review progress. We urge the
parties not to miss the current opportunity to make
progress in these talks and to move to direct
negotiations with active third-party involvement and
close Quartet support.
On 20 June, the Government of Israel announced
a package of measures aimed at easing the blockade on
Gaza. The Quartet welcomed this announcement while
restating its overall goals for Gaza and expressed the
hope that the package would contribute to the
fulfilment of resolution 1860 (2009), including for the
unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid, commercial
goods and persons to and from Gaza. The United
Nations and the Quartet are following closely the
implementation of these measures.
On 5 July 2010, as a first step — which the
Secretary-General welcomed — the Government of
Israel switched from a positive list of goods allowed
into Gaza to a negative list of goods whose entry is
prohibited or restricted. Under the new guidelines,
anything that may be used as military material,
including so-called dual-use goods and items,
continues to be subject to specific, exceptional
permission to enter Gaza. Construction items and
materials are to be allowed entry only for projects

10-45871

authorized by the Palestinian Authority
implemented by the international community.

and

Since the announcement of the new policy, new
food and productive items have entered Gaza and the
volume of imports into Gaza has increased steadily. A
weekly average of 780 truckloads entered during the
reporting period — a 40 per cent increase compared to
the weekly average in 2010 prior to the announcement.
Approvals have also been given for a number of
additional United Nations projects in the vital areas of
education and health.
While these are positive steps, we hope they can
be enhanced to address the deplorable conditions in the
Strip. Further measures need to be taken to enable
exports and movements of people and to streamline
procedures for project approval. Our goal remains the
full opening of land crossings, in the framework of the
Agreement on Movement and Access.
The situation in Gaza has been compounded by
the electricity crisis. Given the internal disputes over
revenue collection and funding for fuel for the Gaza
power plant, the plant’s output has declined steadily.
The Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process (UNSCO) is active
between the Palestinian Authority and the de facto
authorities in Gaza to urge a Palestinian solution to this
problem.
The Rafah border crossing with Egypt has
remained open since 2 June, and there has been a
significant increase in the number of people allowed to
cross for humanitarian purposes. Egypt continues its
efforts to counter smuggling across the border with
Gaza.
I am pleased to report that arrangements agreed
by UNSCO to ensure that the cargo of the Turkish
vessels in the 31 May convoy reaches its beneficiaries
in Gaza are being implemented, and agreement has
been reached to effect similar arrangements for the
cargo of the Rachel Corrie. The Libyan-sponsored
vessel that sailed on 12 July with aid for Gaza arrived
in an Egyptian port without incident. Arrangements are
being made by the Egyptian Government to transfer the
material into Gaza. I would like to point out that such
convoys are not helpful in resolving the basic
economic problems in Gaza, and they needlessly carry
the potential for escalation.

3

S/PV.6363

The Government of Israel has initiated
investigations into the 31 May incident. A military
investigative committee headed by former National
Security Adviser Eiland has issued its report. A public
commission headed by Justice Tirkel, in which two
Israeli-nominated internationals are participating as
observers, is under way. The Security Council has
called for a prompt, impartial, credible and transparent
investigation conforming to international standards.
The Secretary-General continues to be in contact with
the parties involved to gain agreement for his proposal
for an international panel of inquiry that would be
based on domestic inquiries.
Israeli Corporal Gilad Shalit has entered his fifth
year in captivity. We call again for his immediate
release. The fact that there has been no humanitarian
access is inexcusable. We also note the detention of
over 9,000 Palestinians in Israeli jails. We urge the
completion of a prisoner exchange agreement, as well
as releases of Palestinian prisoners to the Palestinian
Authority.
The reporting period saw a lack of progress in
intra-Palestinian reconciliation based on the Egyptianmediated proposal. We restate our full support for
unification of Gaza with the West Bank within the
framework of the legitimate Palestinian Authority.
The Secretary-General condemned the cowardly
attack on 28 June by militant elements in Gaza on a
children’s camp run by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). This is the second attack against such a
facility in a month. It is crucial that there be respect
for, and no interference with, United Nations
operations on the ground, and we reiterate the
responsibility of the de facto authorities in this regard.
We are also concerned by reports of political arrests by
the de facto Hamas authorities.
On 12 July, Special Coordinator Serry and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women visited Gaza to meet with
representatives of women and reaffirm the importance
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
During the reporting period, Palestinian militant
groups fired 41 rockets and mortars into southern
Israel, causing no injuries. The Israel Defense Forces
conducted 6 air strikes and 21 incursions, killing
4 Gazans, including 1 alleged militant, and injuring 23.
Citing security concerns, the Israeli security forces

4

continue to restrict Palestinian access to areas close to
the border with Israel by opening warning fire on
people entering this area, killing 1 person and injuring
18, including 4 children, during the reporting period.
We continue to closely follow developments in
Jerusalem. In 2006, four Jerusalemite lawmakers from
the Hamas-affiliated Change and Reform bloc were
charged with not fulfilling the minimum loyalty to the
State of Israel, stripped of their Jerusalem resident
status and handed prison sentences of up to four years,
which they have now served. Following their recent
release, they were given 30 days to leave East
Jerusalem. Court proceedings are continuing. I wish to
stress that the prospect of expulsion of Palestinian
legislators from their home city would be a serious step
backwards and would undermine the hopes of making
political progress.
Notwithstanding comparative restraint on the
ground in East Jerusalem in recent months, on 12 July
the Jerusalem municipality approved the construction
of 32 new apartments in an East Jerusalem settlement.
On 13 July the municipality demolished six Palestinian
structures in East Jerusalem, displacing 26 people,
including 14 children. We have repeatedly stated that
the international community does not recognize Israel’s
annexation of East Jerusalem and that the Fourth
Geneva Convention is applicable. The future of
Jerusalem remains to be determined in final status
negotiations, and a way must be found for the city to
emerge as the capital of two States.
The 10-month moratorium on West Bank
settlements construction is largely being observed, but
it is set to expire on 26 September. We call for the
moratorium to be extended and expanded to cover all
settlement activity throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem. No further steps
have been taken towards dismantlement of settlement
outposts erected since March 2001. During the
reporting period, the Israeli authorities demolished a
total of 106 structures in area C of the West Bank. We
reiterate the Quartet’s call on 19 March in Moscow for
the parties to implement their obligations under the
Road Map and international law.
The barrier, constructed in deviation from the
Green Line and in contravention of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, continues
to pose significant challenges to movement of
Palestinians in the West Bank. Despite efforts to ease

10-45871

S/PV.6363

restrictions on movement and access, the number of
obstacles in the West Bank remained at 505 during the
reporting period.
Palestinian security forces continued to maintain
law and order and to fight extremism in the West Bank
during the reporting period, in furtherance of Road
Map commitments. During this period, the Israeli
security forces conducted 376 incursions into the West
Bank, resulting in 74 Palestinians injured and 322
arrested, while 11 members of the Israeli security
forces were injured. In demonstrations against the
barrier, dozens of Palestinians and peace activists were
injured, arrested or suffered from gas inhalation.
There were 21 violent clashes between Israeli
settlers and Palestinians in the West Bank during the
reporting period, in which three Palestinians were
injured and/or suffered damages to their property. In
several separate incidents in the past two months,
Israeli settlers used their vehicles to run over and injure
or kill Palestinians. Settlers were also injured by stones
thrown at their vehicles.
I am pleased to report that according to the
preliminary growth figures for the first quarter of 2010
released by the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics,
gross domestic product in the occupied Palestinian
territory increased by 12.5 per cent, as compared to the
first quarter of 2009. To ensure that the enabling
reforms undertaken by the Palestinian Authority are not
undermined, continued external financing to support
the Authority’s recurrent budgetary needs is critical.
There were tensions in the occupied Syrian Golan
during the reporting period. On 11 July Israeli
policemen conducting a search operation were
surrounded by a large crowd. In the course of events,
there were reports that more than 40 civilian residents
of the Golan suffered from tear gas inhalation and that
three Israeli police cars were damaged. Settlement
activity in the occupied Syrian Golan continued
throughout the reporting period. During this period an
Israeli bill that would require a referendum before any
withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan passed a
committee reading.
Turning now to Lebanon, where the situation
remains stable, allow me to recall that the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations briefed the Council on 14 July
on the implementation of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006). Since the tensions in southern Lebanon

10-45871

earlier this month, the situation has remained quiet.
Throughout the month, Israeli aerial violations
continued. Lebanese Prime Minister Hariri visited
Damascus on 18 July 2010, when he led a large
ministerial delegation to discuss bilateral affairs. The
two Governments signed 17 agreements covering
various aspects of cooperation between the two
countries.
The Lebanese Parliament has continued
discussions on draft legislation on the civil rights of
Palestinian refugees. Consensus appears to be within
reach, and the United Nations would welcome this as a
first step. The United Nations has also focused on the
need to ease restrictions on access to the Nahr el-Bared
refugee camp. Reconstruction of the camp continues,
and the return of the first 2,000 residents is expected
by the end of the year. I urge donors to continue to
provide vital financial assistance to UNRWA.
In the period ahead, we must work to bring the
parties into direct talks without delay on a basis that
gives confidence in the possibility of genuine progress
on the core issues and on the ground, including
restraint in Jerusalem, implementation of Road Map
obligations on settlements and further measures to
empower the Palestinian Authority. We must ensure
that policy change towards Gaza is fully implemented
and followed with further steps. And we must place
these efforts in their larger regional context and
reinvigorate the search for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the text in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour: Madam President, I warmly
congratulate you and your friendly country, Nigeria, on
your presidency of the Security Council this month. We
express our appreciation to Mexico for its very skilled
guidance of the Council’s agenda last month.

5

S/PV.6363

I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. In that connection, I wish
to express our appreciation to the United Nations,
including the Secretary-General, Mr. Serry, the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and all the
agencies that have been working so hard on the ground
during this period, including with regard to securing
the delivery of humanitarian aid from the Gaza
freedom flotilla and other ships to the Palestinian
people in Gaza. We also express our appreciation to the
United Nations for its unwavering calls for the full
lifting of the Israeli blockade of Gaza.
Three months ago we came before the Council, in
its last open debate on this subject (6298th meeting),
compelled to draw attention to the extremely difficult
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, as a result of Israel’s ongoing
aggression, colonization and provocation against the
Palestinian people and their land. While we had hoped
to inform the Council of progress in the United Statesmediated proximity talks and of improvement on the
ground, today we regretfully report that the situation
remains volatile, due to Israeli actions. It is a situation
requiring immediate redress if we are not to lose the
opportunity before us for attaining peace. The
alternative is to allow tensions to continue to rise,
igniting another cycle of violence that will do further
harm to the possibility for a peaceful resolution of the
conflict and cause more suffering, insecurity and
instability.
For some, it seems strange that such a volatile
situation persists in light of the international and
regional efforts being exerted for a revival of the peace
process. Those efforts have raised hopes in the region
and throughout the globe and are being followed
closely, with all hoping that the problems that have
historically plagued and undermined the peace process
can finally be overcome.
The proximity talks were supported by the
Palestinian leadership, the Arab countries and the
international community as a means to bridge the gaps
that remain between the two sides. That those gaps
remain is due to Israel’s refusal to comply with its
legal obligations and its Road Map commitment to
cease all settlement activities, including so-called
natural growth, which, we are all aware, constitute a
major obstacle to the peace process. We reiterate that
such cessation is essential for the resumption of a

6

credible process aimed at achieving a two-State
solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders.
We believe that the proximity talks would serve to
reaffirm the fundamental principles and agreed terms of
reference of the peace process and to clarify respective
obligations and the status of their fulfilment, including
with regard to previous agreements and understandings
reached and commitments undertaken in the context of
the Annapolis process under international auspices.
While a strong international consensus exists in support
of the agreed terms of reference — including among the
Arab countries, which remain committed to the Arab
Peace Initiative — it is clear that Israel continues to
refuse to adhere to those terms of reference and
commitments and, in fact, continues to carry out
policies undermining them.
We believe that the active engagement and
mediation of the United States, as reflected in the
dedicated efforts of Senator Mitchell as well as by
President Obama and Secretary of State Clinton, would
compel Israel, for the sake of peace and security, to
finally
comply
with
these
obligations
and
commitments, including a settlement freeze. That, in
turn, would help build the trust and confidence
necessary for a resumption of direct negotiations on the
core final status issues — Jerusalem, refugees,
settlements, borders, water and security.
The Palestinian side has thus engaged in the talks
in good faith. Over and over again, the Palestinian
leadership has affirmed its commitment to peace and its
willingness to engage in the talks to pave the way for a
return to direct negotiations aimed at the achievement
of a just and lasting settlement. This commitment has
been reflected in both words and deeds and is attested
to in numerous multilateral and bilateral reports and
meetings, including with regard to the positive and
proactive Palestinian State-building programme and
efforts to promote law, order and security.
The same cannot be said for Israel. On the
contrary, Israel has repeatedly challenged those talks
with illegal and reckless actions. It has been the same
dysfunctional and destructive pattern since the start of
the peace process almost 20 years ago, of Israeli
intransigence
and
arrogant
ruses
aimed
at
circumventing its obligations, and shocking acts of
aggression and illegal policies that are causing serious
harm to the Palestinian civilian population and to the
contiguity, unity and integrity of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, sabotaging the peace process.
10-45871

S/PV.6363

There is an extremely wide gap between Israel’s
words and deeds that must be obvious to all. While
Israel professes to want peace, all of its actions are
absolutely to the contrary. Unlawful and provocative
Israeli policies and actions, both by the Israeli
occupying forces and by the Israeli settlers, continue to
inflame tensions and sensitivities on the ground and
throughout the region. This, in turn, is casting a dark
shadow on the efforts to resume the peace process,
raising grave doubts about Israel’s credibility as a
peace partner and its willingness to abide by legal
obligations and commitments. What we are witnessing
is an Israeli Government that speaks facetiously of
peace on the international stage while it simultaneously
carries out its illegal schemes aimed at imposing a fait
accompli prior to conclusion of a peace settlement,
making a mockery of the efforts being exerted in this
regard by all parties concerned.
In the two-month period since the proximity talks
began, Israel has persisted with its illegal measures on
a broad scale, in some instances even intensifying
them, including by continuing settlement and wall
construction in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
particularly in and around East Jerusalem, despite the
unwavering international calls for complete cessation
and Israel’s own so-called moratorium. It also
continues to impose the punitive blockade on the Gaza
Strip, despite widespread international condemnation
and calls for its full lifting, which heightened in the
aftermath of Israel’s attack on the humanitarian flotilla.
Israel continues to impede the efforts aimed at lifting
the blockade and allowing for sustained and regular
movement of persons and goods and for the longoverdue reconstruction process to begin.
Over 900 military incursions in the West Bank and
several raids against the Gaza Strip were carried out by
the occupying forces during this period. At least six
Palestinian civilians were killed and more than 120
injured in Israeli attacks, including the killing of a 16
year-old boy and a 59 year-old woman by Israeli
settlers. Settler terror, in particular, continued unabated.
Threats of deportation have continued against
Palestinian civilians, including four elected Palestinian
legislators from Jerusalem, who are among the hundreds
of Palestinian Jerusalemites whose residency rights have
been revoked or that Israel is threatening to revoke.
Demolition of Palestinian homes in East
Jerusalem has also continued, with several more homes
destroyed and families made homeless and displaced as

10-45871

part of the illegal campaign to empty the city of its
indigenous residents. Final approval for the demolition
of 22 Palestinian homes in the Al Bustan area of
Silwan for the building of a so-called park was also
announced during this period. Tens of other demolition
orders have also been issued, including for a school,
and there are reports of intentions to issue demolition
orders for up to 40 buildings, comprising at least 100
homes, in the Issawiya neighbourhood of East
Jerusalem.
More than 380 Palestinians were arrested several
hundred others detained, especially at checkpoints and
including children, adding to the thousands of
Palestinian civilians still in Israeli jails and detention
centres.
Incitement by Israeli officials and settlers has
continued, including threats to launch military assaults
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory as well as against
other countries in the region, and ongoing threats
against ships attempting to break the Gaza blockade,
despite the disastrous aftermath of Israel’s attack on
the Turkish aid ship and its killing of nine civilians. In
this regard, we continue to join the calls for a full,
independent, credible, international investigation,
under the auspices of the Secretary-General, into that
Israeli attack.
Despite its claimed commitment to peace,
Israel has not ceased these actions — not even for a
moment — in violation of its legal obligations and in
defiance of international calls for their cessation. This
situation has seriously hampered progress in the
proximity talks and undermined the credibility of any
kind of peace process.
What was set out to be accomplished during the
current talks, has thus far not been accomplished.
Moreover, everything that has occurred in the
meanwhile on the Israeli side has been the stark
antithesis of that required for a peaceful settlement in
accordance with the two-State solution on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders and the parameters that are well
known to all of us and firmly internationally supported
and endorsed.
The solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, is before us and
has been for decades. And, yet, the international
community once again seems at a loss as to how to act
collectively to justly and finally resolve this longfestering conflict. The bold measures that must be

7

S/PV.6363

taken to implement the relevant resolutions of this
Council, which provide the basis for any just, lasting
and comprehensive peace, remain to be taken. Israel’s
impunity continues to trump the efforts to shore up the
necessary political will to take those bold measures
needed to promote the resumption of a credible and fair
peace process and advance the cause of international
peace and security, which this conflict unquestionably
directly harms.
What needs to happen for the Security Council to
finally rise to its responsibility to bring an end to this
brutal military occupation that has denied the
Palestinian people their inalienable rights, denied them
a life of freedom and dignity in their homeland, and
totally destabilized an entire region, making peace and
security elusive for millions and millions of people for
more than half a century? We have reiterated on
numerous occasions that time is of the essence and that
its passage is not in favour of the realization of the
two-State solution, which continues to be threatened by
illegal Israeli attempts to alter the demographic
composition, status and character of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and
forcibly de facto annex even more Palestinian land,
prior to any final settlement being reached.
Faced with this ongoing challenge, it is high time
that the international community, with the Security
Council and Quartet at the forefront, ceases to appease
Israel and genuinely consider the collective actions that
must be taken to bring it into compliance with its legal
obligations and to salvage the two-State solution and
advance the realization thereof within an accelerated
time frame.
I reaffirm today that, despite the harsh reality that
prevails on all fronts, the Palestinian leadership
remains fully committed to peace and to engaging in a
credible peace process based on the agreed terms of
reference, with the aim of definitively bringing an end
to the Israeli occupation in order to allow the
Palestinian people to exercise their right to selfdetermination in their independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967
borders, and achieving a just resolution of the plight of
the Palestine refugees in accordance with international
law and United Nations resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.

8

Ms. Shalev (Israel): Madam President, allow me
to commend you for your able stewardship of the
Security Council this month. Let me also thank
Mr. Lynn Pasco, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his informative briefing.
Almost two years ago, I came to New York to
represent the Israel that I know and love: a vibrant,
democratic State that shares the noble values
enumerated in the Charter of the United Nations. That
is precisely why I have sat in this Council time and
again to declare Israel’s commitment to peace. For
words are the father of action; declarations of peace are
the precursors of peace.
Hence, Israel calls for direct negotiations
between us and the Palestinians — no preconditions,
no delays. With Jerusalem and Ramallah only 10
minutes apart, direct negotiations are the only path to
bridge the existing gaps. In anticipation of such direct
talks, our partners and our neighbours have an essential
role: to embrace the language of peace and coexistence
and to reject one-sided narratives. And so I ask, how
many times in this Chamber have our neighbours
recognized Israel’s right to exist as the homeland for
the Jewish people, or condemned Hamas terrorism and
violence against Israeli civilians, or spoken out against
those who call for us to be wiped off the map? Not
once. The silence is deafening.
As we seek a way forward in our region, we
applaud the important work of Senator George Mitchell
on behalf of United States President Barack Obama.
Senator Mitchell works to achieve our shared vision of
two States living side by side in peace and security, one
Jewish, one Palestinian. Despite this important work
and progress towards direct negotiations, there exists a
dangerous phenomenon in our region. So-called
activists, under the guise of humanitarian aid, support
terrorist forces in our region, particularly in the
Hamas-controlled Gaza Strip. The organizers of such
efforts in Gaza — with the cooperation of Hamas and
others who oppose peace — are fully aware of the
internationally recognized and unimpeded channels for
delivering aid to the Gaza Strip. They are aware of the
good offices available to them if they truly desire to
assist the people of Gaza. Yet these provocateurs seek
nothing but confrontation. They choose violence,
escalation and instant media headlines in an effort to
delegitimize Israel.

10-45871

S/PV.6363

As we just heard from Mr. Pascoe, the
phenomenon of flotillas to Gaza is not conducive to
efforts to achieve peace in the Middle East. Indeed, in
this respect I wish to share with the Council Israel’s
deep concern regarding new reports of yet another
flotilla departing from Lebanon to the Gaza Strip. We
call upon the international community to exert its
influence on the organizers of this provocative action.
We also call on the Government of Lebanon to
demonstrate its responsibility to prevent this from
happening.
In Lebanon, the terrorist organization Hizbullah
continues to build its military infrastructure and embed
it into the civilian population. Transfers of
sophisticated weapons from Syria and Iran to
Hizbullah systematically violate the arms embargo. At
the same time, this terrorist group continues to place
increasingly sophisticated and deadly weapons within
villages, adjacent to schools, hospitals and civilian
homes. This is a blatant violation of international law
and basic dictates of humanity.
Just as alarming, recent confrontations in
southern Lebanon between the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and so-called Lebanese
civilians reflect Hizbullah’s efforts to redeploy its
forces and further harass and assault the critical work
of UNIFIL. These most recent clashes against UNIFIL
are a direct violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and a
challenge to the members of the Security Council. In
this respect, Israel commends the Security Council for
meeting on 9 July to address these most recent
confrontations. Hizbullah’s provocations must not go
unanswered by the Council. The Security Council has
repeatedly and clearly stipulated that this terrorist
organization must disarm and disband.
As we seek a way forward, certain basic
principles must emerge. The first is security. Israel’s
security will never be compromised by us. We must all
recognize that since the advent of peace talks, the
threats facing Israel have grown more diverse and
dangerous: the rockets of Iranian proxies Hamas and
Hizbullah, global terrorism and the pursuit of nuclear
weapons by Iran.
In direct negotiations, we stand prepared to take
political risks for peace. We have taken a major step
with respect to Israel’s policy towards the closure of
Gaza. As we heard from Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe, all goods that are not weapons or materiel for

10-45871

warlike purposes are now entering Gaza. Beyond Gaza,
we have worked with the Palestinian Authority to build
a flourishing economy in the West Bank.
The second principle is that we must look
towards a definitive end to the conflict that involves
mutual recognition. A request that Israel recognize a
Palestinian State as the nation-State of the Palestinian
people must be met with an acknowledgement that
Israel is the nation-State of the Jewish people. Through
such mutual recognition, we can take tangible steps
towards promoting coexistence, eliminating incitement
and combating terrorism. Through such mutual
recognition, courageous decisions can be made for the
sake of peace. Through such mutual recognition, we
can speak with each other, not past one another or
through intermediaries.
Before concluding, my comments today would be
incomplete without expressing our ongoing deep
concern that Gilad Shalit has remained deprived of his
most basic human rights, including any visit from the
Red Cross, for more than four years. Israel expects the
international community to do all in its power — more
than has been done thus far — to bring about the swift
release of Gilad Shalit.
Peace is not merely a signed document. It is a set
of values that allow us all to live our lives in security
and with hope — Israelis and Palestinian alike.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Council.
Ms. Anderson (United States of America): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing.
Israeli and Palestinian leaders have continued to
engage in proximity talks, with the help of Special
Envoy George Mitchell. The gaps have narrowed, and
we believe there are opportunities to narrow them
further in direct talks, which we encourage the parties
to begin as soon as possible. Special Envoy Mitchell
was in the region again this week to continue this
process. Based on President Obama’s recent meetings
in Washington with President Abbas and Prime
Minister Netanyahu, we believe that we have an
opportunity to make progress towards Middle East
peace, which can ultimately be achieved only through
direct negotiations, and we urge all concerned to work
with us towards this goal.

9

S/PV.6363

Only through good-faith negotiations can the
parties mutually agree on an outcome that ends the
conflict and reconciles the Palestinian goal of an
independent and viable State based on the 1967 lines,
with agreed swaps, and the Israeli goal of a Jewish
State with secure and recognized borders that reflect
subsequent developments and meets Israeli security
requirements. We should all seek to assist the parties as
they make the hard choices necessary for lasting peace
and do nothing to hinder them.
The United States has welcomed the new policy
towards Gaza announced by the Government of Israel,
which responds to the calls of many in the international
community. Israel’s 5 July announcement of a list of
controlled items for Gaza is an important step towards
successful implementation of this new policy. With this
change, the flow of goods and material into Gaza
should significantly improve, along with the access
that the people of Gaza have to those items.
We are already seeing progress, with an
expansion of both the scope and the quantity of goods
entering Gaza through the crossings. We welcome
these increases and expect the number of truckloads to
continue to rise in the days and weeks ahead. These
arrangements should improve conditions for the people
in Gaza while preventing the entry of weapons for
Hamas. We urge all those wishing to deliver goods to
do so through established channels so that their cargo
can be inspected and transferred via land crossings into
Gaza, to ensure that Israel’s legitimate security needs
are addressed even as the Palestinians’ humanitarian
needs are met.
Hamas interference with international assistance
and with the work of non-governmental organizations
continues to seriously complicate efforts in Gaza. On
28 June, for example, an armed band of masked men
attacked and destroyed one of the sites of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) summer games
for children in Gaza. This was the second such attack
in a month, another craven attempt to impose an
extremist viewpoint on Gaza’s population.
We commend UNRWA for conducting a
programme that promotes human rights and tolerance
and that serves as a viable alternative to Hamas camps
that promote radicalism and violence. Continued arms
smuggling by Hamas and its commitment to terrorism
undermine security and prosperity for Palestinians and

10

Israelis alike. And Hamas continues to hold captive the
Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, whom it abducted in 2006.
We call again for his immediate release.
In its 1 June statement on the Gaza flotilla
incident (S/PRST/2010/9), the Council expressed
support for the proximity talks, urged the parties to act
with restraint, avoiding any unilateral or provocative
actions, and called on all international partners to
promote an atmosphere of cooperation between the
parties and throughout the region.
We urge the international community to shun
unilateral action and confrontation and instead
undertake conciliatory steps that promote cooperation
between the parties.
We call on all parties to act responsibly to meet
the recovery needs of the people of Gaza and to rebuild
Gaza’s civilian private sector, which will be the engine
of Gaza’s recovery.
In this context, Israel, like any nation, should be
allowed to undertake an investigation into events that
involve its national security. Israel is capable of
conducting a serious and credible investigation, and the
structure and terms of reference of the independent
public commission on the Gaza flotilla can meet the
standard of a prompt, impartial, credible and
transparent investigation. We will prejudge neither the
process nor its outcome, and we will await the conduct
and findings of the investigation before drawing further
conclusions.
The United States has expressed its concern about
the reports of Israeli Government actions in Jerusalem,
including the demolition of a number of buildings in
East Jerusalem. We have urged all parties to avoid
actions that could undermine trust, and we continue to
oppose unilateral actions that prejudge negotiations on
the status of Jerusalem, which, like all other permanent
status issues, must be resolved by the parties through
negotiations.
Let me conclude by noting our firm and abiding
commitment
to
Lebanon’s
sovereignty
and
independence and thus to the full implementation of
the Council’s resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and
1701 (2006). The United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) is integral not only to the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) but also to
maintaining calm along the Blue Line. The United
States fully supports UNIFIL, and we commend the

10-45871

S/PV.6363

active role it plays in ensuring the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006). We call on all parties to
preserve UNIFIL’s freedom of movement within its
area of operations, and we strongly support its mission.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I too am grateful to UnderSecretary-General Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Mansour and Ambassador Shalev for their respective
statements.
As all of us agree, the only way to achieve
durable peace in the Middle East is through sincere
negotiations in good faith between the parties
concerned. We support the effort by the United States
to pursue proximity talks between the parties with a
view to starting direct negotiations. We hope that these
efforts will produce progress as early as possible.
The negotiations should achieve a two-State
solution by ending the 1967 occupation of territories,
including East Jerusalem. Japan supports the plan of
the Palestinian Authority to build a Palestinian State
within 24 months. Japan will continue to extend
assistance and help build capacity for the Palestinian
people and institutions for the Palestinian State.
Both parties must carry out their obligations and
commitments under the Road Map. We reiterate the
call on the Israeli Government to freeze all settlement
activities in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
We deplore the recent razing of Palestinian houses in
East Jerusalem by the Israeli authorities. Any act that
could prejudge the final status negotiations should not
be taken.
At the same time, we call upon the Palestinian
Authority to continue its efforts to improve security
and fulfil its commitment to cease violence and work
against incitement. Both sides need to build mutual
trust, to move from proximity talks to direct
negotiations and to refrain from taking any action that
undermines trust, which is essential for such a
transition. Neither the parties, nor the peoples, nor the
international community can afford to turn away from
serious confidence-building efforts.
On Gaza, the announcement by the Israeli
Government on easing restrictions on civilian goods in
Gaza is a very positive step. We hope that the Israeli
authorities will make further efforts to improve the
lives of people in Gaza.

10-45871

We call for the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009), including preventing illicit trafficking in
arms and stopping rockets from being fired into Israel.
We support efforts facilitating intra-Palestinian
reconciliation.
Regarding the investigation into the Gaza flotilla
incident, we support the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, which we strongly hope will contribute to
making the investigation consistent with the principles
contained in the presidential statement adopted by the
Security Council on 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9).
Japan will make every effort to help the parties
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
update on recent developments in the Middle East.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of
Israel, Her Excellency Ms. Gabriela Shalev, and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, His Excellency
Mr. Riyad Mansour, for their presence and their
contributions to our debate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains deeply
concerned by the extremely worrying impasse that
persists in the peace process in the Middle East. The
pattern of events in the region in recent months is a
strong reminder that the situation on the ground
continues to be a source of great concern. Recent
events further demonstrated that the counterproductive
and unacceptable blockade of Gaza represents a grave
obstacle to security, prosperity and opportunity for the
Palestinians and the Israelis, and for all nations in the
region.
In this regard, we welcome the Israeli
Government’s recent announcement, which, once fully
and effectively implemented, will be a significant step
forward in the review of Israeli policy on Gaza.
However, we strongly believe that this is not enough
and that more needs to be done. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is of the view that only the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1860
(2009) can meet the basic needs of the 1.5 million
Palestinian residents in the Gaza Strip. Hence, we
reiterate our call upon Israel to allow the immediate,
sustained and unconditional opening of the crossings
for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods

11

S/PV.6363

and persons to and from Gaza, in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009) and the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access.
Time and again, we have to reiterate that
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
can be achieved only on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Road Map, the agreements previously reached by the
parties and the Arab Peace Initiative. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is and will remain committed to the twoState solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State
of Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
In order to overcome the current peace process
impasse, the parties have to fulfil their obligations and
make a tangible contribution towards creating
conditions conducive to negotiations. Settlements, the
separation barrier built on occupied land, the
demolition of homes and evictions are illegal under
international law and contrary to Israel’s obligations
under the Road Map. We believe that these activities
constitute a major obstacle on the road to
comprehensive peace because they prejudge the
outcome of final status negotiations and threaten to
make a two-State solution impossible. It is therefore
essential that Israel put an end to all settlement
activities, including natural growth, in East Jerusalem
and the rest of the West Bank, and dismantle all
outposts erected since March 2001.
Our concerns also include the latest developments
in East Jerusalem and continuing tensions in the city.
Bosnia and Herzegovina does not recognize the
annexation of East Jerusalem and underlines that the
status of Jerusalem is a permanent status issue that
must be resolved through negotiations between
the parties. Jerusalem — the holy city of the three
great monotheistic religions: Christianity, Judaism and
Islam — should be the symbol of peace, freedom of
religious expression and human rights.
Israel’s security concerns, including a complete
stop to all violence and arms smuggling into Gaza,
must also be addressed. Bosnia and Herzegovina
condemns the latest attack on the children’s
recreational facility in Gaza. We call upon Hamas to
unconditionally allow the International Committee of
the Red Cross access and to end its interference with
the operations of non-governmental organizations and
United Nations agencies in Gaza.

12

Regarding the recent tragic incident involving the
humanitarian aid flotilla, we reiterate our call for a
prompt,
impartial,
credible
and
transparent
investigation conforming to international standards, in
accordance with the statement of the President of the
Security Council S/PRST/2010/9. At the same time, we
support Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s proposal for
an international inquiry to investigate the Gaza flotilla
incident.
Before concluding, allow me, once again to
emphasize that only direct negotiations between the
Israelis and the Palestinians can bring about a lasting
resolution to the conflict and ensure peace, stability
and progress in the Middle East.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing.
Israel’s raid on the freedom flotilla carrying
humanitarian supplies to besieged Gaza on 31 May
2010 still occupies the forefront of our Organization’s
attention. That aggression constituted a flagrant
violation
of
international
law,
international
humanitarian law and the law of the sea. We reiterate
that the aggression, which took place in international
waters, was an act of piracy, and we agree with the
statement issued by the Secretariat that the tragedy
could have been avoided had Israel responded to the
repeated appeals of the international community to end
its blockade. Indeed, there will be no need for
humanitarian aid ships to Gaza when Israel lifts its
blockade of Gaza and opens the crossings.
In this connection, we would like to state the
following. First, we emphasize the need for the
Secretary-General to launch an urgent investigation
into the actions of the Israeli navy against the freedom
flotilla. It should be marked by impartiality, credibility
and transparency. As emphasized in the presidential
statement of 1 June 2010(S/PRST/2010/9), it should
conform to international standards with a view to
identifying responsibility, punishing the perpetrators of
these crimes and ensuring compensation for the
victims. It is unacceptable that impunity should
continue in this manner.
Secondly, we stress our rejection of the unilateral
Israeli investigation, which is neither credible,
impartial nor transparent and does not conform to
requisite international standards. Israel is the aggressor.
It determined the outcome of the investigation before it

10-45871

S/PV.6363

started. It invoked the right of self-defence to justify its
attack on defenceless civilians. In this connection, we
reiterate our demand for the lifting of the blockade
imposed by Israel on the Gaza Strip, which violates
international norms and laws, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, which enshrines the
protection of civilians in time of war.
The partial closing of the border crossings to
Gaza impedes freedom of movement and the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and necessary commodities
such as food, medicine and fuel. The blockade
constitutes collective punishment of more than 1.5
million Palestinians in Gaza. This tragedy must
unconditionally come to an end.
Once again, we condemn Israeli settlement
policy, which coincides with a rabid campaign to
demolish Palestinian homes and evict the Palestinian
residents of East Jerusalem. The policy is aimed at
disrupting the geographic contiguity of the Palestinian
territory and thwarting the two-State solution. We
would like to stress the need to follow up on the
updates of the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48)
transmitted by the Secretary-General to our Council.
We call on Israel to report on the implementation
of General Assembly resolution 64/10 of 5 November
2009, in emulation of the actions taken by Switzerland
and Palestine. Israel has intentionally hampered the
peace process, as proven by its lack of response to
United States efforts and refusal to freeze settlement
activities in East Jerusalem and the other occupied
territories at a time when the Arab States are making
their best efforts to facilitate the resumption of
negotiations, which, we emphasize, must address the
issue of a final settlement within a specified timeframe.
The negotiations must not merely be a confidencebuilding measure.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, we
stress once again the need to implement resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Israel must withdraw to the
line of 4 June 1967. We stress that any action taken by
Israel to transform the legal, physical or demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan, including the
expansion and building of settlements, is null and void.
On the actions undertaken in southern Lebanon
early this month, I note that the Lebanese Council of
Ministers held a meeting on 8 July and issued a
statement recalling its firm support for maintaining the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)

10-45871

and the close and inextricable link between UNIFIL
and Lebanese citizens — yes, Lebanese citizens — for
decades. It emphasized the important role of UNIFIL
under resolution 1701 (2006) and the need to
implement all provisions of that resolution. I wonder
whether Israel complies with the provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006). Has Israel ceased violating
Lebanese sovereignty by air, land and sea? Has Israel
withdrawn from the northern part of Al-Ghajar and the
surrounding area? We therefore call upon the
international community to put an end, once and for
all, to all Israeli violations of Lebanese sovereignty.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Pascoe for his substantive
briefing. The situation in the Middle East remains
unstable and very fragile, although with some positive
aspects, above all the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian
proximity talks mediated by Senator Mitchell. An
opportunity remains for the resumption of direct talks
between the sides, and we cannot let it slip away. In
this connection, reports from Israel about plans for new
construction in East Jerusalem and on recent
demolitions of a number of Arab homes are a source of
great concern.
Moscow continues to consider unacceptable any
unilateral action that could prejudice the outcome of an
Israeli-Palestinian settlement. We call on the Israeli
side to show restraint in accordance with the united
position of the international community on these
issues, given the particular sensitivity of the problem
of Jerusalem, whose fate should be decided through
negotiations on the final status of the Palestinian
territories. It is evident that, if they are to move from
proximity talks to a substantive exchange of views on
the key issues on the bilateral agenda, the sides must
refrain from decisions and actions that could
undermine efforts to build an atmosphere of trust
between them.
The Middle East Quartet remains the primary
instrument supporting the peace process, and the recent
trip to the region by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation, Sergey Lavrov, should be seen
in that context. The Special Representatives of the
Quartet continue their intense daily work, including on
the ground, to achieve the objectives set by Quartet
leaders at their most recent meeting in Moscow with a
view to moving towards a comprehensive Middle East
settlement.

13

S/PV.6363

We note some movement in the situation
involving Gaza. Easing the embargo is a step in the
right direction which we are convinced should be
followed by further measures, such as restoring the
conditions that existed at the conclusion of the 2005
Agreement on Movement and Access, when
representatives of the European Union and the lawful
Palestinian authorities were stationed at Gaza border
crossings. The ultimate goal of the international
community should, of course, be the complete lifting of
the blockade, while ensuring Israel’s security interests.
We await additional information from the United
Nations and Israel on the status of the investigation of
the circumstances relating to the incident of the
freedom flotilla to Gaza.
Unfortunately, one serious remaining issue is that
of intra-Palestinian unity. We are conducting principled
activity at all levels to support efforts to overcome
differences within the Palestinian ranks. We appeal to
and are seeking to convince Hamas to align itself with
the platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization
and the Arab Peace Initiative, in favour of which the
Quartet has repeatedly spoken out. There has been
some movement in Hamas’ position in this direction,
and we will pursue our relevant work with that
organization.
In conclusion, I again reaffirm Russia’s readiness,
within international forums and bilateral frameworks,
to continue its efforts to contribute to a comprehensive
and just settlement in the Middle East, a crucial
element of which would be to resolve the Palestine
question on a two-State basis that provides for the
existence of an independent and viable Palestinian
State living side by side with Israel in peace and
security. There is no other option.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East. I also thank the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.
The events that have taken place in recent weeks
confirm once again that the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, must continue to
monitor the situation in the Middle East and encourage
intensified negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, based on previous agreements and
obligations and ongoing diplomatic efforts. That has
been particularly evident following the attack on the

14

freedom flotilla that took place in international waters
on 31 May, with tragic and disturbing consequences, not
only because of the clearly reprehensible facts, but also
because it has yet again highlighted the fragility of the
humanitarian situation in Gaza.
The presidential statement adopted by the
Security Council on 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9), which
called for a prompt, impartial, credible and transparent
investigation of those events in accordance with
international standards, remains valid. Mexico believes
that the parties involved have not only the right to
establish their own commissions of inquiry, but also
the obligation to do so in matters that concern them.
In that regard, we note the results of the internal
inquiry commission established by Israel, which were
made known on 12 July. We continue to await the
results of the independent public committee for more
in-depth conclusions.
That not withstanding, such internal commissions
cannot replace the establishment of an international
commission as outlined in the Council’s presidential
statement; rather, they must complement it. Only thus
can we create the cooperation and trust that are needed
to ensure that a credible outcome of the investigations
that is acceptable to the parties concerned. Hence, we
encourage the Secretary-General to continue his efforts
to establish a body that would meet those criteria.
At the same time, it is essential also to prevent all
acts of provocation that could give rise to another
incident like the one that occurred on 31 May. In that
regard, any delivery of humanitarian assistance must
be arranged through established channels.
We believe that the Gaza blockade is
unsustainable and counterproductive, and that it has
severe humanitarian consequences for the civilian
population of the Strip; at the same time, we welcome
Egypt’s decision to partially lift the blockade and
Israel’s decision to permit access to Gaza for more
goods, limiting only material that could affect its
security. We recognize the important work in that
regard of the Quartet and its Representative and that of
representatives of the United Nations system.
While this progress is positive, the lifting of the
blockade must be complete. As we have been saying
since January 2009, and taking account of Israel’s
legitimate security concerns, we believe that this
security can be achieved only if it is accompanied by

10-45871

S/PV.6363

the establishment of an international monitoring
mechanism to guarantee a lasting ceasefire, the
complete opening of border crossings and control of
illicit trafficking in arms to Gaza, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009).
We also underscore the importance of carrying
out the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process, which
is taking place with the support of Egypt. This is
essential for the building of a future Palestinian State.
Frank and direct dialogue is the only way to
achieve a comprehensive, lasting resolution of the
Middle East conflict that recognizes Israel’s right to
exist and makes possible the establishment of a
politically and economically viable Palestinian State,
living in peace with Israel within secure and
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions, the Road Map, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We therefore support the holding of so-called
proximity talks, so long as they lead to the resumption
of direct negotiations within a reasonable time. We
must understand that the window of opportunity that
opened when the proximity talks began could close if
significant progress is not made. We therefore
encourage both parties to make every possible effort
aimed at an agreed resumption of direct negotiations.
Thus, it is essential for both Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to comply with the principles set out in the
Road Map, which are the basis for resolving all
pending issues in this conflict.
Similarly, both parties must avoid actions that run
counter to international law and international
humanitarian law, as well as any provocative statement
or act of violence that could exacerbate tension. In that
regard, the demolitions in East Jerusalem and the
building of new settlements are to be condemned. Such
practices in an occupied territory run counter to
international law and violate the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention. We reaffirm that all such
practices, including the expansion of settlements in the
West Bank and in East Jerusalem by so-called natural
growth, are a further serious obstacle to the peace
process. We urge Israel to cease such practices.
We commend the Palestinian Authority’s efforts to
meet its commitments with respect to security and
economic development in the West Bank. We have
taken note of the positive economic and human impact
of Israel’s initiative to partially lift restrictions imposed

10-45871

on the movement of people and goods in the West
Bank. We hope that these steps will be permanent and
will lead to the complete and irreversible dismantling
of all checkpoints, which is indispensable for the
establishment of a viable and independent Palestinian
State.
We are convinced that improvement in the living
conditions of the Palestinian people and effective
security controls in the West Bank are essential for the
achievement of lasting peace in the Middle East. We
therefore support Prime Minister Fayyad’s plan to lay
the economic and institutional foundations of a future
Palestinian State; we call upon the Quartet and the
international community to continue their active
support for those efforts.
Peace in the Middle East requires progress on the
various tracks of the conflict in the region. Thus, we
are concerned at continued violations of the provisions
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), in
particular daily raids by the Israel Defense Forces in
Lebanon’s territorial space and the discovery of
weapons and explosives in the area of operation of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
We are concerned also by recent acts of violence —
presumably organized — against UNIFIL personnel.
We must guarantee their safety and freedom of
movement in their area of operation and must ensure
coordination at the highest level between the Lebanese
Armed Forces and Government and UNIFIL in order to
avoid incidents like those that took place on 3 July. We
appeal to both Israel and Lebanon, and to all other
actors involved, to comply with the provisions of the
relevant Security Council resolutions and to avoid all
hostile rhetoric that could lead to an escalation of
violence. It is essential to strengthen Lebanon’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence.
Finally, we consider that Israel and Syria must
resume a process of rapprochement as soon as possible,
through modalities acceptable to both parties, in order
to find a solution on the occupied Golan that will
preserve the sovereignty and protect the interests of
both States.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome the holding of
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East. I
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing and Ambassadors Gabriela Shalev and Riyad
Mansour for their remarks.

15

S/PV.6363

As we meet for another quarterly open debate on
the Middle East, my delegation can see some
improvement in the situation on the ground — but,
unfortunately, much less than we all wished for. It is
disappointing to be forced to recognize that the region
remains tense and that a solution continues to prove
elusive.
Making substantial progress on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is perhaps the single most important
pending business in the Security Council today, a
conflict whose resolution would surely have a positive
effect in many areas. In the long term, the status quo is
in the interest of no one. Rather, it feeds extremism,
fosters disillusionment and discredits diplomacy.
We therefore reiterate our support for the
mediation efforts by the United States Administration
through the proximity talks and hope that these can
lead to direct negotiations. But we should have no
illusions: if no real progress is made in the coming
weeks, the situation on the ground is not likely to
improve in a sustainable manner. On the contrary, the
fragile support obtained, on both sides, for engaging in
indirect negotiations may be gravely eroded. This
process is approaching a point where it must yield
results.
When direct talks resume, the international
community will have to sustain its involvement
throughout the process, as history shows that progress
requires strong external incentives. In this context,
Brazil reiterates its support for the holding of a
comprehensive international conference on the Middle
East, once conditions are appropriate. Further
engagement by relevant players from outside the
region might prove beneficial.
An independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security within internationally recognized
borders, remains the only solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict and for the long-term stability of the entire
region and the world.
On 1 June 2010, the Security Council called for a
“prompt,
impartial,
credible
and
transparent
investigation conforming to international standards”
(S/PRST/2010/9) into the Israeli action against a Gazabound humanitarian flotilla.
We took due note of the Israel’s decision to
establish an inquiry panel, with two respectable

16

foreigners as observers. That is a positive step.
However, the panel does not meet the requirements set
forth by the Security Council. In our view, the gravity
of the incident and the facts that the attack has taken
place in international waters and that it involves
entities and individuals from various countries require
that the investigation be conducted under the auspices
of the United Nations. We therefore urge the SecretaryGeneral to continue consultations on an arrangement
that fulfils the requirements by the Council.
The tragic loss of life and injuries to civilians as a
result of that action showed once again that the
blockade of Gaza is politically unsustainable. That was
clearly recognized by the Security Council in the
presidential statement of last June. We therefore
welcome the Israeli decision to expand the list of goods
allowed to be brought into Gaza, including building
materials for projects sponsored by the international
community. That is particularly welcome, as it will
speed up the long-overdue reconstruction of the Strip.
In this regard, I am pleased to inform the Council
that yesterday President Lula signed into law a bill by
which Brazil will donate 25 million reais — around
$15 million — to the Palestine Authority, in principle
through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), for
projects to support Gaza’s reconstruction and
development.
Also positive is Israel’s decision to improve the
capacity at the Kerem Shalom crossing and to extend
its hours of operation.
However, those measures are still insufficient.
Israel must find ways to reconcile legitimate security
concerns with the normalization of life in the Strip. An
immediate and sustained opening of crossings is
imperative. The resumption of regular exports from
Gaza is urgently needed as a way to revive an economy
that has been crippled by the blockade. The population
of Gaza must not be forced to keep surviving on
international charity.
A lasting solution to the crisis in Gaza can create
a new logic of peace that might not only strengthen
those forces in Palestine that favour moderation and
national reconciliation, but also pave the way for a
strong revival of the peace process altogether. The
continuation of the blockade, on the other hand, might
aggravate the Palestinian schism and impair a future
viable Palestinian state.

10-45871

S/PV.6363

Israeli policies that prejudge the result of
negotiations and forcefully change the demographics of
the West Bank and East Jerusalem make it more
difficult for negotiations to be resumed. We reiterate
the need for a permanent cessation of all settlement
activity. On their part, Palestinians must overcome
their longstanding divisions, keep extremists in check,
including in Gaza, completely halt the launching of
rockets against Israel and enhance democratic
governance. In this context, we welcome and support
the efforts of Prime Minister Salam Fayyad to
implement his two-year statehood programme.
We must continue to avoid the return of the
conflict between Lebanon and Israel. All parties must
therefore faithfully implement their obligations under
resolution 1701 (2006). We also urge the international
community to assist Lebanon in building up its state
capacity, in particular its armed forces, and facilitating
the central Government to exercise its authority
throughout the country.
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe for the clear briefing he has just given
us. I would also like to join Council members who
have spoken before me in expressing my thanks for the
information provided by the ambassadors of Palestine
and Israel.
My delegation would like to reiterate our concern
at the lack of progress made since our most recent
debate on this issue (6340th meeting). It quite rightly
shows how urgently we need to close the gap between
Palestinians and Israelis, as we approach the end of the
freeze on new Israeli settlements.
My delegation would like to welcome the
international community’s inspired new dynamic, in
particular the recent initiatives of the United States,
Egypt, Morocco, the Quartet and the United Nations,
aimed at promoting the resumption of direct talks
between the parties in accordance with their
obligations and the provisions of the Road Map.
I therefore welcome the regional meeting for
Africa organized by the United Nations on 1 and 2 July
2010 in Rabat on strengthening African support for a
just and lasting solution to the question of Jerusalem. It
was reaffirmed at the end of the meeting that the only
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict lies in an
agreement negotiated between the parties and that only
a two-State solution, with an independent and viable

10-45871

Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours, can bring
peace to the region.
As recalled by the Secretary-General, the
situation in the Middle East will remain tense if we do
not arrive at a comprehensive settlement that takes all
aspects of the problem into account. My delegation
believes that it is important to find solutions to Israel’s
security concerns as well as to the question of West
Bank settlements, border demarcation between the two
States in accordance with resolution 242 (1967) and the
Fourth Geneva Convention, the status of Jerusalem and
respect for human rights and for the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination.
A political solution in the Middle East will also
be found by resolving the security situation, as
advocated by the Quartet in its statement of 21 June.
However, security must be a reality for both sides.
Thus, while for the Government of Israel security is
synonymous with the end of arms smuggling, for the
Palestinian Authority it means respect for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
Moreover, Gabon welcomes the recent efforts by
the Israeli Government aimed at adjusting its policy
towards Gaza, in particular by allowing the entry of
additional goods such as building materials, thus
enabling the United Nations and the international
community to continue to provide aid to the people of
Gaza.
We also welcome the review now underway of
the plan for the administration of Judea and Samaria, in
particular measures aimed at employment and the free
circulation of goods and persons. However, we favour
a complete lifting of restrictions, including at the
border crossings. We also call for the freeing by the
parties of all political prisoners, including Israeli
soldier Gilad Shalit.
With regard to East Jerusalem, my delegation
expresses its regret at the destruction of Palestinian
families’ property on 13 July in certain districts. We
deplore this unilateral and provocative act, which is a
violation of international law and undermines efforts
aimed at resuming negotiations and strengthening
mutual confidence.
Moreover, we remain fully committed to finding
a solution through peaceful and constructive
negotiations that will integrate the legal, religious,

17

S/PV.6363

social and environmental aspects of East Jerusalem. We
believe that the negotiations should be guided by the
borders indicated in the resolutions of 1967 and by the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
Several members of the Council have often
rightly held that, while we must not neglect the
symptoms of the disease, we should focus on its root
causes of the disease itself. My country thus remains
convinced that it is urgent to intensify negotiations in
order not only to make direct contact possible but also
to reach a lasting peace, which, let me recall, involves
creating a viable Palestinian State. We therefore urge
the parties to show restraint and avoid any unilateral
action and any provocation. We again invite
international partners to promote a climate of trust
between the parties and throughout the region.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank Mr. Pascoe for his briefing this morning, and I
thank the Palestinian and Israeli representatives for
their remarks.
Peace in the Middle East is a high priority for the
United Kingdom. With every month that a sustainable
solution eludes us, the situation in Israel and Palestine
becomes more of a catalyst for resentment, violence
and extremism. So it is in the interests of this Council,
with its responsibility for international peace and
security, and of the rest of the international community,
to encourage direct negotiations between the parties,
leading to a lasting peace.
The expiry of the Israeli settlement moratorium,
and Arab League support for proximity talks in
September, highlight the urgent need for progress
towards a two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The only long-term solution is a secure and
universally recognized Israel living alongside a
sovereign and viable Palestinian State, with Jerusalem
the capital of both States, and a fair settlement for
refugees.
We continue to strongly support the United States
efforts on proximity talks. It is imperative that the
negotiations focus on resolving the final status issues.
We encourage the parties to move to direct negotiations
as soon as possible. Both sides must avoid actions that
undermine the peace process. For Israel, this means
extending the settlement moratorium indefinitely and
ensuring that it also applies in occupied East
Jerusalem. The recent issuing of permits for the
construction of 32 new housing units in Pisgat Ze’ev

18

and the demolition of three East Jerusalem homes are
exactly the kind of provocative acts that must be
avoided. We continue to call for a complete cessation
of all settlement activity in both the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. Settlements are illegal under
international law and must stop.
For their part, the Palestinians and the Arab
States must not back away from their responsibility to
seize the opportunity presented by the efforts of the
United States Government. The Palestinian leadership
must be prepared to make bold decisions in the
interests of its people, and it must have the support it
needs from Arab States to see negotiations through to a
sustainable conclusion. There must be a complete halt
to rocket attacks into southern Israel, and Hamas and
other militant groups should renounce violence once
and for all. As Mr. Pascoe has said, Hamas attacks on
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) children’s
summer camps in Gaza are particularly deplorable.
Turning to the Gaza flotilla incident of 31 May, I
reiterate our deep regret at the loss of life involved.
Accountability is important. We welcome the efforts of
the Secretary-General towards that goal. The Israeli
independent public commission should proceed swiftly,
transparently and rigorously, with access to all the
evidence available. We will be better able to draw
further conclusions once the conduct of the inquiry
becomes clearer.
This incident and the threat of further flotillas
highlight what we all know: that the situation in Gaza
is unsustainable. Together with the European Union
and the Quartet, we have called on Israel to ease
restrictions on access and enable a return to economic
normality. Israel’s recent decision to move from a list
of 120 permitted goods to a list of specific prohibited
items is a welcome development. It shows that it is
possible to lift the pressure on ordinary Gazans without
compromising the security of ordinary Israelis. But we
need to see this translated into real change on the
ground. That will mean building capacity at the
crossings, getting vital reconstruction projects up and
running and ensuring that Gazans can export as well as
import goods. The United Kingdom stands ready to
support this.
We continue to call for the immediate release of
Gilad Shalit, who has been held hostage in Gaza since
June 2006. It is unacceptable that four years on he

10-45871

S/PV.6363

should still be held by Hamas, in denial of the most
basic of human rights.

Jerusalem, as well as about decisions on renewed,
continued settlement construction.

A solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict is in all our
interests. We want the new generation of Palestinians
to grow up in hope, not despair, believing in a peaceful
settlement with Israel, and not impoverished and
susceptible to terrorist recruitment. We want the next
generation of Israelis to live free from the fear of
rocket fire, and to be able to enjoy peaceful relations
with their Arab neighbours. The international
community has a responsibility to help deliver that
goal.

Trust in a peace process will depend on visible
and tangible changes on the ground. Austria has
consistently acknowledged Israel’s right to protect its
citizens against indiscriminate attacks emanating from
Gaza. We repeat our call for an immediate end to all
such attacks. At the same time, we continue to believe
that security concerns cannot justify the blockade of
Gaza. That blockade is unacceptable, unsustainable and
counterproductive. We therefore welcome Israel’s
willingness to review its policies regarding imports to
the Gaza Strip. We are convinced that the prospect of
reconstruction, new job opportunities and increased
freedom of movement can contribute to a positive shift
of attitudes, and reverse the current worrying trend of
de-development, as asserted by United Nations experts.

Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first join
others in thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his update this morning on recent
developments in the Middle East. We also thank the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their presence here today and
their contributions to our debate.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union delegation on behalf
of the European Union later in our debate today.
We are close to the end of the ten-month partial
moratorium on settlements that the Israeli Government
committed to. The four-month deadline for the
proximity talks, after which the Arab League wished to
evaluate results, is also rapidly approaching. The
coming weeks will therefore be crucial for achieving
progress in the peace efforts for the Middle East. These
efforts must lay the foundation for a sustainable
negotiating process; otherwise they will add to the long
list of missed opportunities and play into the hands of
peace opponents. Quartet members are fully committed
to helping the parties get back to the negotiating table.
We appreciate the extraordinary efforts undertaken by
the United States Special Envoy, Senator Mitchell, to
identify common ground for starting a process towards
the implementation of a two-State solution.
Austria calls on both parties to honour the
obligations they agreed to under the Road Map, and to
refrain from any policies that may undermine the spirit
of negotiation in good faith. Israeli settlement activities
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, the demolition of
houses and the continued building of the separation
barrier on Palestinian land continue to constitute major
obstacles to peace. In this context, we, like others, wish
to express our grave concern about the recent
demolition of homes in various neighbourhoods of East

10-45871

We welcome Israel’s decision to allow, as a first
step, imports of building materials for United Nationssupervised projects. These measures go in the right
direction. At the same time, they still fall short of the
fundamental change of policy leading to a durable
resolution to the situation in Gaza that European Union
Foreign Ministers called for in their latest European
Union Council conclusions.
We strongly encourage Israel to allow for largescale reconstruction, to create conditions for a full
resumption of productive activities, to allow for
exports of agricultural produce and industrial goods as
soon as production can recommence and, most
important, to grant freedom of movement to the
civilian population living in then Gaza Strip.
Austria is deeply disturbed by recent attacks
against
non-governmental
organizations
and
international organizations in Gaza, including, as
others have already mentioned, the vandalizing of a
summer games facility for children of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. Hamas, as the de facto
authority in Gaza, bears the responsibility to ensure the
safety and unhindered operations of the United Nations
and civil society.
Regarding the follow-up to the Security Council’s
presidential statement of 1 June concerning the military
operations against the Gaza flotilla (S/PRST/2010/9),
we wish to reiterate the importance of a prompt,
impartial, credible and transparent investigation
conforming to international standards, so as to clarify

19

S/PV.6363

all facts. We therefore support the ongoing efforts of
the Secretary-General and call on Israel to positively
react to his proposal for an international inquiry.
Austria welcomes the continuing trend of
increased stability and economic growth in the West
Bank, in particular as it seems that this is due not only
to foreign aid but also to improved overall security and
a number of successful reform efforts by the
Palestinian Authority. Nonetheless,
last
month’s
decision to postpone municipal elections was a painful
setback in the Palestinian Authority’s efforts to build
the institutions of a future State. We call on Palestinian
political
representatives
to
seriously
pursue
reconciliation efforts and to agree on a political
platform based on the Quartet principles and the quest
for peace, democracy and the rule of law. The current
split between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
jeopardizes
prospects
for
the
successful
implementation of a two-State solution.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I should like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing. We fully appreciate and
support the efforts of the Secretary-General and United
Nations officials on the ground.
We are currently at the halfway point in terms of
the anticipated duration of the proximity talks before
proceeding into the envisaged direct negotiations. We
fully support this process and the efforts of the United
States. Nevertheless, we have hardly seen any
breakthroughs, as the Israeli side has not given up its
current approach. During recent weeks, Israel has
continued active settlement construction and
announced comprehensive future projects in the
occupied territories. The evidence suggests that Israeli
settlement expansion has actually increased since Israel
declared its moratorium on building.
Israel has also continued to implement its policies
on Palestinian home demolitions and evictions. Last
week, the Israelis destroyed at least six Palestinian
buildings in East Jerusalem. The Israeli Jerusalem
municipality is also preparing for the demolition of up
to 100 units in East Jerusalem, starting next month.
Israel has not stopped its policy of stripping the
residency rights of Palestinians living in Jerusalem
either. Among the victims were four elected members
of the Palestinian Legislative Council.
These policies are not at all compatible with the
understanding of permanent peace, nor do they make

20

any contribution to building confidence between the
parties: they simply obstruct the peace process. By
now, it should have been realized that Israel has
nothing to gain through pursuing such policies.
Undermining peace efforts and trying to prejudice the
outcome of the negotiations only harm its interests, its
standing in the international community and its
prospects for the future. In particular, Israel’s policies
aimed at changing the status and fabric of Jerusalem
are deplorable and have far-reaching ramifications.
Israel has made some improvements in terms of
the goods and material allowed to enter Gaza.
However, this has not changed the fact that the
blockade imposed on Gaza is still in place. The
blockade continues. So does the suffering of the
Palestinian people in Gaza, as they are not allowed to
engage in normal economic activity, exporting their
products, importing necessary materials and moving
freely. Eighty per cent of the Palestinians living in
Gaza continue to rely on the support of international
aid organizations. Sixty-five per cent of the population
is living below the poverty line, with an unemployment
rate of 34 per cent.
We welcome the increasing international
awareness and sensitivity regarding the suffering of the
Palestinians in Gaza. The blockade imposed on Gaza is
a means of collective punishment. It is unacceptable
and immoral, and it poisons the region. The ordeal of
the Palestinians in Gaza will end only when the
blockade is completely lifted, as stipulated by
resolution 1860 (2009).
On 31 May 2010, Israeli military forces attacked
a civilian humanitarian convoy in international waters,
killing nine civilians. In accordance with the
presidential statement adopted by the Security Council
on 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9), which called for a prompt,
impartial, credible and transparent investigation
conforming to international standards, the SecretaryGeneral officially proposed an international panel of
investigation. We accepted the proposal of the
Secretary-General, and we continue to support the
Secretary-General in his efforts to establish a panel of
investigation. We hope that he will succeed in
establishing an independent and impartial panel of
inquiry shortly, as he anticipates.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Pascoe, for his briefing. I also thank the Permanent

10-45871

S/PV.6363

Representative of the State of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.
I should like to address four points, starting with
the issue of Gaza, which has been front-page news due
to the flotilla episode. France condemned the
disproportionate use of force. We would like to see the
full implementation of the presidential statement of
1 June 2010 (S/PRST/2010/9), in which the Security
Council called for a prompt, impartial, credible and
transparent investigation conforming to international
standards. We hope that the efforts of the parties
concerned, especially Turkey, the State of Israel and
the Secretary-General, will make it possible for this
objective to be met.
Furthermore, the flotilla episode brought to the
fore what we have been saying for some time in this
forum: the blockade of the Gaza Strip is not only
unacceptable, but also counterproductive. We welcome
the decision of the Governments responsible for this
policy to reconsider it. In particular, the announcement
by the Government of Israel of measures easing the
restrictions is welcome, and we hope that it will be
fully implemented. We believe that it would be timely
to go even further, with the aim of improving the lives
of the civilian population and making economic
recovery possible in Gaza. I am thinking specifically of
such steps as increasing the capacity of crossings,
resuming exports and liberalizing the conditions
governing the movement of persons to and from the
Gaza Strip.
The European Union is following the situation
very closely, as shown by the visit at the beginning of
this week by High Representative Ashton. The
ministers for foreign affairs of the European Union
also expressed their willingness for the Union to
contribute to a mechanism allowing for the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009).
I also note the need for the immediate cessation
of all violence, in particular rocket attacks on southern
Israel. We further call for the unconditional and
immediate liberation of Gilad Shalit, an issue that is
being followed very closely in my country.
The flotilla incident also demonstrated the need
to reintegrate the territory of Gaza into the peace
process. To that end, one of our highest priorities
should be to encourage the current mediation efforts in
favour of inter-Palestinian reconciliation.

10-45871

My second point is that we must not lose sight of
the fact that the main objective remains the immediate
relaunching of the peace process. There is no
alternative to the resumption of negotiations towards
the creation of a viable and contiguous Palestinian
State living in peace side by side with Israel within
secure and recognized borders on the basis of Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. That
is also the position of the European Union, as will be
indicated by the acting head of its delegation in his
statement, with which France associates itself.
The international community must commit itself
to assisting negotiations and to guaranteeing the
parameters of a final agreement that would enable the
parties to re-engage in dialogue. We are working very
closely with United States and Egyptian authorities to
define the terms of an international framework that
would allow the negotiations to resume.
My third point is that changes are necessary on
the ground to create conditions favourable to the
resumption of negotiations. The situation in Jerusalem
remains concerning. We therefore deplore the recent
demolition of homes in Arab neighbourhoods of the
city. Like the destruction of Palestinian houses,
settlement activities in East Jerusalem are unacceptable
and provocative. There can be no peace that excludes
Jerusalem, which, as the President of the French
Republic said in his address to the Knesset on 23 June
2008, is likely to become the capital of two States.
Settlements throughout the Palestinian territories
remain a major obstacle to a solution. The decision of
the Government of Israel to announce a 10-month
moratorium on new construction and building permits
in the West Bank was a step in the right direction that
should be fully implemented. No peace will be possible
without the complete cessation of the illegal
construction of settlements. As noted by the President
of France, settlements complicate the establishment of
a Palestinian State and thus do not contribute to Israel’s
security; on the contrary, they increase the dangers.
The implementation by the Israeli authorities of
confidence-building measures on the ground would be
likely to promote the rapid resumption of the direct
talks that we all hope to see. For instance, prisoners
could be released, Zones A and B could be extended,
and restrictions on access and movement in the West
Bank could continue to be lifted. The Palestinian
Authority, for its part, must pursue its efforts to

21

S/PV.6363

strengthen the security sector and establish the rule of
law. The merciless struggle against terrorism must
remain a priority.
My fourth and last point is that the international
community must provide strong support for the
Palestinian Authority and President Abbas in
consolidating the institutions of the future Palestinian
State. The challenge is also for Israel to assist more
resolutely in that process, particularly in the West
Bank. Gestures have been made on the ground, but
they are insufficient. The Palestinians must be able to
see that developments on the ground will lead to the
end of the occupation, in particular in terms of freedom
of access and movement.
In this regard, we reiterate our support for
Palestinian Prime Minister Fayyad’s plan, pursuant to
the Paris Conference of December 2007, to create a
Palestinian State within a fixed period of time. In order
to maintain the momentum of international support
created by the Conference, on 1 July French Minister
for Foreign Affairs Bernard Kouchner held another
follow-up meeting with the co-Presidents in the
presence of Prime Minister Fayyad and Egyptian
Minister for Foreign Affairs Ahmed Aboul Gheit.
I reiterate that our prime objective is the urgent
resumption of negotiations, not only on issues of
concern to Israelis and Palestinians, but also other,
regional aspects of the peace process. Accordingly, we
are working to establish conditions for the resumption
of talks between Israel and Syria. We are also pursuing
our efforts in Lebanon and call on the parties to
implement resolution 1701 (2006), which would
guarantee peace between the two countries. In this
context, we reaffirm the crucial role played by the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. The Force
must be able to discharge its mandate with the full
cooperation of the parties.
The international community and this Council
have a major role to play because the situation in the
Middle East concerns all of us. France is ready to play
its full part in that effort. To that end, the President of
France has called for a peace summit, organized in
cooperation with all concerned actors, to support
United States efforts and assist in the resumption of
talks between the two parties.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his comprehensive briefing. I also thank the

22

observer of Palestine and the representative of Israel
for their statements.
It is a matter of concern to my delegation that the
situation in the Middle East remains fragile and tense.
It is regrettable that, despite the international and
regional efforts to relaunch direct negotiations between
Israel and Palestine, no tangible progress has been
achieved. We commend, however, the efforts of the
United States Administration and the Quartet.
We encourage Israel and Palestine to take
practical steps to start direct negotiations. It is in doing
so that a comprehensive and lasting peace, based on
the vision of two democratic States — Israel and
Palestine — living side by side in peace and security,
can be realized. Ultimately, lasting peace in the Middle
East will be achieved through the efforts and
agreement of both parties.
We commend the continued efforts of the
Palestinians to fulfil their obligations under the Road
Map, particularly in the security sector, State-building
and economic development. We are concerned,
however, about divisions among the Palestinian
groups, and call on the Palestinians to overcome their
differences and forge unity.
Israel’s continued settlement activity in East
Jerusalem is a matter of serious concern. We call on
Israel to freeze all settlement activity, including natural
growth. We are further concerned about recent
incidents in which additional home demolition orders
have been issued in East Jerusalem.
On Gaza, we are concerned about the grave
humanitarian situation caused by the blockade. We
welcome the recent efforts of Israel to ease the
blockade, which have facilitated the onset of a number
of United Nations projects and allowed more goods
into Gaza. However, this is not enough. We call on
Israel to fully open the borders and lift the blockade.
Concerning the flotilla incident, we support an
impartial, credible and transparent investigation
conforming to international standards, as called for by
the Council’s presidential statement of 1 June
(S/PRST/2010/9).
In January 2009, this Council expressed its
concern at the ceasefire violations and the deterioration
of the situation in Gaza. We are concerned that the
violations persist today. We reiterate our call on all
parties to exercise maximum restraint and avoid further

10-45871

S/PV.6363

escalation. We call for the complete implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009).
The attacks on the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) summer camps in Gaza last month, which
set fire to their recreation facilities, were deplorable.
We are glad to hear that UNRWA will rebuild the
camps to continue with its summer programmes, which
are important for the physical and psychological wellbeing of Gaza’s citizens.
On Lebanon, we salute the national unity
Government for its efforts in broadening a national
consensus that has translated into internal stability. The
continued violations of resolution 1701 (2006), such as
violations of Lebanese airspace, ground violations of
the Blue Line and the lack of enforcement of the arms
embargo, are matters of serious concern. The territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon should be
respected, and we call on all parties to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006).
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing. I also listened attentively to the statements of
the observer of Palestine and the representative of
Israel.
The current situation in the Middle East remains
complex and volatile. The early end to tension and
confrontation and the achievement of a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East are the shared
wish of the international community. China maintains,
as always, that political negotiations are the only way
to solve the Middle East question. We support
negotiations between Palestine and Israel so that they
can live side by side in peace as two States.
We welcome the launching of proximity talks
between Palestine and Israel, and we urge both sides to
build up their faith in peaceful negotiations and to
solve the issues of security, borders, settlements,
refugees and the status of Jerusalem in a
comprehensive, just and sustainable manner. At this
stage, the international community should make greater
effort to push for a new momentum for negotiations so
as to reinvigorate the Middle East peace process.
The parties concerned must demonstrate political
will, enhance mutual trust, make courageous
compromises and avoid any action that could
undermine mutual trust, obstruct the negotiations or

10-45871

prejudge the outcome of the negotiations. We oppose
Israel’s recent approval of the construction of new
housing in East Jerusalem and its demolition of
Palestinian structures. Not only has this complicated
the situation, but it will also hurt the negotiation
process. We urge Israel to completely cease all
settlement and wall construction in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including the West Bank and East
Jerusalem.
The humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, and the Gaza Strip in particular,
remains grim. Israel’s blockade has inflicted great
suffering on more than 1 million residents of Gaza,
whose rights to life and development have been
gravely violated. This state of affairs is unacceptable
and must not be sustained. We call on the international
community to continue to follow these developments
closely and to provide greater assistance to the people
of Gaza.
We welcome the fact that Israel has recently
eased its restrictions on the flow of some humanitarian
aid and commercial goods to Gaza, and we call on
Israel to put a complete end to its blockade of Gaza and
let the people of Gaza resume their normal, dignified
existence and livelihood and regain their space for
development.
The Israeli attack of 31 May against a flotilla
transporting humanitarian aid to Gaza was unfortunate.
Such incidents must not recur. We support fair,
impartial, credible and transparent investigations
conforming to the spirit of the United Nations Charter
and based on the principles established in the
presidential statement of 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9).
As always, China supports Palestine in its just
cause of establishing an independent State. We hope
that all Palestinian parties will work in their long-term
national interest and stay united in their efforts to
establish an independent State of Palestine and ensure
a bright future of peace and steady development. China
supports the early establishment of an independent
State of Palestine through the two-State solution on the
basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative, the principle of land for peace and the
Road Map, so that Palestine and Israel can live side by
side in peace as two States. We will continue to make
greater efforts to this end alongside the international
community.

23

S/PV.6363

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Nigeria.
I, too, would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
his very detailed briefing on the current situation in the
Middle East. It is clear that, in the weeks following the
tragic events of 31 May, important lessons have been
learned by all parties. While the incident and its
consequences are most regrettable, we welcome the
decision of the Israeli authorities to ease the
restrictions on goods entering the Gaza Strip by land.
Commendable as this step is, we believe that a
complete and unconditional lifting of the ban is
imperative to bringing an end to the humanitarian crisis
that has resulted from the Gaza blockade. The blockade
is indeed a collective punishment meted out on
innocent people in Gaza, and we hope Israel will live
up to its obligations under international humanitarian
law.
We commend the positive role played by the
Egyptian authorities in averting yet another
confrontation by allowing an aid vessel to unload its
cargo at Al-Arish, from where the goods were
transported in trucks to the Rafa crossing into Gaza.
We encourage such prudence and circumspection by all
sides in handling similar situations in the future to
avert the use of force.
We note Israel’s decision to commission a panel
of inquiry led by retired Israeli Supreme Court Justice
Jacob Turkel to investigate the flotilla incident. It will
be necessary for the panel in its work to meet
international
standards
of
independence
and
transparency, as envisaged in the presidential statement
of 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9). The findings of the panel
should aim to command credibility and legitimacy.
Indeed, there is scope for Israel to consider the wellmeaning offer of the Secretary-General to facilitate an
impartial and independent investigation of the flotilla
incident.
While the past few months have been testing
times in the region, the next few months may prove
even more trying. The demolition of Palestinian homes
last week and the approval of the new settlement in
East Jerusalem will no doubt inflame passion and
reaction. Therefore we renew our call on Israel to
refrain from deliberate acts of provocation. In the same
vein, we urge the Palestinians to exercise restraint and
also guard against inflammatory rhetoric as well as acts
of violence. Mutual confidence is what the two sides

24

need in order to proceed to direct talks, building on the
gains of recent rounds of proximity talks. Time is fast
running out, and faith in the hope of attaining a twoState solution within 24 months, as envisaged by the
Middle East Quartet statement of 19 March 2010 in
Moscow, is gradually eroding.
In order to recapture the momentum, we call on
all interlocutors, including the Arab League, not to
waver in their determination to achieve a lasting peace
in the Middle East. In this respect, we welcome the
efforts of the Middle East Envoy, Senator George
Mitchell, to hold further talks between Israel and the
Palestinians. We also welcome the visit of Catherine
Ashton to the region, undertaken in an effort to ease
the distribution of humanitarian aid in Gaza.
The continued detention of Gilad Shalit without
access to visitors does not serve any useful purpose for
the peace process. On the contrary, it fuels mistrust and
heightens animosity. His unconditional release would
create a new atmosphere conducive to peace. Indeed, a
prisoner exchange between the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities would go a long way towards easing
tensions and building much-needed confidence.
Now more than ever, the parties to this dispute
need to demonstrate their undivided commitment to
peace. They must remove all obstacles to the
resumption of direct negotiations to resolve the
outstanding permanent status issues.
The Council, for its part, should continue its
supportive role in the peace process, fostering security
and stability within the occupied Palestinian territory.
For our part, we shall remain firmly committed to
the goal of seeing a secure State of Israel living side by
side in peace, harmony and security with an
independent State of Palestine with recognized borders.
While peace in the Middle East is attainable, it must be
underpinned by sustained political will and
commitment. The Middle East needs peace, and so
does the rest of the world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, including the Arab Group,
which Egypt has the honour to chair this month.

10-45871

S/PV.6363

I would like to start by expressing appreciation
for the convening of this debate to address the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
It takes place at a time when endeavours continue to be
made to support and advance the resumption of peace
process negotiations and to overcome the lack of
progress and, in some respects, the deteriorating
situation and rising tensions resulting from the ongoing
Israeli occupation and the many violations that
continue to be perpetrated by the occupying Power.
These include its illegal settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, in particular East
Jerusalem, and its continuing imposition of a blockade
on Gaza.
Despite all serious efforts to relaunch direct
negotiations towards the attainment of the well-known
and internationally-supported objectives of the peace
process, a just and lasting settlement to the question of
Palestine regrettably remains far from being achieved,
as Israel, the occupying Power, continues to carry out
illegal policies and practices that are totally
contradictory to an outcome based on a two-State
solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.
In the light of the ongoing situation, the NonAligned Movement reiterates its call for the
international community to be resolute in demanding
that Israel, the occupying Power, abide by its legal
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention,
respect the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and comply with its Road Map
obligations.
Israel must cease all of its violations and
unlawful measures, including its policies of collective
punishment and colonization in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. This is
essential to creating an environment conducive to the
launching of direct negotiations on all core issues,
which must be conducted within a fixed time frame and
in good faith, in accordance with the agreed principles
and terms of reference of the peace process, namely
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid
terms of reference including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road
Map.
While the Palestinian Authority has repeatedly
affirmed its determination, with Arab support, to
pursue the path of peace, security and State-building,

10-45871

Israel continues to fail to abide by its obligations and
continues to blatantly impede efforts to resume direct
negotiations, through a series of measures that only
further aggravate the situation. These include the
31 May military attack on the civilian maritime convoy
carrying humanitarian assistance to Gaza to alleviate
the suffering of the Palestinian civilian population
under Israel’s blockade.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
condemnation of Israel’s use of force against the
civilian maritime convoy and calls upon the SecretaryGeneral to initiate a full, impartial, transparent,
independent and credible investigation, as demanded
by the Security Council. Further, the Movement fully
supports the demand of the Human Rights Council,
through its resolution 14/1, for an accountable and
fully independent investigation into the matter.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that justice
must prevail and that the unacceptable and
unsustainable situation in the Gaza Strip must end. The
unresolved crisis of Gaza continues to have negative
repercussions on efforts to advance peace and inflicts
deep suffering on the Palestinian civilian population
there. We reiterate, in this regard, that international
humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, must be fully applied and respected by
Israel, the occupying Power. The Non-Aligned
Movement demands that Israel immediately lift its
blockade, in compliance with Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009), General Assembly resolution
ES-10/18 and other relevant United Nations resolutions
in this regard.
We still believe that the international community
must play its rightful and obligatory role by taking the
necessary action to halt all illegal measures taken by
Israel in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses deep
concern regarding the extensive damage caused by
Israeli settlements in the West Bank, the separation
wall and the network of hundreds of checkpoints that
the occupying Power continues to impose, which are
undermining the contiguity, integrity, viability and
unity of the Palestinian territory, isolating East
Jerusalem and seriously jeopardizing the prospects for
physically achieving the two-State solution.

25

S/PV.6363

The international community, represented by the
United Nations, must take clear action to ensure that
violations are swiftly brought to an end and replaced
by concerted endeavours for peace, in line with
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Charter.
Turning now to Lebanon, the Non-Aligned
Movement remains deeply concerned over Israel’s
ongoing violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty, in breach
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). The
Movement calls for the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) by all parties in order to end the
current fragility and to avoid the recurrence of violence.
Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical or
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
I do not need to state that if the ongoing Israeli
measures are not stopped and remedied, their
consequences will lead to the further destabilization of
the situation in the region, with far-reaching
repercussions. Tangible progress in the peace process is
vital and would contribute to a positive dynamic. This
requires Israel to cease immediately and completely its
illegal policies and measures in Gaza and the West
Bank, including in and around East Jerusalem, and that
it finally commit to the terms of reference of the peace
process and uphold its legal obligations and
commitments in this regard. The international
community has to take the lead by reaffirming clear
parameters for the negotiating process on all core
issues and by helping the parties to reach agreed
solutions based on United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference and agreements reached
between the parties.
To conclude, the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its call for serious and concrete actions from
the Security Council, stressing in this regard the
permanent responsibility of the United Nations towards
the question of Palestine until it is resolved justly and
satisfactorily in all respects. This is a responsibility

26

from which the Security Council cannot be absolved,
particularly in the light of its responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security, which cannot be
achieved as long as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole continue to fester
unresolved, with their wide-ranging impact on the
region and beyond.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Paul Badji, Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
Mr. Badji (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, allow me to congratulate you,
Madam, on the exemplary and effective manner in
which you are steering the work of the Council this
month. I should also like to congratulate Ambassador
Claude Heller, Permanent Representative of Mexico,
for his effective guidance of the Council during the
month of June.
On behalf of the Committee, I would like to
express my appreciation to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his thorough
and objective briefing on the situation in the Middle
East and the status of the question of Palestine. It
clearly showed that the parties and the international
community must engage forcefully at this critical
juncture to create conditions conducive to the
resumption of serious negotiations on all permanent
status issues of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
While we all would wholeheartedly welcome
serious direct negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians, our Committee is of the view that such
negotiations can be successful only in an atmosphere of
mutual trust and if the parties are convinced that they
will lead to a comprehensive, just and lasting outcome.
To that end, the parties must first and foremost
implement their respective obligations as established in
the Road Map and endorsed by the Council.
Our Committee remains alarmed by the refusal of
the Israeli Government to heed the calls of the
international community for a complete halt of
settlement construction in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. In spite of the
limited moratorium, the pace of construction in certain
settlements has not even slowed, as reported by the
New York Times last week. The Committee calls on

10-45871

S/PV.6363

Israel to enforce the moratorium and to extend it
indefinitely. The moratorium should also be applied to
East Jerusalem. That would certainly be the most
important step the Israeli Government could take to
contribute to a resumption of direct negotiations
between the parties.
The situation in East Jerusalem remains of utmost
concern to our Committee. Settlement expansion
continues and the city’s planning and construction
committee approved new housing units in East
Jerusalem just last week. House demolitions have
resumed, residency rights are being revoked and
Palestinian politicians in the city are threatened with
deportation. This state of affairs is unacceptable and
calls for a swift reaction by the international
community. The Committee would like to reiterate its
position that Israel’s dangerous policies in East
Jerusalem risk inciting forceful reactions by large parts
of the Muslim world that could lead to violence and
even armed conflict. It is the prerogative and obligation
of the Security Council to intervene swiftly and
resolutely to prevent a possible escalation of violence.
It will be six years this month that the
International Court of Justice rendered the historic
advisory opinion determining that the construction by
Israel of the separation barrier within the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
constitutes numerous violations of international law.
The International Court of Justice concluded that such
violations engaged Israel’s responsibility to cease
construction, dismantle the existing sections in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, and provide
reparations, including restitution of confiscated
property and compensation for damages incurred.
However, construction of the wall has continued
at the same pace, cutting thousands of Palestinians off
from their lands, families, schools and hospitals. Our
Committee is disturbed by the impunity with which
these legal obligations have long been flouted by
Israel, and calls on the Security Council to take the
required action to ensure respect for and compliance
with the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice, the Fourth Geneva Convention and relevant
United Nations resolutions.
The deadly raid carried out by the Israeli Defense
Forces on 31 May against the unarmed Gaza freedom
flotilla was more than a human tragedy. That incident
and the ease with which Israel has avoided an impartial

10-45871

investigation into its actions clearly demonstrate that
politics often trump accountability to the law.
While our Committee acknowledges the value of
internal investigations at the national level, it fully
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation for
an international investigation under United Nations
auspices. Only after a truly impartial accounting of the
events of 31 May will all parties be satisfied that those
responsible for violations of international law will be
held to account.
Our Committee also follows closely the
repercussions of the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48).
We maintain that the report of the United Nations Fact
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, established by
the Human Rights Council and led by Justice Richard
Goldstone, presents a comprehensive, balanced and
authoritative account of the 2008-2009 Israeli
incursion into Gaza. While our Committee recognizes
the value of the Israeli Government’s recent
examination of some specific allegations in the
Goldstone report, it also calls for a comprehensive
investigation into the actions of the parties and
demands follow-up action. The Committee advocates
the creation by the Security Council of an independent
committee of experts to monitor the ongoing
investigations on both sides.
Since the Council’s last open debate under this
agenda item (6298th meeting), our Committee has held
two international meetings — one in Istanbul, Turkey,
and the other in Rabat, Kingdom of Morocco — to
support the resumption of the peace process.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People remains committed to
achieving the two-State solution, whereby Israel and
the future Palestinian State will live side by side in
peace and security. The United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, have a special
responsibility in the realization of this vision. I assure
the Council of the Committee’s cooperation and
support in implementing its resolutions on the
Palestinian question.
The President: I thank Mr. Badji for his
statement. I now give the floor to the representative of
Norway.
Ms. Enge (Norway): With key deadlines and
expiration dates fast approaching, September seems set
to mark a critical juncture in the search for a negotiated

27

S/PV.6363

two-State solution to the Israeli–Palestinian conflict.
Our shared hope is that serious and substantive
negotiations on the permanent-status issues will be
under way before that decisive point in time. Direct
negotiations may also serve to lock in the modest
achievements of the past year and extend and expand
them in accordance with key Road Map obligations.

In line with Security Council resolution 1860
(2009), the AHLC is taking an active part in facilitating
those efforts. Through the Joint Liaison Committee —
a subcommittee of the AHLC — discussions are under
way between Israel, the Palestinian Authority and
international partners to work out the modalities for
implementation of the package.

As chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
(AHLC), Norway has repeatedly stressed the need for a
clear political horizon in order to justify the high levels
of international donor support to the Palestinian Statebuilding project. Earnest negotiations, backed by goodfaith efforts to create a favourable environment on the
ground, are essential to keep the two-State solution
clearly in sight. A credible process for the political
track, within the time frame set by the Middle East
Quartet, will help to sustain the donor community’s
commitment to the parallel effort to build a Palestinian
State from the bottom up. On the economic track, the
plan of the Fayyad Government to prepare for
Palestinian statehood within two years remains the
platform on which to centre our continued support.

The reopening of traffic in and out of Gaza is not
just a question of stocking the shelves with legally
imported goods, nor is it really an issue of letting in
construction materials, however important that is for
the reconstruction of Gaza. The overriding objective
must be to allow for inbound supplies and outbound
exports on a commercial scale that will foster the
reversal of the dramatic de-development of Gaza. That
requires strengthened capacity and more efficient
control procedures at the border crossings.

Ultimately, Palestinian statehood cannot be
realized without Gaza as an integral part of the future
Palestinian State. The West Bank and Gaza must
sooner or later be reintegrated as one territorial,
political and economic unit. The recent Israeli decision
to ease the blockade of Gaza is a welcome step in the
right direction. Now the immediate challenge is to
ensure prompt and effective implementation of the
ensuing measures. We are confident that this can be
done without prejudice to legitimate Israeli security
concerns.

28

And let us not forget: it is just as vital to lift the
blockade on people. The people of Gaza cannot be
fenced in indefinitely. They must be allowed to
exercise their right to freedom of movement. At the
end of the day, the impoverished people of Gaza should
have the opportunity to claim their rightful place in,
and make their indispensable contribution to, a future
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

10-45871
