III.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

expressed in those Treaties to continue neg~tiations
to achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions for
all time,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject,
in particular resolution 32/78 of 12 December 1977
and paragraph 51 of resolution S-10/2 of 30 June
1978,
Recognizing the importance to a treaty prohibiting
nuclear testing of the study being carried ~ut by the
Ad Hoe Group of Scientific Experts to Consider Int~rnational Co-operative Measures to Detect ~nd Identify
Seismic Events on a global network of stations for the
exchange of seismological data,
Taking note of that part of the report of the C?nference of the Committee on Disarmament13 relating
to the question of a comprehensive test-ban treaty,
1. Reiterates its grave concern over the fact ~hat
nuclear-weapon testing has continued unabated against
the wishes of the overwhelming majority of Member
States;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that a treaty on the
subject of the present resolution is a matter of the
highest priority;
3. Regrets that a draft treaty has not been concluded during the past year;
4. Notes that the three negotiating nuclear-weapon
States acknowledge the need to bring their negotiations
to a speedy and successful conclusion;
5. Urges those three States to expedite their n~~otiations with a view to bringing them to a positive
conclusion as a matter of urgency and to use their
utmost endeavours to transmit the results to the Committee on Disarmament before the beginning of its
1979 session for full consideration;
6. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
take up immediately the agreed text resulting fr<;>m
the negotiations referred to in paragraph 5 above with
a view to the submission as soon as possible of a draft
treaty, which will attract the widest possible adherence,
to a resumed thirty-third session of the General
Assembly;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an item relating to the implementation of the present resolution.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/61.

Implementation of General Assembly
resolution 32/79 concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
of 7 December 1970, 2830 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971, 2935 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3079
(XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3258 (XXIX) of
13 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/33/27), vol. I, paras. 54-115.

41

9 December 1974, 3467 (XXX) of 11 December
1975 31/67 of 10 December 1976 and 32/79 of
12 December 1977, ten of which contain appeals to
the nuclear-weapon States regarding the signature and
ratification of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco), 14
Reiterating its firm conviction that, for the maximum
effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nucle_arweapon States is necessary and that such co-operation
should take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which
is legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or
protocol,
Recalling with satisfaction that the United King~om
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Umted
States of America, France and the People's Republic
of China are already parties to Additional Protocol II
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco),
1. Notes with satisfaction that Additional Protocol
II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) was
signed in 1978 by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and that the Government of that country has
officially announced that it intends to ratify the Protocol in the very near future;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "Implementation of General Assembly resolution 33/61 concerning
the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/62.

Effective measures to implement the purposes and objectives of the Disarmament
Decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 E (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it declared the decade of the
1970s the Disarmament Decade,
Reaffirming the purposes and objectives of the
Decade,
Recalling its assessment in the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly
that the objectives established for the Decade appeared
to be as far away as they had been or even further
because the arms race was not diminishing but increasing and outstripping efforts to curb it,u
Deeply concerned at the continued wastage of resources on armaments and the consequent detrimental
effect on international security and the achievement of
the new international economic order,
Recalling the decision taken at its tenth special session concerning a comprehensive programme of disarmament, 1G
Recalling also its decision that the Secretary-General should, with the assistance of a group of qualified
H United Nations, Treaty Scrie.s, vol.
J.i Resolution S-10/2, para. 4.
i,; See

resolution S-10 2, sect. III.
1

634, No. 9068, p. 326.

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

42

governmental experts, initiate an expert study on the
relationship between disarmament and development in
view of the relationship between expenditure on armaments and economic and social development and the
need to release real resources now being used for
military purposes to economic and social development
in the world, particularly of the developing countries, 17
Affirming the urgent need for the promotion of
negotiations on effective measures for the cessation of
the arms race, especially in the nuclear field, for the
reduction of military expenditures and for general
and complete disarmament,
l. Calls upon the Disarmament Commission to
give priority consideration to the elements of a comprehensive programme of disarmament at its session
to be held in 1979 and to exert its best endeavours
to transmit its recommendations thereon, through the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session, to the
Committee on Disarmament;
2. Expresses its satisfaction that the Group of
Governmental Experts on the Relationship between
Disarmament and Development has been convened
by the Secretary-General to commence its study and
looks forward to receiving an interim report on the
study at its thirty-fourth session;
3. Takes note of the preparations for the strategy
for the third United Nations development decade and
stresses the need to continue to promote the link
between the strategy for disarmament and the strategy
for development in view of the close relationship between disarmament and development affirmed by the
General Assembly at its tenth special session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "Consideration
of the declaration of the 1980s as a disarmament
decade".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

33/63.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa

The General 'Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/81 of 12 December
1977, in which it requested all States to refrain from
such co-operation with South Africa in the nuclear
field as would enable the aggressive and racist regime
of that country to acquire nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa18 adopted by the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo
from 17 to 21 July 1964,
Recalling its resolutions 1652 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 2033 (XX) of 3 December 1965, 3261 E
(XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3471 (XXX) of 11
December 1975, 31/69 of 10 December 1976 and
32/81 of 12 December 1977, in which it called upon
all States to consider and respect the continent of
Africa, comprising the continental African States,
11 Ibid., para. 94.
18 Official Records of

the General Assembly, Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 105, document A/5915.

Madagascar and other islands surrounding Africa, as
a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 418
(1977) of 4 November 1977, in which the Council,
inter alia, decided that all States should refrain from
any co-operation with South Africa in the manufacture
and development of nuclear weapons,
Gravely concerned that South Africa has not renounced the acquisition of nuclear weapons and therefore may still detonate a nuclear explosion and acquire nuclear-weapon capability in contravention of
the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa
adopted by the Organization of African Unity and of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council,
Convinced that this situation constitutes a grave
danger to international peace and security and a
permanent challenge to the efforts of the international
community to establish Africa as a nuclear-weaponfree zone,
Reiterating its decision, taken at the tenth special
session, that the Security Council should take appropriate effective steps to prevent the frustration of the
decision of the Organization of African Unity for the
denuclearization of Africa, 19
1. Strongly reiterates its call upon all States to
consider and respect the continent of Africa, comprising the continental African States, Madagascar and
other islands surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weaponfree zone;
2. Vigorously condemns any attempt by South Africa to introduce in any way whatsoever nuclear weapons into the Africa continent;
3. Demands that South Africa refrain forthwith
from conducting any nuclear explosion in the continent
of Africa or elsewhere;
4. Requests the Security Council to exercise a
close watch on South Africa and to take appropriate
effective s_t~ps to prevent South Africa from developing
and acqumng nuclear weapons, thereby endangering
international peace and security;
5. Condemns any nuclear collaboration by any
State, corporation, institution or individual with the
racist regime which could frustrate the objective of
the Organization of African Unity to keep Africa a
nuclear-weapon-free zone;
6. Demands that South Africa submit all its
nuclear facilities for inspection by the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
7. Appeals to all States to refrain from such cooperation with South Africa in the nuclear field as
would enable the racist regime to acquire nuclear
weapon~, and to dissuade corporations, institutions
and individuals within their jurisdiction from any cooperation with South Africa in this field;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
nec_essary assistance to the Organization of African
Umty towards the realization of its solemn Declaration
on the Denuclearization of Africa;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
i!s thirty-fourth sessio~ the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of
Africa".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
1 9 Resolution

S-10/2, para. 63 (c).
