S/2013/704

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 November 2013
Original: English

Letter dated 21 November 2013 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my last report on Libya dated 5 September 2013
(S/2013/516), which provided an update on the situation in Libya and the activities
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). In section IV of the
report, entitled “Safety and security” and in my observations, I noted the overall
deterioration of the security situation and the continued lack of effective host
government protection for the United Nations (see S/2013/516, paras. 84, 85 and 100).
Regrettably, the situation has not improved and United Nations staff are at increased
risk of attack.
In October 2013, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Jeffrey
Feltman, in consultation with my Special Representative and Head of UNSMIL,
Tarek Mitri, deployed a joint directors’ mission to Libya. The mission included
directors from the Department of Field Support, the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Safety and Security and the United Nations Development
Programme. The mission aimed to take stock of UNSMIL and its ability to deliver
its mandate in the changing and challenging Libyan context. Of paramount
importance was an evaluation of the new security dynamics at play in Libya and the
safety and security of staff. The joint directors’ mission confirmed the urgent need
to implement measures that enhance the protection of United Nations personnel and
installations, especially in the light of the lack of reliable national security forces.
Based on an assessment of the prevailing threats and risks for United Nations
personnel and premises, the findings of the joint directors’ mission and my own
conversations with senior managers, we have explored several options to improve
security for the staff in Libya.
I have considered the possibility of deploying a United Nations guard unit to
enhance the security arrangements currently in place. Such a guard unit would
provide perimeter security and access control for United Nations facilities and
installations in Tripoli. It would act as a deterrent against possible attacks by
extremist elements who are not welcoming of foreign personnel. The guard unit
would also be able to relocate United Nations personnel under imminent threat of
physical violence to safer locations.
In this regard, the Secretariat has developed plans for the deployment of a
United Nations guard unit comprising military units, provided as contingents by
Member States, to form part of UNSMIL. Based on the recommendation of a

13-58558 (E) 291113

*1358558*

S/2013/704

reconnaissance team that I recently dispatched to Tripoli, I propose that the guard
unit consist of up to 235 military personnel.
Pending the conclusion of an amendment to the existing status-of-mission
agreement for UNSMIL that would extend the necessary legal protection to the
guard unit and to the States contributing contingents, it would be understood that the
provisions of the model status-of-forces agreement (A/45/594) that apply to, and in
respect of, the military personnel of national contingents assigned to the military
component of a United Nations operation and to the property, funds and assets of the
States contributing those contingents shall apply provisionally to, and in respect of,
the military personnel of national contingents assigned to the guard unit and to the
property, funds and assets of the States contributing those contingents.
I have also considered the option of contracting an armed private security
company to perform the functions of the guard unit as described above. I have taken
into consideration General Assembly resolution 67/254 of 12 April 2013, in which
the Assembly recommended that the United Nations proceed with the recruitment of
an armed private security company only as a last resort and when other alternatives,
including protection by the host country, other support from Member States or
internal United Nations system resources, are inadequate. I therefore recommend the
deployment of a guard unit to UNSMIL, using the military option outlined above,
rather than contracting an armed private security company.
I would be grateful if you could confirm that these arrangements are
acceptable to the Security Council. If so, it would then be my intention to proceed
with the establishment and deployment of the guard unit.
In keeping with existing practice, I would, in due course, notify the Security
Council of the concurrence of the troop-contributing country or countries whose
units would be deployed to Tripoli.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/2

13-58558
