General Assembly-Eighteenth SeHion

30

practical kno:wledge ga~ned by countries experienced in
planning their economic development,
Recognizing that long-term _economic. projec~ions
have a definite role to play in national and international
planning for economic development,
.
Realizing the close relationship betw~en nat10?al
· plans and international trade, particularly in connex10n
with the forthcoming United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, as reflected in ite?1 I.3.. of the
provisional agenda of the ~onfer~nce e~titled International trade and its relations with national development planning, policies and institutions",
1. Endorses the recommendations of the Economic
and Social Council concerning further work in the field
of planning for economic development, contained in
Council resolution 979 (XXXVI);
2 Welcomes the establishment of economic developme~t and planning institutes in the respective regional
economic commissions ;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the work programme of the Economic Projections and Programming
Centre;
4. Invites ,the regional economic commissions and
the Economic Projections and Programming Centre to
intensify their co-operation with and assistance to the
regional planning ins~itutes, a_nd to help i~ the l?rom~tion of exchange of information on experience in this
field among regional economic commissions _and. other
United Nations bodies concerned and the d1ffus10n of
this information by all appropriate means, including the
organization of symposia and seminars ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To further the assistance rendered to the
regional planning institutes by making use of the
knowledge gained by countries experienced in planning
their economic development, applied to the specific
conditions and needs of each developing country;
( b) To intensify the activities already i1:itiated on
projections of world economic trends relating to the
expansion of world trade and the acceleration of
economic growth in the world economy;
6. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
group of experts entitled Planning for Economic Development ;10
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the regional
economic commissions to include in further studies on
this subject detailed analyses by sectors;
B. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
include the report of the group of experts in the documentation for the third session of the Preparatory
Committee of the Conference and for the Conference
itself.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1940 (XVIll). Activities in the field of industrial
development
The General Assembiy,
Recalling its resolution 1712 (XVI) of 19 December
1961, as well as Economic and Social Council resolutions 873 (XXXIII) of 10 April 1962 and 969
(XXXVI) of 25 July 1963,
10 United

Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.3.

Mindful of the aim expressed in the Pream~le of
the Charter of the United Nations to employ mte~national machinery for the promotion of the economic
and social advancement of all peoples, and of the p~ovisions of Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter, which
place upon the Organization. t~e responsibility for promoting higher standards of hving: full employment and
conditions of economic and social progress and development,
Recognizing that a dynamic i?dustrial sector. is of
strategic importance in diversifying the economies of.
developing countries generally, in r_aising t~e per caput
income of their populations and m assurmg a more
balanced economic and social structure,
Considering the priorities which are being given to
industrial development in the national economic plans
of developing countries,
Bearing in mind that the developing countries need
the greatest possible international assist~nce and c?operation in the solution of technical, financial, ec~no"'.1c,
commercial and social problems connected with industrial development,
Convinced of the need to expand the means of providinoadvice , information and assistance
through
the
0
•
•
•
United Nations system to the developmg countries m
the planning and execution of their industrial development,
Having considered the report of the Advisory Committee of Experts on the Industrial Development
Activities of the United Nations System, 11 established
under Council resolution 873 (XXXIII), and all other
relevant documentation,
1. Endorses the view of the Advisory Committee
of Experts on the Industrial Development Activities
of the United Nations System that the present institutional framework of United Nations activities in the
field of industrial development is not satisfactory and
tha.t existing resources are not adequate;
2. Declares that there is a need to carry out changes
in the existing United Nations machinery so as to
provide an organization capable of dealing with the
problems of the developing countries, in order to
intensify, concentrate and expedite United Nations
efforts for industrial development ;
3. Recommends the Economic and Social Council at
its resumed thirty-sixth session to instruct the Committee for Industrial Development to consider, in the
light of the report of the Advisory Committee of Experts and of the views expressed at ,the eighteenth
session of the General Assembly, the establishment of
such an organization for industrial development, including its structure and functions, having due regard
both to the close relationship between industrial development and the utilization of natural resources and to
the advisability of close co-operation between this
organization on the one hand, and the regional economic commissions, the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency on the other
hand, and to submit its report to the Council at its
thirty-seventh session and to the Assembly at its nineteenth session, for a final decision ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
working paper on the subject referred to in paragraph
2 above for submission to the Committee for Industrial
Developmei:it at its fo~rth session ;
11 Official Records of the Economic and Social CoWtcil,
Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No.14 (E/3781), annex VIII.

Re11olutions adopted on th., reports uf the Second wmmittee

--------~---------

5. Requests the Secretary-General, without prejudice to the need for organizational changes, to initiate
consultation and studies with States Members of the
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies,
with the specialized agencies, the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the regional economic commissions and
the Committee for Industrial Development, on the
advisability of holding, not later than 1966, an international symposium, preceded, as appropriate, by regional and sub-regional symposia, relating to the
problems of industrialization of developing countries,
and to report to the Economic and Social Council at its
thirty-seventh session and to the General Assembly at
its nineteenth session.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1941 (XVIII). Decentralization of the economic
and social activities of the United Nations
and strengthening of the regional economic
commissions and the United Nations Office
in Beirut

The General Assembly
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
decentralization of the economic and social activities
of the United Nations and strengthening of the regional
economic commissions, 12 and his first report on the
meeting with the executive secretaries of those commissions13 indicating the steps that have been taken
and his intention of further implementing the policy of
decentralization;
2. Welcomes in particular:
(a) The decision of the Secretary-General that the
executive secretaries will participate actively in the
programming of technical co-operation for the biennium
1965-1966;
( b) The growing number of regional advisers in the
regional secretariats, which enhances the capacity and
the expertise necessary for efficient advisory services
to the Governments at their request;
3. ~~, elcomes the report of ,the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Q'.Iestions to the
General Assembly at its eighteenth session on the
subject,1~ and the very constructive comments and
recommendations contained therein pertaining both to
the concept and to the process of implementing the
policy of decentralization;
4. Endorses the views and recommendations of the
Economic and Social Council set forth in its resolution
955 (XXXVI) of 5 July 1963, particularly paragraph
5 thereof relating to the participation of the regional
secretariats in the preparation for the forthcoming
. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
and paragraph 3 regarding the United Nations Office
in Beirut, and recommends to the Secretary-General
the establishment of a technical assistance co-ordination
unit in the United Nations Office in Beirut;
5. Reaffirms its conviction that all regional economic
commissions, as the principal United Nations bodies in
the economic and social field in the various regions,
12 lbid., Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 12,
document E/3786.
18 /bid., document E/3798.
a Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 12, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39 and 76,
document A/5584.

31

as well as the United Nations Office in Beirut, have a
special and increasing role to play with regard to the
Expanded Programme and the regular programme of
technical assistance as well as the projects of the Special
Fund, in full co-operation with the resident representatives of the Technical Assistance Board and the
directors of Special Fund programmes wherever
necessary;
6. Reaffirms also that its resolutions 1518 (XV) of
15 December 1960, 1709 (XVI) of 19 December 1%1
and 1823 (XVII) of 18 December 1%2 concerning
decentralization of the economic and social activities
of the United Nations and strengthening of the regional
economic commissions apply to all the existing regional
economic commissions, in so far as they affect Member
States;
7. Endorses the view ,that the regional secretariats
should continue, as appropriate, to increase their contribution to the United Nations technical assistance
programmes, with respect not only to the formulation
of projects but also to their execution and evaluation,
and to undertake some financial and administrative
responsibilities related thereto;
8. Looks forward to the forthcoming study by the
Administrative Management Service concerning the
utilization of staff in the economic and social fields;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to accelerate the
continuing implementation of the policy of decentralization and strengthening of the regional economic commissions set out in General Assembly resolutions 1709
(XVI) and 1823 (XVII) and to submit, as part of
his activities · during the International Co-operation
Year and within the framework of the United Nations
Development Decade, a comprehensive report on this
question for consideration by the Economic and Social
Council at its 1%5 summer session and by the General
Assembly at its twentieth session;
10. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to assess, in the light
of the Secretary-General's report referred to in paragraph 9 above and the study of the Administrative
Management Service, the results of decentralization in
terms of its fundamental objectives as defined in
General Assembly resolutions 1709 (XVI) and 1823
(XVII) and Economic and Social Council resolutions
823 (XXXII) and 955 (XXXVI), and to submit its
report to the Assembly at its twentieth session.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1942 (XVIII). Question of a declaration on international economic co-operation

The General Assembly,
Attaching particular importance to the need for a
declaration on international economic co-operation as
a means of promoting sound, stable and fair economic
relations between all States and of stimulating the
efforts aimed at the economic and social progress of
all peoples of the world,
Taking note of the progress made by the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
ad hoe Working Group established under Council resolution 875 (XXXIII) of 13 and 18 April 1962 in the
elaboration of a draft declaration on the principles of
international economic co-operation,
