S/PV.7329

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7329th meeting

Tuesday, 9 December 2014, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cherif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 28 October 2014 from the Panel of Experts on the Central African
Republic established pursuant to Security Council resolution 2127 (2013)
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/762)
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2014/857)
Letter dated 5 December 2014 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2014/870)

14-68006 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1468006*

S/PV.7329

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 28 October 2014 from the Panel
of Experts on the Central African Republic
established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2127 (2013) addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2014/762)
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2014/857)
Letter dated 5 December 2014 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2014/870)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé Ladsous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/857, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic. I also wish to draw the attention
of Council members to document S/2014/870, which
contains a letter dated 5 December 2014 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, as well as to document S/2014/762,
which contains a letter dated 28 October 2014 from
the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
2127 (2013) addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Hervé Ladsous and Her Excellency
Ms. Raimonda Murmokaitė, Permanent Representative
of Lithuania, in her capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to bring the

2/6

09/12/2014

Security Council up to date on recent developments in
the Central African Republic following the issuance on
1 December of the report of the Secretary-General.
Although the situation in the Central African
Republic remains volatile — members will recall
the episodes of violence that took place in Bangui in
October — we note with satisfaction that the political
process is once again moving forward thanks to the
notable efforts of the mediator for the Central African
Republic, President Sassou Nguesso. An agreement
has been reached among stakeholders in the country,
the region and international partners to request the
mediator to extend the transition period by six months,
until August 2015.
In that context, preparations are well under way
for the Bangui forum on national reconciliation, to be
held early next year. In order to lay the groundwork
for this important national dialogue, a process of
local consultations coordinated by the Ministry of
Reconciliation has been initiated with the support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). From 29 November to 3 December,
transitional Government ministers representing the
Central African Republic’s 16 prefectures met with
local Government officials and community leaders as
a first step towards engagement in the Bangui forum
and the country’s longer-term reconciliation process.
Further consultations at the prefecture level are also
planned, the results of which will feed into the work of
a preparatory committee announced by the transitional
authorities that will oversee preparations for the forum.
As the outline of the Bangui forum begins to take
shape, there is incontestably a growing consensus on
the need to address the full range of issues that lie at
the heart of the crisis in the Central African Republic,
including the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of armed groups and preparations for
security-sector reform, including the reconstitution of
the Forces armées centrafricaines, as well as issues
relating to political and economic governance and the
fight against impunity, which is a vital issue. Let us
not forget the situation of the approximately 1 million
refugees and internally displaced persons, many of
whom want to return to their homes.
In addition, the Bangui forum, which international
partners have been requested to support, should aim to
be the starting point for a longer-term reconciliation

14-68006

09/12/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

process at all levels of society, with mechanisms put in
place to monitor the implementation of the forum’s key
recommendations.
Various leaders of the increasingly fragmented
ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka have held their general
assembly meetings and publicly expressed their support
for the national dialogue process, which will include
participation in the Bangui forum. On 29 November,
the national coordinator of the anti-Balaka, Patrice
Edouard Ngaissona, announced that his group would
transform into a political party named the Central
African Party for Unity and Development.
Let us be clear: a successful and timely Bangui
forum will be crucial in order to prepare the ground
for the planned constitutional referendum as well as the
legislative and presidential elections. Preparations for
the elections had been proceeding quite slowly until
agreement was reached to conduct the polls by August
2015. This is clearly an extremely tight time frame for
the elections. MINUSCA and its main United Nations
electoral partner, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), are reinforcing their support
capacities for the elections, with a particular focus on
the mobilization of additional logistical assets and the
swift recruitment of electoral staff. A UNDP project
document on the issue has also been agreed. However,
only three partners, namely the European Union,
France and UNDP, have pledged funds in support of
the electoral process.
For their part, the transitional authorities have
released a tranche of funds in the amount of 1 billion
CFA francs — approximately $2 million — for the
elections. The National Electoral Authority, with
support from MINUSCA, is finalizing the dispatch
of several missions to the region to appoint elections
officers in each of the districts. The National Electoral
Authority also conducted a mission to Cameroon to
assess voter-registration modalities for refugees there.
Further missions in the subregion are also planned for
the same purpose.
Despite all of these positive steps, we should not
forget that the holding of elections by August 2015
will be extremely challenging. The success of the
process will hinge on a significantly strengthened
commitment on the part of the Central African
Republic authorities and, I would reiterate, also require
the political, operational and financial support of the
international community. There is a critical need for
the national authorities to adopt the revised electoral

S/PV.7329

law and to agree on outstanding issues, including on
the sequencing of elections and the voter registration
methodology. The national electoral authorities must
launch a transparent voter registration process that
enables the full participation of returning and displaced
populations without delay.
Increased support of the international community
will also need to be strengthened in order to avoid
further delays. A conducive security environment will
also be required and necessitate progress in the political
process and the strongest possible resolve of all actors
to ensure the peaceful conduct of the electoral process
and a successful conclusion of the Transition.
In January 2015, the Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and Field Support will review, with
MINUSCA and in consultation with Operation
Sangaris and the European Union Force in the Central
African Republic (EUFOR), the military and police
concepts of operations and make recommendations
regarding adjustments that may be required to the
agreed troop and police levels and their deployment to
achieve mandated tasks, in particular in the run-up to
the elections. We remain fully committed to ensuring a
phased approached in MINUSCA’s deployment.
The security situation in the Central African
Republic remains volatile, as I have said, and the
presence of the State weak at best, and often essentially
absent. Civilians remain under constant threat and
impunity is still rampant. Following the violence
in October in Bangui, driven by the anti-Balaka and
during which civilians as well as MINUSCA, Operation
Sangaris and EUFOR personnel were actively targeted,
some of the ex-Séléka elements who had been regrouped
in three camps in Bangui since December 2013
threatened to explode a significant arms cache in one
of the camps unless they were provided with substantial
assistance. Approximately 900 ex-Séléka elements
have since been relocated from these camps to their
communities of origin. There are also ongoing efforts
with the transitional authorities and the support of the
international community to complete the relocation of
the remaining camp residents and remove the arms and
munitions from the site.
On 24 November, an incident also took place inside
the Bangui central prison when inmates seized weapons
and shot and threw hand grenades at United Nations
peacekeepers who were on guard duty outside the
prison. Three United Nations soldiers and one United
Nations police officer were injured in the incident. It

14-680063/6

S/PV.7329

The situation in the Central African Republic

must be said that all these serious security incidents in
the capital could have significantly escalated without
the robust efforts by MINUSCA, supported by Sangaris
and EUFOR, to restore order.
Our national counterparts are also taking
measures. On 3 December, MINUSCA, in cooperation
with Sangaris and EUFOR, supported by the Chief of
Staff of the Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA),
took action to verify and clarify the position of selected
FACA elements who will constitute the first company of
a static protection battalion to be put in place after the
Bangui forum. Each of the troops signed a declaration
of honour, a commitment of good service, and a pledge
to respect human rights and humanitarian law. I believe
that this is a symbolic and important step towards the
reoperationalization of FACA pending future efforts to
complete security sector reform.
Outside Bangui, there have also been violent
clashes involving factions of the ex-Séléka and
anti-Balaka, as well as other armed groups. On
24 November, 15 nationals of Cameroon and one
Polish priest held hostage by the Front démocratique du
peuple centrafricain (FDPC) were released following
negotiations in Cameroon that resulted in the freeing of
FDPC leader Abdoulaye Miskine from detention there.
The remaining 10 Central African hostages still held by
the FDPC were liberated on 29 November.
Unfortunately, in the eastern and central parts of
the country, intercommunity violence, confrontations
between armed groups and violent attacks on the civilian
population continue. While the Lord’s Resistance
Army remains a threat in the south-east of the country,
recently the Zemio area in Haut-Mbomou province
was a theatre of ethnic confrontations in which at least
5 people were killed and 13 wounded. In response,
MINUSCA expedited the deployment of the first troops
of a MINUSCA contingent assigned to the area, and
supported the creation of a reconciliation committee
composed of leaders from opposing communities.
Similarly, in the city of Bambari in Ouaka province,
bloody clashes took place once again between different
faiths. Several people were killed and houses burned
down over the past two weeks. On 5 December, three
United Nations peacekeepers were wounded in an
attack by anti-Balaka elements following the arrest
by MINUSCA of their local leader, John “Américain”.
We do not know his real name. In the west, some
communities at risk remain confined to areas where,

4/6

09/12/2014

it must be said, living conditions remain extremely
precarious.
For MINUSCA a critical priority in that context
clearly remains the protection of civilians; in that
regard, securing the full deployment of MINUSCA’s
troop and police contingents remains a top priority.
This month, MINUSCA will achieve 80 per cent of its
full troop deployment, and in January 2015, 9 out of the
10 of the formed police units will be deployed, with the
tenth to arrive very soon thereafter. In the framework
of MINUSCA’s mandate of urgent temporary measures
agreed by the Government of the Central African
Republic, 217 people have been arrested by MINUSCA
and handed over to the local judicial authorities.
On 24 November near Bouar, MINUSCA arrested
the well-known anti-Balaka leader “Chocolat” — his
real name, too, is unknown to us — who was transferred
to Bangui. “Chocolat” is accused of a series of very
serious human rights violations. We will need to
follow up on his case. MINUSCA has also continued
to broaden and improve its capacity to monitor and
address threats to civilians and human rights violations
through enhanced training for MINUSCA troops and
the establishment of field offices outside Bangui. In
areas where there is no MINUSCA presence, close
coordination and communication with humanitarian
agencies has resulted in the dispatch of integrated
MINUSCA and United Nations agency teams to
threatened areas, for instance to Zemio and Yaloke.
It must be said that the Central African Republic
is entering a critical phase at a time when international
attention to the crisis is starting to wane. Still, the
risks remain high that additional disruptions to the
political process and to the security situation could put
the transitional process in jeopardy. The transitional
authorities, for their part, have reaffirmed their
commitment to ensuring that the Central African
Republic’s transition is managed in an inclusive and
consensual manner. The Head of State of the Transition
herself has stated repeatedly her intention not to run
for the elections, in accordance with the provisions of
the Constitutional Charter for the Transition. However,
it must be clear that any further delays beyond August
2015 could undermine the transition itself. It is therefore
very important for the Central African authorities
to stay the course and for the country’s regional and
international partners to remain engaged in a sustained
and coordinated manner in order to provide the Central
African Republic with the assistance necessary to

14-68006

09/12/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of its actions
and decisions.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Murmokaitė.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I have the honour to
brief the members of the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the
Central African Republic. In my statement I intend
to highlight the work of the Committee and the Panel
of Experts since my last briefing in the Chamber on
11 July (see S/PV.7215).
On 22 July, following the Committee’s consideration
of the Panel’s interim report (see S/2014/452) and
recommendations, the Chair sent letters to the Permanent
Representatives to the United Nations of Cameroon,
Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the Sudan,
as well as INTERPOL, the Economic Community of
Central African States and the African Union, drawing
attention to the Panel’s recommendation for the
enhancement of information-sharing and joint action
to investigate and combat regional criminal networks
involved in the illegal exploitation and trade in natural
resources, including wildlife and wildlife products.
On 22 July, the Committee also issued a press release
highlighting that recommendation.
During the Committee’s informal consultations
on 1 August, the Panel coordinator provided further
information concerning individuals and entities
that, in the Panel’s view, met the designation criteria
in accordance with paragraph 41 of resolution 2134
(2014), namely, five individuals and two entities. The
Panel recommended that the Committee might wish to
postpone its consideration of the possible designation of
one individual and two entities until after 1 September.
On 19 September, the Panel conveyed the view that
the one individual and two entities met the designation
criteria. On 20 October, the Panel presented eight
additional statements of case for seven individuals and
one entity that in its view met the designation criteria,
as well as several updates to the sanctions list. In that
connection, I would like to reiterate my willingness to
convene informal consultations of the Committee or any
other meetings that would facilitate the Committee’s
consideration of future designations.

S/PV.7329

On 24 October, the Committee met with the
Panel of Experts to consider its final report (see
S/2014/762) and recommendations. According to the
report, armed groups remain in control of, or still
exert influence over, almost all inhabited areas of the
Central African Republic despite the signing of the
cessation of hostilities agreement in July 2014. The
increasing fragmentation of the main armed groups
active in the country also poses significant challenges
to the stabilization of the political landscape, while the
competition among political representatives of armed
groups for ministerial positions, as well as among
military commanders for control of resources, accounts
for the recent infighting among the key armed groups
of the country. In that context, the Panel noted little
progress in terms of voluntary or forced disarmament
since March 2014.
Providing an update to the final report since its
submission to the Committee, on 17 September, the
Panel mentioned that, as of 20 October, it had compiled
reports indicating that a total number of 3,232 civilians
had been killed since the imposition of the arms
embargo on 5 December 2013, including the killings
of 23 humanitarian aid workers. On 14 November, in
connection with the Committee’s consideration of the
final report and recommendations, the Chair sent letters
to the Permanent Missions of Belgium, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, India, Israel, Lebanon, the Republic of the
Congo, Senegal, the Sudan and the United Arab Emirates
in connection with particular recommendations.
Letters from the Chair were also sent to the Chair of the
Kimberly Process, the President of the World Diamond
Council and the Executive Secretary of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. In the United
Nations system, the Chair transmitted the letters to the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
On 14 November, a Security Council press release
(SC/11647) was also published, in English and French,
in connection with the Panel’s recommendation that the
Committee urge exporters,importers, processors and
consumers of Central African gold to mitigate the risk of
further exacerbating the conflict in the Central African

14-680065/6

S/PV.7329

The situation in the Central African Republic

Republic by following due diligence guidance as it is
being implemented through the Regional Certification
Mechanism of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. There was no consensus in the
Committee to take similar action on a recommendation
by the Panel concerning diamonds, nor was consensus
reached on a recommendation that a Committee request
the neighbouring States to convey, on a confidential
and annual basis, complete statistics on the import and
export of natural resources.
On 2 December, following the receipt of information
from the Panel of Experts concerning the reported
death, on 15 November, of one of the three sanctioned
individuals, Mr. Levi Yakété, the Committee agreed
to update the sanctions list to reflect the reported
death and to contact the designating States for official
confirmation and, in that connection, sent letters to the
concerned States seeking additional information.
On 3 December, the Committee convened its
second formal meeting with the Permanent Missions
to the United Nations of the Central African Republic
and its neighbouring States, which were invited to
provide their views on the final report of the Panel of
Experts. During the discussion, the Chair welcomed
the views of Committee member Chad, as well as
the representatives of the Central African Republic,
Cameroon, the Republic of the Congo and South
Sudan. In their remarks, participating Member States
highlighted a number of challenges in implementing
the sanctions measures, such as porous borders and the
absence of border monitoring. One of the invited States
expressed concerns with the Panel’s recommendation
that the Committee request neighbouring States to
convey, on a confidential and annual basis, complete
statistics on the import and export of natural resources.
I would now like to update the Council on the
implementation reports the Committee has received
from Member States to date. To date, the Committee
has received reports from 31 Member States, as well as
five addendums from three States. Only two African
States have submitted implementation reports, with
none from the immediate region. All the reports
received have been posted on the Committee’s website.
Of the 15 Committee members, 11 have submitted
reports to date. I have encouraged the members to lead
by example and to submit their implementation reports

6/6

09/12/2014

in a timely manner. Along those lines, I would also like
to encourage those recipients of the Chair’s letters, in
connection with the Panel’s interim and final reports,
to kindly provide the Committee with timely responses.
I intend to continue my outreach activities to the
Central African Republic and its neighbours, some of
which highlighted during the 3 December meeting the
need for implementation assistance, as well as further
clarification concerning the exemption procedures.
In that regard, the Chair plans to invite the regional
States and the Secretariat to the third informal informal
meeting at the Permanent Mission of Lithuania during
the second half of December to review the exemptions
procedures and to discuss ways in which States may
possibly seek donor assistance to help them implement
the sanctions regime.
It is also my intention to visit the Central African
Republic early next year with a view to engaging the
transitional authorities, MINUSCA, civil society,
religious leaders and others to echo the message that
resonated in the Committee meeting on 3 December,
namely, that a sanctions regime should be seen not
as a punitive measure but as a collaborative tool of
engagement. As one delegation best phrased it, this
engagement is an expression of the Committee’s
solidarity with the Central African Republic, through
which the authorities in Bangui can strengthen State
authority and target spoilers. I intend to inform
members of the Committee of the details of my planned
visit in due course.
In concluding, I would like to assure Council
members that as Chair of the Committee I will do
my utmost to ensure that the Committee makes a
significant contribution to the efforts of the Council,
MINUSCA and other international partners to bring
an end to the ongoing violence that threatens the
Central African Republic and to set the country on a
path to reconciliation, durable peace and sustainable
development.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Murmokaitė for her briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

14-68006
