RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Page

714 (VIII). Question of impartial investigation of charges ?£ use by United
Nations forces of bacterial warfare (3 November 1953) (item 24) ..... , ..
715 (VIII). Regulation, limitation and balanced reductiot?- ~f all armed forces
and all armaments: report of the Disarmament Commission (28 November
1953) (item 23) ................. , . , , . , •. • • • •,. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • · • · · ·
716 (VIII). The Korean question (8 December 1953) .(item 18 (~)) ... ·:., •:
717 (VIII). Complaint by the Union of Burma regarding aggress10~ against 1t
by the Government of the Republic of China (8 December 1953) (item 25) ..

3
3

4
4

the whole programme to be carried out under effective
international control and in such a way that no State
would have cause to fear that its security was endangered,
Believing that the continued development of weapons
of mass destruction such as atomic and hydrogen
bombs has given additional urgency to efforts to bring
about effectively controlled disarmament throughout
the world, as the existence of civilization itself may
be at stake,
Mindful that progress in the settlement of existing
international disputes and the resulting re-establishment
of confidence are vital to the attainment of peace and
disarmament and that efforts to reach agreement on
a comprehensive and co-ordinated disarmament programme with adequate safeguards should be made concurrently with progress in the settlement of international disputes,
Believing that progress in either field would contribute to progress in the other,
Realizing that competition in the development of
armaments and armed forces beyond what is necessary
for the individual or collective security of Member
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations is not only economically unsound but is in
itself a grave danger to peace,
Conscious of the continuing desire of all nations, by
lightening the burden of armaments, to release more
of the world's human and economic resources for
peace,
Having received the third report 2 of the Disarmament Commission of 20 August 1953, submitted in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 704
(VII) of 8 April 1953,
Endorsing the Commission's hope that recent international events will create a more propitious atmosphere
for reconsideration of the disarmament question, the
capital importance of which, in conjunction with other
questions affecting the maintenance of peace, is recognized by all,

714 (VIII). Question of impartial investigation
of charges of use by United Nations forces of
bacterial warfare

The General, Assembly
1. Refers to the Disarmament Commission the
draft resolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics contained in document A/C.l/L.67 ~ for such
consideration as deemed appropriate under its plan of
work and pursuant to the terms of reference of that
Commission as set forth in General Assembly resolutions 502 (VI) of 11 January 1952 and 704 (VII) of
8 April 1953;
2. Decides also to transmit to the Disarmament
Commission for its information the records of the
meetings of the First Committee at which this item
was discussed.
456th plenary meeting,
3 November 1953.
715 (VIII). Regulation, limitation and balanced
reduction of all armed forces and all armaments: report of the Disarmament Commission

The General, Assembly,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations
for considering the problem of disarmament and affirming the need of providing for:
(a) The regulation, limitation and balanced reduction of all armed forces and all armaments,
( b) The elimination and prohibition of atomic, hydrogen and other types of weapons of mass destruction,
( c) The effective international control of atomic
energy to ensure the prohibition of atomic weapons
and the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes
only,
1 The

USSR draft resolution reads as follows :
"The General Assembly
"Calls upon all States which have not acceded to or ratified
the Geneva Protocol of 17 June 1925 for the prohibition of
the use of bacterial weapons to accede to the Protocol or
ratify it."

2
See Official Records of the Disarmament Commission, 1953,
Supplement for July, August and September 1953, document
DC/32.

3

4

General Assembly-Eighth Session

1. Recognizes the general wish and affirms its
earnest desire to reach agreement as early as possible
on a comprehensive and co-ordinated plan, under international control, for the regulation, limitation and
reduction of all armed forces and all armaments, for
the elimination and prohibition of atomic, hydrogen,
bacterial, chemical and all such other weapons of war
and mass destruction, and for the attainment of these
ends through effective measures ;
2. Recognizes that, whatever the weapons used, aggression is contrary to the conscience and honour uf
the peoples and incompatible with membership in the
United Nations and is the gravest of all crimes against
peace and security throughout the world;
3. Takes note of the third report of the Disarmament Commission ;
4. Requests the Commission to continue its efforts
to reach agreement on the problems with which it is
concerned, taking into consideration proposals made
at the eighth session of the General Assembly, and to
report again to the General Assembly and to the Security Council not later than 1 September 1954;
5. Calls on all Member States, and particularly the
major Powers, to intensify their efforts to assist the
Disarmament Commission in its tasks and to submit
to the Commission any proposals which they have
to make in the field of disarmament ;
6. Suggests that the Disarmament Commission
study the desirability of establishing a sub-committee
consisting of representatives of the Powers principally
involved, which should seek in private an acceptable
solution and report to the Disarmament Commission
as soon as possible, in order that the Commission may
study and report on such a solution to the General
Assembly and to the Security Council not later than
1 September 1954;
7. Further suggests to the Disarmament Commission, in order to facilitate the progress of its work, to
arrange for the sub-committee, when established, to
hold its private meetings as appropriate ir, the different
countries most concerned with the problem.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.

716 (VIIl).

The Korean question

The General Assembly
1. Resolves that the eighth session of the General
Assembly stand recessed;

2. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to reconvene the eighth session, with the concurrence
of the majority of Member States, if (a) in the President's opinion developments in respect of the Korean
question warrant such reconven;ng, or ( b) one or more
Member States make a request to the President for
such reconvening by reason of developments in respect
of the Korean question.
470th plenary meeting,
8 December 1953.

717 (VIII). Complaint by the Union of Burma
regarding aggression against it by the Govern•
ment of the Republic of China
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 8 dated 31 August 1953
of the Government of the Union of Burma on the situation relating to the presence of foreign forces in its
territory, and all other information on the subject laid
before the Assembly,
1. N ates that limited evacuation of personnel of
these foreign forces has begun as from 7 November
1953;
2. Expresses concern that few arms have been surrendered by them ;
3. Appreciates the efforts of the United States of
America and Thailand in striving for the evacuation of
these forces ;
4. Urges that efforts be continued on the part of
those concerned for the evacuation or internment of
these foreign forces and the surrender of all arms;
5. Reaffirms General Assembly resolution 707
(VII) of 23 April 1953, and in particular;
6. Urges upon all States to refrain from furnishing
any assistance to these forces which may enable them
to remain in the territory of the Union of Burma or
to continue their hostile acts against that country ;
7. Invites the governments concerned to inform the
General Assembly of any action that they have taken
to implement the present resolution;
8. Requests the Government of the Union of Burma
to report on the situation to the General Assembly as
appropriate.
470th plenary meeting,
8 December 1953.
3

See document A/2468.
