1521st

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Tuesday, 23 May 1967,
at 10.30 a.m.

Official Records
FIFTH SPECIAL SESSION

6. If the United Nations is to be made a more
effective instrument for the maintenance of peace,
continuous and manifold efforts on the part of States
will be required. We must, above all, strive to prevent
violations of the Charter, stop interference in the
domestic affairs of States and peoples, and condemn
the imperialist policy of positions of strength, a policy
which, for the sake of the selfish interests of a group
of imperialist Powers, jeopardizes world peace and
security and which could have the direct consequences
for all mankind.

CONTENTS

Agenda item 8:
Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peace-keeping operations in all their
aspects (concluded)
Report of the Special Political Committee...

NEW YORK

Page

1

President: M r . A b d u l R a h m a n P A Z H W A K
(Afghanistan).

7. In this connexion, we feel that a step of major
importance was taken by the Soviet Union when it
proposed the adoption of the Declaration on the
Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs
of States and the Protection of Their Independence
and Sovereignty, and also the initiative taken by
Czechoslovakia in raising the question of prohibition
of the use of force in international relations and
the right of peoples to self-determination.1/ There
can be no doubt but that these actions have strengthened
the United Nations as an organization for the mainten­
ance of international peace and security.

AGENDA ITEM 8
Comprehensive review of the whole question of peace­
keeping operations in all their aspects (concluded)

REPORT OF THE SPECIAL POLITICAL
COMMITTEE U
1. Mr. SHEVCHENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): The Special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations has discussed
in detail the question of United Nations operations for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

8. In order to make the United Nations more effective
we must also make fuller use of the possiblities
offered by the Charter for the taking of collective
measures to maintain international peace and security.

2. We should like to note with satisfaction that
most of the States represented on the Committee
exhibited a high sense of responsibility for the fate
of the United Nations and refused to follow those
who sought to lure both the Committee and the United
Nations as a whole into the dangerous enterprise of
taking decisions contrary to the United Nations Charter
and the Special Committee's terms of reference.

9. The Charter, besides defining the fundamental
purposes and principles of the United Nations, provides
detailed regulations for the methods and means to be
used in attaining them, above all as regards questions
relating to the maintenance of peace. It states unequivo­
cally that primary responsibility for the maintenance
of peace has been conferred on the Security Council.

3. The Ukrainian delegation deems it necessary to
point out that in so important a matter as the achieve­
ment of mutual understanding among Member States
on the question of ensuring international peace and
security there should be no undue haste; still less
should there be any attempts to force through proposals
which contravene the Charter.

10. The Security Council is empowered to decide
all questions relating to action to be taken for the
maintenance of peace, including the use of armed
force. These extraordinary powers include the right
to form and use armed forces, and to determine
their duties, numbers command, duration of the opera­
tions, and ways and means of financing.

4. Experience has shown that any impairment in such
mutual understanding, based on the provisions of the
Charter, has led only to a heightening of international
tension and has hurt the cause of peace and of the
United Nations itself, as an organization in which
States are to co-operate, on an equal footing, in
promoting peace and the welfare of people everywhere.

11. In brief, the Charter contains all the provisions
necessary to enable the United Nations, in case of
need, to take effective measures for the maintenance
of peace, including the use of armed force. What we
have to do is to make proper use of the possibilities
open to us of creating and organizing an armed
force—naturally, in strict compliance with the Charter.

5. This is why my delegation supports the Special
Committee's draft resolution [A/6654, para. 153],
which, as we all know, calls for further study of
the whole question of peace-keeping operations,
although we have some reservations on a number of
details.

12. Of great importance for a fuller utilization of the
possibilities inherent in the Charter are the Soviet
Union's proposals, set forth in its Government's

y Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first Session,
Annexes, agenda item 33, document A/6603.

2J Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second Year.
Supplement for April-June 1967, document S/7852.

1

A/PV.1521

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

2

memorandum, 11 which are aimed at activating both
the Security Council itself and its Military Staff
Committee, with due regard to certain rights conferred
by the Charter on the General Assembly.
13. We do not wish in any way—and our position on
this matter is known to all—to minimize the functions
and prerogatives of the General Assembly as they are
set forth in the Charter.
14. To enable the Security Council to have at its
disposal contingents of armed forces and, if the need
should arise, to use them swiftly and to good effect,
we must above all strive for the implementation of
Articles 43 and 45 of the Charter, i.e. the conclusion
in the near future of agreements whereby States
would make available to the Security Council armed
forces and other assistance and facilities.
15. Such agreements might also make it incumbent
upon the signatory States to maintain in a condition
of immediate readiness certain contingents of their
national armed forces, which could be made available
to the Council.
16. Furthermore, consideration should be given to
the question of activating the Military Staff Committee,
and inviting a large number of States to participate
in its work.
17. In order to expedite the conclusion of agreements
on making contingents of armed forces available to
the Council, the Military Staff Committee could even
now proceed to prepare a standard model for such
agreements, for the Security Council's approval.
18. As to the financing of peace-keeping operations,
the Security Council, in the exercise of its powers,
could in each particular case select the most appro­
priate methods of financing, which could include,
inter alia, charging the costs to the aggressor State,
apportionment of the costs among the Members of
the United Nations, voluntary contributions, payment
of the costs by the countries directly concerned, or
a combination of any of these methods.
19. This is the course that we should take if we are
to succeed in increasing the capability of the United
Nations to discharge its functions with regard to
the maintenance of peace. It calls for the implementa­
tion of certain entirely unambiguous provisions of the
Charter, and proposals to this effect should there­
fore command the support of all those who are
really desirous of carrying out the Charter's prescrip­
tions concerning effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and
for the suppression of acts of aggression.
20. However, the discussion of the question of peace­
keeping operations indicates that certain States prefer
to follow another course. On the pretext of making
the United Nations better able to maintain the peace,
they are virtually mounting an attack on those Charter
provisions which define the measures that must be
taken on behalf of the United Nations in order to
maintain or restore peace, and especially measures
relating to the use of armed force. The proposals
advanced in this connexion are tantamount to a revi­
sion of those Charter provisions under which only
Jl/ Ibid., document S/7841.

the Security Council may take decisions on action
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
21. The idea of trying to find a substitute for the
Security Council is not really new. Throughout the
entire history of the United Nations, the representa­
tives of the United States of America and certain
other imperialist Powers, desirous of using the United
Nations as a tool of their aggressive policy, have
been attempting to destroy the very cornerstones of
the Charter—those provisions of it which define the
functions and powers of the Security Council with
regard to the maintenance of peace. And now again,
being engaged in an aggressive war against the
Viet-Namese people, the United States is persistently
seeking ways to circumvent the Charter provisions
on the use of armed force on behalf of the United
Nations in order somehow to conceal under the
United Nations flag both this bloody conflict and
other Pentagon-planned assaults on fighters for na­
tional freedom and independence.
22. We should be failing in our duty if we did not
draw to the attention of all Members of the United
Nations the fact that in his statement the United
States representative has been guilty of arbitrary
interpretation of the Charter.
23. We, for our part, have always stood, and shall
stand in the future, for keeping firm the cornerstone
provisions of the Charter, that solid foundation of
the United Nations without which it could neither
exist nor act.
24. My delegation is deeply convinced that strict
compliance with those Charter provisions which
govern the use of force on behalf of the United
Nations is the only correct and, in the world as it
is today, the only possible solution to the problem
before us—that of making the United Nations a more
effective instrument for the maintenance of interna­
tional peace and security.
25. It is a grievous error to imagine that the
United Nations can succeed in maintaining the peace
if the fundamental principles of its Charter, defining
the legal international obligations of States, its
structure and its purposes and principles, are cir­
cumvented or violated outright.
26. The United Nations Charter is an agreed and
generally accepted treaty which alone offers a basis
for international co-operation within the United
Nations. To seek to destroy it means to seek to destroy
the United Nations itself, to shake its foundations,
to make it powerless in international affairs.
27. We are therefore deeply convinced that the ques­
tion of peace-keeping operations must be examined
in the light of the clear and precise provisions of the
Charter concerning the functions and prerogatives
of the Security Council, in a spirit of co-operation,
without undue haste or agitation, but rather with a
sense of full responsibility on the part of all Member
States, great and small, for the ultimate fate of the
United Nations. It is in that spirit that the special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, which has
been entrusted with a review of this important
problem, should proceed, and it is in that sense
that we understand the recommendation it has sub­
mitted.

1521st meeting — 23 May 1967
28. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, for its
part, will support any and all efforts to strengthen
the United Nations, and it urges all other States
which are sincerely desirous of strengthening the
United Nations and increasing its prestige and effecti­
veness, to do likewise.
29. Mr. SHAHI (Pakistan): At this late stage, the
Pakistan delegation will confine its statement to those
aspects of peace-keeping that have been the subject
of continuing study by the Special Committee. Those
aspects continue to demand consideration if progress
is to be made in enabling the United Nations to
respond promptly and effectively to situations which
pose imminent or potential threats to international
peace and security.
30. In our view, the meetings of the Special Com­
mittee during its recently concluded session brought
up many constructive ideas and suggestions to resolve
the differences which continue to persist, in relation
to the procedural as well as to the substantive
aspects of the problems of peace-keeping. The discus­
sions were marked by an earnest approach aimed at
preventing a paralysis of the Organization in the ful­
filment of its primary purpose, namely, to maintain
international peace and security. We should like to
pay tribute to the wisdom and patience with which
the Chairman of the Committee, Ambassador Cuevas
Cancino of Mexico, conducted the Committee's deli­
berations and steered it to the draft resolution which
is before us [A/6654, para. 153].
31. My delegation was greatly impressed with the
virtual unanimity of all members of the Special
Committee on the approach to the task before it.
It was generally stressed that controversial constitu­
tional issues inherent in the question of peace-keeping
should be avoided as far as possible and that future
efforts should be concentrated on the search for
practical, realistic and mutually acceptable solutions
that have so far eluded the Organization.
32. We share the view that the real problem before
us is not so much a constitutional as a political one.
The constitutional controversy is but the emanation of
the conflict of views between the permanent members
of the Security Council over what each of them regards
as its own vital political interest in the question of
peace-keeping, as well as the insistence of the over­
whelming majority of Member States of the United
Nations that they should have an effective role to
play in the decisions of the United Nations on the
establishment and financing of peace-keeping opera­
tions.
33. There can be no doubt in regard to peace-keeping
operations of the nature of enforcement actions, that
is the use of armed force in cases of threat to the
peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression,
undertaken in pursuance of the provisions of Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Here, the
responsibility of the Security Council is not only
primary, but also exclusive on all aspects of peace­
keeping, in regard not only to authorization, but also
to organization and financing.
34. If the Security Council fails to act under Chapter
VII of the Charter, no enforcement action can be
undertaken. No such action has so far been attempted

3

by the Security Council, nor does my delegation
foresee any practical possibility of its doing so in
the future unless the international situation undergoes
a revolutionary transformation.
35. It is in regard to peace-keeping operations
under Chapter VI of the Charter—namely, the pacific
settlement of disputes—that controversy has raged in
the United Nations during the last seventeen years.
The Security Council has in fact authorized peace­
keeping operations under Chapter VI in disputes or
situations which had or were likely to become a danger
to peace or security. No doubt, the responsibility
of the Security Council in this sphere is primary,
but is it exclusive, or does the General Assembly
have a residual responsibility?
36. The permanent members of the Security Council
hold opposing views on this question. A large number
of other Member States have taken up positions in
affirmation of the residual responsibility of the General
Assembly under the Charter of the United Nations.
37. In this context, it is pertinent to take note of
the fact that in the only case in which the General
Assembly decided to assert a residual authority and
to authorize a peace-keeping force to interpose itself
between combatants and perform duties in the nature
of surveillance of frontiers or truce lines, practical
difficulties of financing supervened which, in conjunc­
tion with the problem of financing a peace-keeping
operation authorized by the Security Council, plunged
the United Nations three years ago into the worst
constitutional and financial crisis in its history
and brought it to a virtual standstill. The Organization
was able to emerge from that crisis, thanks to the
efforts of the Asian and African Member States
and as a result of your initiative, Mr. President, by
an explicit agreement to shelve the constitutional
issues arising from the provisions of Article 19 of
the Charter. The consensus of 31 August 1965,
appealing for voluntary contributions, continues to be
the basis of our search for a solution of the financial
difficulties of the Organization resulting from the
peace-keeping operations in the Middle East and the
Congo.
38. This experience has been a chastening one.
It has taught us a lesson and we must draw the
necessary conclusions. Therefore, in the view of my
delegation, continued preoccupation with the task of
delimiting the respective competence of the Security
Council and the General Assembly in accordance with
the constitutional provisions of the Charter is not
likely to lead either to a consensus or to the provision
of necessary financial resources to raise and maintain
peace-keeping forces, when situations so require,
if some of the States which would otherwise be large
contributors refuse to pay.
39. There is no immediate prospect of overcoming
the constitutional differences on peace-keeping. Judi­
cial verdicts cannot in practice be enforced. Majority
votes are not the answer to the problem of financing.
Hence the wisdom of a pragmatic and realistic approach
on the basis of mutual accommodation of divergent
views and interests is self-evident.
40. In this context, my delegation has noted with
great interest the view expressed in the recent

4

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

session of the Special Committee that peace-keeping
measures have emerged as a new concept, different
from, but not incompatible with, the enforcement
measures contemplated in Chapter VII of the Charter.
41. The foundersoftheOrganizationwereundoubtedly
statesmen of wisdom and foresight, but they were not
omniscient; nor did they have the gift of divination
to foresee future events and to provide for the
contingent and unforeseen elements that influence the
march of history. The Charter was written when
the cold war had yet to come, making unanimity
among the permanent members of the Security Council,
on which alone the Council could act to maintain
international peace, a rare phenomenon and, con­
sequently, plunging the Security Council into deadlock
when the situation demanded commensurate action.
42. Little did the founders of the United Nations,
assembled in San Francisco in 1945, visualize the
historical phenomenon of decolonization and the emer­
gence into independence of new nations whose number
has almost tripled the membership of the Organiza­
tion. That the "third world" would have collective
interests and stakes of its own in world peace, not
always identical to those of the great Powers, and
would demand for itself a place and a role in the
scheme of things within the framework of the Organiza­
tion, was a development neither foreseen nor provided
for in the Charter of the United Nations. Consequently,
the Charter, based as it is on the imperatives and
hopes of 1945, does not reflect the realities and
expectations of today.
43. While Pakistan believes in and will always act
in scrupulous respect of the Charter and of all the
obligations flowing from it, we cannot regard it as
Holy Writ or immutable like the laws of the ancient
Medes and the Persians.
44. In saying this, let it not be understood that my
delegation is suggesting amendment of the Charter
to delimit more precisely the respective competence
of the Security Council and the General Assembly,
or to resolve the constitutional controversy by spelling
out new provisions on the concept of peace-keeping
operations other than those in the nature of enforce­
ment action. Nor do we seek, through constitutional
amendments, to rectify the imbalance in the distribu­
tion of power and responsibility in the Organization
so as to confer a greater degree of both on its
general membership. We are fully aware that the time
is not opportune for seeking adjustments in the
relationship of the principal organs of the United
Nations through amendment of the Charter.
45. What we do think to be both necessary and
opportune is to search, through continuing discussions
in the Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Opera­
tions, for a political compromise on the basis of
consensus without prejudice to the positions of princi­
ple of the great Powers.
46. In this context, I may refer to the suggestion
made by the representative of Ethiopia in the Special
Committee regarding the possibility of evolving a
number of gentlemen's agreements "on procedures
to be used in the initiation, conduct and financing
of peace-keeping operations". This suggestion, in
the view of my delegation, deserves consideration.

47. It has been contended that the Security Council
offers possibilities for the maintenance of international
peace and security, fuller use of which would enable
the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America to
play a more active role in the discussion of United
Nations peace-keeping operations, thereby providing
a democratic system and protecting the interests
of all Member States. In this context, reference
has been made to Article 50 of the Charter, under
which any Member State which found itself confronted
with special economic problems as a result of the
Security Council's decision to establish a peace-keep­
ing force has the right to consult the Security Council
with regard to the solution of such problems. Reference
was also made to Article 44, under which any Member
State is entitled to participate in the decision of the
Security Council if it is called upon to provide
armed forces. It seems to my delegation that Articles
50 and 44 are applicable only in the context of measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter and cannot be
resorted to when the Security Council decides on
peace-keeping operations under Chapter VI.
48. It is for this reason that my delegation has
been led towards the conclusion that a greater role
in the decision-making processes of the United
Nations in all the aspects of peace-keeping under
Chapter VI should be accorded to the countries of
Asia, Africa and Latin America through understandings
and informal agreements.
49. I now turn to the question of methods of financing
future peace-keeping operations in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, with the study
of which the Special Committee is particularly charged
under the draft resolution before us [A/6654, para.
153],
50. My delegation is pleased to note the constructive
suggestions that have been made by a number of
delegations. We agree that, first of all, attention
should be given by the Special Committee to peace­
keeping operations authorized by the Security Council.
There also appears to be a general consensus on the
various methods to which recourse could be had to
finance them. In this regard the guide-lines for
equitable sharing of the costs of peace-keeping
operations set forth in resolution 1874 (S-IV), adopted
by the fourth special session of the General Assembly,
should also be kept in view.
51. As for the method of financing by apportionment
of the expenses among all Member States, in pursuance
of the principle of collective responsibility, the
question arises whether the Security Council can or
should assume exclusive responsibility to tax the entire
membership for peace-keeping operations under
Chapter VI, without their concurrence. In an attempt
to find a way out of the persistent differences that
have marked the consideration of this issue, it has
been proposed to establish a financing committee.
Whether this committee should be established by the
Security Council or by the General Assembly, or by
both, and whether it should submit its recommendations
to the one or to the other organ, are crucial matters
which require further clarification before any defini­
tive opinion can be expressed on the subject.

52. There is one other issue to which my delegation
would like to refer. This is the question of establishing
a special scale of assessments on an equitable
basis to share the costs of peace-keeping operations
if they are apportioned among all Member States.
My delegation considers that the suggestion in the
report submitted by the Special Committee to the
General Assembly, that the global financial participa­
tion of the developing countries should not exceed 5
per cent of the total costs of peace-keeping operations
involving heavy expenditures [A/6654, annex V, para.
3], deserves the serious consideration of the Special
Committee for reasons which are well known.
53. Turning now to the question of facilities, services
and personnel which Member States might voluntarily
provide, in accordance with the Charter, for United
Nations peace-keeping operations, as set forth in
sub-paragraph (lq) of operative paragraph 2 of the
draft resolution recommended by the Special Com­
mittee, my delegation notes with appreciation the
practical and constructive suggestions that have
been put forward by the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia,
Canada, Mexico, the United Kingdom, the United States
and the Netherlands. We consider it important to
explore the Soviet Union proposal that the Military
Staff Committee or, as suggestedby the representative
of Mexico, the competent organs of the United Nations,
should consult with interested Member States with
a view to drafting a standard form of agreement to
be used in the conclusion of agreements between
them and the Security Council under Article 43 of
the Charter. We note the observation of the United
States representative that the provision of forces
under Article 43 agreements would not necessarily
meet the need for manning consent-type peace-keep­
ing operations. The implications of this observation
can also be examined together with the proposal of
the Soviet Union.
54. This brings us once again to the imperative need
to adopt a pragmatic and realistic approach to the
problems of undertaking peace-keeping operations
and to serch for solutions on the basis of mutual
accommodation of the conflicting views and divergent
interests.
55. It is encouraging that the permanent members
of the Security Council, while firmly maintaining their
respective positions of principle, have nevertheless
stated their willingness to play their part in the
combined efforts to reach a realistic consensus. We
do not believe that they have frozen their positions.
We are encouraged by the statement of the French
representative that, in the case of peace-keeping
operations involving only surveillance and observation
missions, the Charter of the United Nations has
granted to the General Assembly, together with
the Security Council, the competence to decide on
such operations.
56. The Pakistan delegation therefore believes that
there is a basis for extending the life of the Special
Committee to enable it to continue the review of
the whole question of peace-keeping operations in
all its aspects.
57. In conclusion, my delegaion would like to remind
the General Assembly that the task of the United

Nations in the maintenance of international peace
and security is not confined to the surveillance of
truce-lines by United Nations peace forces and to the
dispatch of observation missions. The representative
of Ethiopia touched on the heart of the problem when
he stated in the Special Committee that "the traditional
means of pacific settlement of disputes—negotiations,
inquiry,
mediation
and conciliation—could be
elaborated and institutionalized by a formal protocol
that would to some extent make their operation
automatic".
58. Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, which
deals with the pacific settlement of disputes, places
upon the Security Council the primary responsibility
for recommending appropriate procedures or methods
of settlement of international disputes likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security. In this respect, we regret to note that the
performance of the Security Council has fallen short
of the promise held out in the Charter of the United
Nations. In our view, the main reason lies in the lack
of resolve to implement its own resolutions.
59. The interests of this Organization and its general
membership require that in the performance of its
foremost task—that is, the maintenance of interna­
tional peace and security—the United Nations should
not be found wanting either in the efforts to remove
the causes of armed conflict or in initiating peace­
keeping operations when such conflict actually breaks
out.
60. Mr. BUDO (Albania) (translated from French):
During the last few years the General Assembly
has constantly been under pressure from certain
Powers which for their own infamous ends, seek to
impose on Member States their own ideas with regard
to the creation of United Nations forces, or, as they
prefer to call it, with regard to "the question of
peace-keeping operations". In a time marked by the
stormy and triumphant emergence of popular national
and social liberation movements, which are bring­
ing together all of progressive mankind struggling
against the forces of oppression and aggression and
are having an immense historic importance for the
fate of human society, these Powers, with the United
States at their head, are using every possible means
to stamp out the flames of revolutionary struggle,
halt the process of popular liberation and launch
mad plans for world domination.
61. As part and parcel of this policy and with the
same end in view, efforts are now being made to
execute in haste the sinister plan for the establish­
ment of United Nations forces.
62. There can be no doubt that those who support
such a plan are, wittingly or unwittingly, assisting
the imperialist oppressors and aggressors, headed
by the United States, at a time when they need
assistance most acutely, reeling as they are under the
blows showered upon them by the people in their
heroic struggle, confronted as they are by insurmount­
able difficulties and having earned the hatred of all
progressive mankind. In other words, to support or
to contribute to the creation of United Nations forces
in the present state of international affairs and the
situation now prevailing in the Organization, is tanta­

6

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

mount to contributing, consciously or unconsciously,
to the fulfilment of dangerous plans for resort to
the threat or use of armed force against the liberation
movement and against all peace-loving and freedomloving countries, in keeping with the policy of spheres
of influence and world hegemony so clearly pursued
by two great Powers.
63. The practice of making use of the United Nations
by some Western Powers as an instrument of inter­
ference in the domestic affairs of independent States,
and of its armed forces as a means of aggression
against peaceful countries and a method of stifling
the revolutionary liberation strggle of peoples, was
initiated in the very first years of the Organizations's
existence. This practice, which is in flagrant violation
of the fundamental purposes and principles of the
Charter, has been the hardest and most damaging
blow the Organization has suffered in its entire
existence. Among the most flagrant instances, one may
cite the armed aggression perpetrated in Korea under
the cover of the United Nations and the shameful
part played by the Organization's forces in the Congo
(Leopoldville) in defence of imperialist and colonialist
interests, which led to the criminal dissolution of the
legitimate Government of the Congo and the achieve­
ment of United States colonialist aims in that country.
64. Every time that a United Nations force has been
established and used, it has invariably served the
interests of the imperialists and aggressors at the
expense of the victims of aggression and of the
liberation movement.
65. But the United States of America has constantly
endeavoured to go ever further in that direction, to
remove any and all difficulties and to have a completely
free hand. Thus it has been obstinately pressing for
the establishment of a United Nations standing force
which it could use easily at any time and in any place
in accordance with unforeseeable contingencies of its
aggressive and counter-revolutionary policy. United
States imperialism has always sought to be in a
position to play, in a somewhat disguised form and
chiefly under the name of the United Nations, its
self-imposed role of international policeman. The
United States Government has been increasing its
efforts in that direction since 1956, the debates in
the General Assembly on the dispatch of the United
Nations Emergency Force to the Suez Canal zone
being a notable example. Supported by its partners,
the United States vigorously maintained at that time
that it was necessary to establish what it called a
standby force of the United Nations. It even went so far
as to argue that the force should be equipped with
nuclear weapons.
66. Opportunities to carry out such dangerous plans
have increased in recent years because the plans
now have the support of another great Power, the
Soviet Union. This is a direct consequence of the
profound change in that country's policies. For
instance, in its Memorandum of 10 July 1964 on
"certain measures to strengthen the effectiveness of
the United Nations",i/ the Government of the Soviet
Union came out openly in favour of establishing such
forces. Thus, on this question as on so many others,
^-1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenth Session,
Annexes, annex No. 21, document A/5721.

the USSR Government is associated with the Govern­
ment of the United States and together these two
Powers are making every effort to have United Nations
forces established without delay, in furtherance of their
own designs which are completely at variance with
the fundamental purposes and principles of the Charter
and with the aspirations of the freedom-loving nations
and peoples.
67. There is hardly any need to emphasize that
this is a highly dangerous undertaking and that it
is a threat to the sacred rights of oppressed peoples,
to national sovereignty and independence and to
world peace and security. It is clear from the
USSR Government's Memorandum to which I have
just referred and which, according to oft-repeated
statements by that Government, constitutes the basic
document on its position in the matter, that this plan
is part of the series of agreements successively
concluded between the United States and the Soviet
Union, and represents one of the many bargains struck
between them at the expense of peaceful peoples and
nations. Like the notorious Moscow Treaty on the
partial cessation of nuclear tests, and like some
other treaties which those two Powers have concluded
subsequently or plan to conclude in the near future
and to impose on other countries—such as the agree­
ment on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons
and a treaty relating to a joint systemof anti-ballistic
missiles—the present plan to establish United Nations
forces is part of the collaboration between those two
Powers and is aimed at aggressive and anti-popular
ends.
68. The differences between the two Powers regard­
ing the respective competence of the Security Council
and the General Assembly in carrying out military
operations are not so great as they would have us
believe by their cunning presentation; they are more
apparent than real. Of course, each of the two Powers
wants to be in an advantageous position with regard
to the establishment, composition, command, control
and everything else relating to the forces. That is
why one of them is endeavouring to obtain recognition
of the exclusive competence of the Security Council,
in which it enjoys a special position, while the other
insists on equal recognition of the competence of
the General Assembly, in which it is still able to
command what has been called "a built-in majority".
But we must bear in mind above all that both parties,
in accordance with their aims, have an equal interest
and are completely in agreement regarding their
objective—namely, the establishment of United Nations
forces. That is the crux of the matter. Hence, it
should not be difficult for them to compose their
differences whenever they wish and to agree on ways
and means of implementing the joint plan, as was
the case, indeed, with the draft resolution which has
been submitted to the General Assembly by the
Special Committee of Thirty-three.
69. The efforts of one of the parties to create
confidence in the Security Council by arguing that
this body is in itself a guarantee that the forces
in question will not be used for imperialist and ag­
gressive ends are obviously in vain. The past
activities of the Security Council and the part played
by the military forces it has set up are notorious

1521st meeting — 23 May 1967
throughout the world, whose peoples can never forget
the unjust decisions and positions, contrary to the
Charter, which the Council adopted on numerous
questions involving the imperialist, colonialist, and
racist policies of certain Powers, and their interven­
tions and acts of aggression in various parts of the
world, in Asia, Africa, the Near East, Latin America
and wherever the rights of peaceful peoples and
countries have been violated. Particularly striking
are the two cases I have mentioned, namely, the
armed aggression perpetrated in Korea in the
name of the United Nations, and the dispatch of
military forces to the Congo (Leopoldville) to defend
the interests of the imperialists and colonialists.
We should also remember that while the Security
Council decision on the Korean aggression was
reached in the absence of the USSR, its decision
to dispatch forces to the Congo (Leopoldville) was
taken with the support and affirmative vote of the
USSR Government—a significant fact which testifies
to the new direction of Soviet policy.
70. Is it necessary to mention that the General
Assembly has behaved no better, especially in con­
nexion with problems relating to the rights of peoples
to freedom and independence and to international
peace and security? Above all, it is very well known
that whenever the United States Government, has
felt it necessary to impose its wishes on this Assembly
in order to advance imperialist policy in some respect,
it has done so without any scruples and has unstintingly
resorted to pressure, threats and blackmail to achieve
that end.
71. The question of the representation of China in
the United Nations is a typical example. The great
majority of Member States agree that refusal to
recognize the lawful rights of the People's Republic
of China in the United Nations constitutes an injustice
and an anomaly without precedent, and that it does
serious harm to the Organization. However, this
intolerable situation has existed for many years
because of the arbitrary position of the United States
which results from its hostile policy towards the
People's Republic of China and its aims with regard
to the Organization itself.
72. Neither must we forget on this occasion that it
is precisely because the United States has a hold
over the United Nations that it and some of its
collaborators were able, by using the expenditures
entailed by the military operations of the United
Nations as a pretext, to sabotage the entire nineteenth
session of the General Assembly, a session which is
one of the saddest pages in the annals of the United
Nations.
73. It obvious that for as long as the United States
Government, either on its own or together with
another Power, exercises a hold over the United
Nations, the latter will continue to decline and to
act in a manner diametrically opposed to the funda­
mental provisions of the Charter and to its own
true mission. To endow it with armed forces which, in
disregard of the prerogatives of the Security Council
and the General Assembly, would only serve to further
the policy of those who at present dominate it, would
be to condemn it irrevocably to destruction.

7

74. In this context we should point out that in order
to justify the plan for the establishment of United
Nations forces a sustained effort has been made in
recent years to make us believe that conditions
favourable for this purpose have been established
through a relaxation of international tension, greater
confidence in relations among States, and some
improvement in the situation within the Organization
itself. Such assertions are often made, even with
reference to the situation in Europe, with regard to
so-called European security. I need scarcely say that
such contentions are unrealistic and completely un­
founded, unless they refer to the strengthening of
understanding and collaboration between the two great
Powers. Indeed, there can hardly be any doubt that for
many years the international situation has been very
tense and dangerous for world peace and that it has
been constantly deteriorating, and that the situation in
the United Nations is equally deplorable and continues
to grow worse. It is quite right that the peoples of
the world should firmly reject such assertions and
should express their profound indignation attempts
to justify, on the same false premises, the creation
of new forces to be placed under the control of
those sworn enemies of the freedom and independence
of peoples, the imperialists and colonialists, headed
by the United States of America.
75. The valiant people of Viet-Nam who are conduct­
ing against the United States aggressors one of the
most heroic struggles that the world has ever seen
cannot but be indignant and protest vigorously against
these sinister plans. The peoples of South West Africa,
South Africa, Southern Rhodesia, Angola, Mozambique,
so-called Portuguese Guinea, occupied South Yemen,
Aden, Oman, Palestine, Puerto Rico, and all other
peoples struggling for their sacred and inalienable
rights against colonialist and racist oppressors and
aggressors are full of indignation and firmly condemn
all such attempts in the United Nations, whenever
the United States and its partners make use of the
Organization for purposes of intervention and pressure
and in order to hoodwink them by false claims
concerning their liberation by peaceful means, by
resolutions destined to remain a dead letter, by
"peaceful talks" and by other tricks which are
meant only to bring about their capitulation and
submission.
76. Member States must also take into account the
fact that the plan to establish United Nations forces
is now more dangerous than ever in view of the
intensified efforts in the Viet-Nam war now being
waged by the sponsors of this proposal who do all
they can to cause the Organization to intervene in it
in every possible way. By such means, by the con­
tinuous escalation of this brutal war and by the artifice
of the "peace talks", the heroic Viet-Namese people
are to be made to give up their sacred struggle for
their country's salvation and surrender to the United
States aggressors. But neither the blackmail of war,
nor forces of any kind, nor the artifice of negotiations,
nor treason from whatever quarter can shatter the
iron will of the Viet-Namese people and prevent them
from winning their just fight against the ferocious
onslaughts of the United States imperialists. Peaceful
States must bear in mind, however, the designs con­

8

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

cealed behind the sinister plan regarding United
Nations forces and must draw the obvious conclusions.
77. It is becoming clear to everyone that the true
aim of the two great Powers is to have at their
disposal, in addition to their enormous war potential
which they are ceaselessly and feverishly perfecting
and augmenting an international police force which
they can use, under the cover of the United Nations,
to implement designs that are totally contrary to the
fundamental principles of the Charter and the hopes
of peaceful nations.0 The people of the world under­
stand full well that, by means of agreements or draft
agreements such as those relating to the partial
cessation of nuclear tests, the non proliferation of
nuclear weapons, the establishment of United Nations
armed forces, and other plans which we know of or
which have been kept secret, the two Powers intend
to disarm the freedom-loving peoples and nations and
to place themselves in a privileged and monopolistic
military position which would enable them, either
overtly or covertly, according to what their plans
call for, to stamp out the flames of popular revolu­
tionary struggle, to put down the fight for freedom
wherever it occurs, to subjugate the peaceful countries
and to direct their strategy of counter-revolution
and world domination against the People's Republic
of China, that impregnable fortress, that invincible
champion of the struggle of peoples for their freedom,
sovereignty and independence.
78. Of course, the peoples will only fight all the
harder for freedom and independence and will surely
bring to naught the infamous designs and attempts
of the imperialists and their collaborators. The will
see to it that their enemies get their just desserts
and will find ways and means to establish and organize
international relations on a fair and sound basis.
Nevertheless, it is the duty of the peaceful Member
States to make their contribution to that cause,
denounce and reject the dangerous plans of the two
great Powers and, acting in concert, do whatever is
necessary to defeat the great conspiracy against
mankind.
79. The establishment of United Nations armed
forces can in no way serve the cause of freedom
or international peace and security, nor can it help
to improve the situation in the United Nations, or to
enhance and strengthen it. On the contrary, such a
measure would be very dangerous to peace and would
inevitably lead to the final transformation of the United
Nations into an instrument of intervention and aggres­
sion in the hands of the United States imperialists and
their collaborators. The imperialists are the oppres­
sors and slaughterers of the peoples who are struggling
for freedom. They bear the chief responsibility for
all the conflicts among States. They are the authors
or the instigators of all the acts of aggression and
all the breaches of the peace and threats to peace
and freedom in the world. Armed forces created at
their instigation and under their control could only
serve their interests to the detriment of peaceful
peoples and nations.
80. What is important to the overwhelming majority
of Member States is not that the United Nations
should have a military force, but that it should regain
its strength and resume its proper course, in confor­

mity with the purposes and principles of the Charter
and the dearest hopes of peoples. It is now more
imperative than ever for us to work together to
prevent the United States from manipulating the
Organization at will, to frustrate the attempts to
bring it under the control of one or two Powers,
to restore to full vigour the principle of the sovereign
equality of Member States, and to establish the
necessary conditions for a reorganization of the United
Nations so as to enable it to satisfy the imperative
requirements of the contemporary world in accordance
with the fundamental principles of the Charter.
81. The delegation of Albania will spare no effort
to make its modest contribution to that end, as it
has done in the past. Guided by our policy of peace
and of unstinting support for the struggle of peoples
against imperialism and colonialism and for their
sacred right to self-determination and independence,
we vigorously oppose and reject any measure whatever
leading to the establishment of United Nations forces.
My Government's position on this question—a position
which has been clearly statedhere on many occasions—
therefore remains unchanged. We have been and we
remain firmly opposed to the establishment of such
forces and we will never agree to contribute to the
expenses relating thereto. The Albanian delegation
will therefore vote against the draft resolution con­
tained in the report of the Special Committee [A/6654,
para. 153].
82. Mr. MATSUI (Japan): The report of the Special
Committee which the Assembly is now considering
embodies a consensus in the form of the draft
resolution which is recommended to the Assembly
for adoption. This consensus is a tribute to the
tireless and devoted efforts of the Committee's
Chairman, our eminent colleague, Mr. Cuevas Cancino,
efforts that were greatly appreciated by my delegation.
83. As a member of the Special Committee, Japan
supported the Committee's recommendation to the
Assembly. We support it here, and we hope that the
draft resolution contained in the Committee's report
will be adopted by the Assembly. The Japanese delega­
tion attaches special importance to the renewed
appeal for voluntary contributions which is contained
in the draft resolution. Prompt solution of this
persistent problem would no doubt conduce to a
much healthier atmosphere, would help break the
present log-jam and, quite possibly, would unlock
the door that now seems such a barrier to progress.
84. In this connexion, it should be noted that among
those twenty-three countries which have so far
made their voluntary contributions, we find, with the
greatest respect and appreciation, quite a number
of developing countries which are the least able
to pay.
85. My delegation also attaches special importance
to the continuation, without interruption, of the Special
Committee's work. As the Committee's report indi­
cates, many suggestions were made by different
delegations, including my own, duringthe Committee's
last session, and it is most desirable that these
suggestions should be studied further and every effort
made to reach agreement.

1521st meeting — 23 May 1967
86. The Japanese delegation is fully prepared to
continue its active co-operation with the other mem­
bers of the Committee of Thirty-three if the draft
resolution before us is adopted by the Assembly. We
are convinced that adoption of this draft resolution
will pave the way for further progress towards solu­
tion of the many vexing problems in the peace-keeping
field.
87. The importance and the urgency of proceeding
as swiftly as possible to find appropriate solutions
for the problems of peace-keeping operations are
markedly stressed, to cite one example, by the
current regrettable build-up of serious tensions in
the Near East. At the end of last week, just as the
Assembly was about to embark upon its consideration
of the question peace-keeping operations, one of the
most successful of such operations, theUnitedNations
Emergency Force, was suddenly terminated.
88. My delegation fully shares the deep concern
expressed by the Secretary-General in his recent
report to the General Assembly,5/ with regard to
the possible implications for peace of the latest
developments in the Near East. We also note the
Secretary-General's view stated in the following
words in his report to the Security Council that
"the current situation in the Near East is more
disturbing, indeed, I may say more menacing, than
at any time since the fall of 1956".2/
89. We ardently hope that the Secretary-General's
current visit to the Near East will prove to be
successful and help to alleviate the current tensions
in that area. The present situation in that area
may well have very important implications with
regard to the question of peace-keeping operations
as a whole, as well as to the future effectiveness
of the United Nations with regard to its primary
purpose, the maintenance of international peace
and security. Perhaps the most important of these
implications, as I see it, is the necessity of the
United Nations being in a position of constant readi­
ness, able at all times to move swiftly to establish
effective peace-keeping machinery before a particular
situation might deteriorate beyond the point of no
return.
90. My delegation is convinced that the difficulties
and obstacles that stand in the way of acceptable
solutions of the problems of peace-keeping operations
can be overcome by intensive effort and hard work,
and we, for our part, are fully prepared to do all
that we can to achieve results.

9

to be found, not by establishing conditions and an
atmosphere conducive to a maintenance of world
peace, but rather by converting our Organization into
a sort of world policeman. As Bulgaria is not a
member of the Special Committee, we felt that
it would be helpful for us to state our views, even
at this late hour, and perhaps thereby to shed some
light on the question that will be discussed by the
Special Committee when it resumes its work, in
accordance with the draft resolution now before- us
[A/6654, para. 153],
92. We were very surprised to hear the United States
representative refer, in his statement yesterday, to
Realpolitik. Perhaps he did so as a diversionary
tactic. We must say that we do not disagree with him
when he says: "I do suggest that we are even less
assured of success if we continue to rely on the
so-called Realpolitik..." [1519th meeting, para. 49],
However, we are in complete disagreement with him
on, and are vehemently opposed to, the implication
of that remark, which equates the peace-keeping
operations of the United Nations with Realpolitik,
past or present. We were truly surprised to hear
the United States representative say yesterday that:
"Great Powers should not alone be responsible for
policing trouble spots, settling quarrels and protecting
weaker nations" [ibid., para. 40]. Frankly, the audacity
of such a statement on the part of the United States
representative amazes us. Indeed, we are astounded
to learn from Mr. Goldberg that someone—certainly
not the United Nations—has instructed the great
Powers to police the world. On the contrary, we have
always wished and wished ardently, that some of the
great Powers would desist from those acts of inter­
ference in the affairs of other States which they call
"police operations". All peoples and all peaceful
States would, we are sure, want to see an end to
Realpolitik as manifested by the sending of the United
States Sixth Fleet to the Mediterranean, where its
presence creates a threat and danger of war and only
breeds trouble and insecurity in the region. Indeed
that threat is only too obvious from the provocatory
attitude adopted by some countries even today.
93. An end must also be put to the United States
intervention and aggression against the heroic people
of Viet-Nam who ask only to live in peace and to
decide their own future. All opposition and all threads
to the popular liberation movement must likewise
cease. However, instead of putting an end to this policy
of force and intervention in the affairs of others,
we see from the statements of some representatives,
and particularly of the United States representative,
that there is a desire to make the United Nations
function for the benefit of the imperialist and colonialist
Powers. To endow the Organization with such functions
would be tantamount to signing its death warrant.

91. Mr. TARABANOV (Bulgaria) (translated from)
French): At this advanced stage, when the work of
the General Assembly's fifth special session is
drawing to a close, my delegation hesitated to ask
to speak in order to express its view on the agenda
item entitled "Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in all their
aspects". However, we decided to address the As­
sembly because we heard several statements endea­
vouring, even at this late stage, to implant the idea
that a solution to the question of peace-keeping is

94. We do not agree with those who pursue such a
policy, any more than, in our opinion, other peaceful
peoples and States can agree with it. On the contrary,
we wish the United Nations to continue to carry out,
and carry out successfully, the tasks and duties which
it has assumed before all mankind.

5/ Ibid.. Fifth Emergency Special Session, Annexes, agenda item 5,
document A/6730.
6/ Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1967, document S/7896.

95. It is in this spirit that the delegation of the
Peoples's Republic of Bulgaria wishes to assure the
Assembly that it shares the legitimate concern of

10

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

the majority of Member States as regards the role
of the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Such an attitude is entirely
consistent with the arguments I have just put forward.
The ability of the United Nations to take preventative
and enforcement measures for the maintenance of
international peace and security is only one aspect,
one of the diverse manifestations of the role it has
to play in the maintenance of peace and the settlement
of international problems in conformity with the
principles of international law and justice. The
effectiveness of the Organization in these matters
is not due solely to its ability to have recourse to
preventative and enforcement measures for the main­
tenance of peace, any more than its scope of action
is limited to such recourse. The tasks and functions
of the United Nations as defined in the Charter
are, without doubt, much wider. That is why the
effectiveness of the United Nations should also be
considered in the light of its contribution to the
peaceful settlement of international disputes, the
elimination of colonialism in all its forms, the
conclusion of agreements on matters of disarmament
and the introduction and strengthening of rules govern­
ing international relations.
96. One of the most important pre-conditions for
the successful solution of such problems in an
atmosphere of peace and security is respect for the
principles of the United Nations Charter and the rules
of international law on the part of all States. The
more respect is shown for law and justice in interna­
tional relations, the less will it be necessary for the
United Nations to take preventative or enforcement
measures in order to eliminate threats to or violations
of peace and tranquillity in any part of the world. In
fact, the use of armed forces by the United Nations
should be regarded as an extraordinary and extreme
measure recommended by the Charter to that end.
It follows that United Nations peace-keeping operations
are a very serious action which may have strong
repercussions, not only in inter-State relations, but
also as regards the rule and functioning of the United
Nations itself. There are some highly significant
precedents in that respect.
97. The discussion of the question of peace-keeping
operations which has taken place in various United
Nations bodies in the last few years, and in this
Assembly in the last few days, has shown that the
way to eliminate the present difficulties and con­
troversies is not by means of hasty improvisation
but through a detailed examination of the entire
problem; not by methods which violate the Charter,
but rather by taking advantage of every opportunity
it offers and by applying all the means it provides for
the safeguarding of international peace and security.
Any recourse by our Organization to preventative
or enforcement measures, including the use of armed
force, should not be based on innovations or assump­
tions that contradict the Charter, but on clearly defined
Charter provisions which are binding on all Members
of the Organization.
98. Consideration of all the legal, political, constitu­
tional, financial and other aspects of the problem of
United Nations peace-keeping operations should be
based on the study of those provisions, with due

regard for their importance. All matters relating to
the nature and aim of preventative and enforcement
measures and the competent organs responsible for '
them and their implementation, like those relating
to the obligations of Member States, must be settled
in accordance with the Charter. The attempts to
amend the Charter have always aimed at the respective
functions and powers of the Security Council and the
General Assembly and their interdependence. While
hiding behind constitutional and legal arguments, those
attempts have always been inspired by well defined
political motives. The attack against exclusive com­
petence of the Security Council to take preventative
and enforcement measures for the maintenance of
peace is in reality directed against the political and
legal foundation on which our Organization stands.
The attempt to transfer certain functions and power
of the Security Council to the General Assembly is
merely part of a not very ingenious scheme thought
up by certain imperialist States which wish to be
able to defend their own interests, by using armed
force in the name of the United Nations, and thus
carry out all their operations under the United
Nations flag.
99. Representing as it does a small country, the
Bulgarian delegation wishes to state that such attempts
to curtail the powers of the Security Council and
to impair the principle of unanimity of its permanent
members may well transform the United Nations
into an intrument of the policy pursued by the
imperialist and colonialist Powers against the small
countries and against the countries which have acceded
to independence in recent years.
100. In this respect, we associate ourselves fully
with the following statement from the Memorandum
submitted by the USSR Government on 16 March 1967:
"If the rule of unanimity among the permanent
members of the Security Council did not exist, the
imperialists could without any difficulty use the
United Nations for crushing the national liberation
movements of peoples!/."
101. Since the Security Council is alone competent
to undertake preventative and enforcement measures
for the maintenance of peace and security, it is also
entitled to resolve all questions relating to the prepara­
tion, execution and financing of such operations.
102. The note from the Permanent Mission of the
People's Republic of Bulgaria to the United Nations,
date 17 December 1964, categorically states:
"Under the Charter, the Security Council is
competent to take preventative or enforcement
measures to maintain or restore international
peace and security. By virtue or those powers,
it is within the competence of the Security Council
to take decisions in all matters relating to the
establishment of United Nations armed forces,
the definition of their duties, their composition and
strength, the direction of their operations the struc­
ture of their command, the duration of their stayin the area of operations and the financing of the
expenditures involved ."
U Ibid., document S/7841.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenth Session,
Annexes. Annex 21, document A/5839.

1521st meeting — 23 May 1967
103. We continue to maintain that position of principle
and we are of the opinion that the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations should take this as a
starting point for its examination of means of financing
and provision of facilities, so that Member States can
make available to the United Nations the means to
carry out peace-keeping operations, in conformity
with the Charter.
104. With regard to how those operations should
be financed the report of the Special Committee
[A/6654/ contains a number of specific proposals,
inter alia, that the cost should be borne by the
aggressor, that a portion of the cost should be borne
by the States directly concerned, and that voluntary
contributions should be solicited and expenses shared
among all Member States.
105. We believe that previous debates on these
questions, allow us to hope that a just and acceptable
solution, in keeping with the principles of international
law and the United Nations Charter, can be found.
No one can deny that, under the general principles
of law and the tenets of international law, anyone
who violates international law by threatening or
causing a breach of the peace must assume full
responsibility for his illegal acts and bear the cost
of the damages he has caused, including the cost of
operations undertaken to prevent or put an end to
the aggression.
106. We are of the opinion that the Special Committee
should also study the practical advantages of other
methods of financing peace-keeping operations, and
should make recommendations on the matter to the
Security Council.
107. My delegation considers that special attention
should be given to problems of the provision of
facilities, and also to the application of those passages
in the Charter that deal with these matters, in particu­
lar Articles 43 to 47. In the course of the recent
discussion in the Special Committee and in the
General Assembly, as well as during the past year,
a number of delegations made constructive and
useful proposals. In this connexion we would draw
attention to a letter from the Permanent Represen­
tative of Czechoslovakia, dated 13 April 1967 [A/6652],
which contains a number of considerations of principle
and some carefully thought out recommendations.
The report of the Special Committee also represents
a useful basis for future debates on these questions.
108. As the representative of a country whose
Government declared, as early as 1964, that it was
prepared to place a contingent of its armed forces
at the disposal of the United Nations in accordance
with Article 43 of the Charter, I wish to reaffirm
that declaration.
109. In conclusion, I should" like to stress that the
political, constitutional, legal, financial and technical
problems I have mentioned should be examined in
greater detail, with a view to making the best and
most productive use of the opportunities offered by
the Charter and the machinery of the United Nations,
basing our actions on the provisions relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
fully justifies the proposal that these questions should
be discussed by the Special Committee until the

11

twenty-third session of the General Assembly, to
which the Committee is to present its report.
110. We believe that the solution to the question
must be sought along these lines, and not by trying
to make the United Nations into a world policeman.
111. Mr. RICHARDSON (Jamaica): The views of the
Jamaican delegation on the subject which is before
the General Assembly this morning have been stated
fully in previous meetings of this Organization,
particularly in the 482nd meeting of the Special
Political Committee in December 1965 and in the
527th and 529th meetings of that same Commitee
in November and December 1966. I have no intention,
therefore, of inflicting on the Assembly a lengthy
dissertation on the merits of the arguments and
proposals which are recorded in the report of the
Committee of Thirty-three [A/6654],
112. I have come to this rostrum to speak on two
matters only, which, in my judgement, have not been
given in the preceding exchanges either the attention
or the emphasis which they deserve. I am not trying
to present a comprehensive statement once more of
our views, but simply to make reference to two
disjointed matters which have been discussed before
the Assembly.
113. The first of these matters has reference to the
rival claims to the United Nations power of assessment.
By this I mean the respective claims by the advocates
of exclusive General Assembly competence and exclu­
sive Security Council competence, respectively, to
make levies or demand a financial contribution from
Member States for the purpose of defraying expendi­
tures of the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
114. I fear that there might be some weakening
of resolve in this matter, and I wish to urge those
of us who believe in and wish to safeguard the General
Assembly's role in the maintenance of international
peace to stand firm on the exclusive nature of the
Assembly's power to make assessments upon Member
States.
115. As Members know, Jamaica has always exhibited
a scrupulous respect for the primary responsibility
of the Security Council in the sphere of maintaining
international peace. We know that when action to
maintain or restore international peace is required,
the Security Council has been given primary responsi­
bility and competence by the Charter. The Council
can determine the scale, the character and the duration
of any military operation, whether such operation be
of enforcement nature or otherwise. It can call
upon Member States to take part in a joint exercise
and, in consultation with the States concerned, of
course, it can determine what share of the joint
operation each State shall undertake with its own
resources. It is competent to designate and organize
the command. It can lay down areas of co-operation
between Member States. It has even, I believe, the
authority to receive and to dispose of voluntary
contributions towards the common expense. What the
Security Council has no authority to do is to levy
any compulsory charges on any Member State to defray
the expenses of such a joint operation. By Article 17
of the Charter, the power to make assessment on

12

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

Member States is exclusively committed into the
hands of the Assembly, and no special interpretations,
no inferences, no deductions—none of those can be
used legally to maintain that the Security Council can
assume or usurp this power.
116. We shall not be enhancing the prestige of the
United Nations Organization or fortifying its capacity
to maintain the peace if we seek to take away from
the Security Council powers which are committed to
it by the Charter. Neither, by the same token, will
it reinforce the moral authority of the Organization
or fortify its capacity to maintain the peace if we
seek to deprive the Assembly of powers which are
exclusively committed into its hands by that same
Charter.
117. My second purpose in coming to the rostrum
has to do with the subject-matter of today's discussion.
I wish to say to the Assembly that the question of
peace-keeping operations, no matter how comprehen­
sive the review we undertake or how varied the
aspects in which the question is considered, is still
too narrow for the present time. It is still a part only
of the broad subject of the maintenance of interna­
tional peace and security, which, we are sure, involves
much more. In the present state of world political
relations, it must involve establishing machinery and
laying down procedures for settling disputes peace­
fully; it must involve a readiness, on the other hand,
to take enforcement or coercive action where neces­
sary, as well as the type of effort which has come
to be known as the peace-keeping operation. I am
concerned that the distinct but complementary roles
of the Assembly and the Security Council should be
recognized and respected; but I am equally concerned
at the conclusion we seem to be arriving at almost
by agreement or by default. We seem to be reaching
the conclusion that the limit of the United Nations
future role in maintaining world peace is to be the
peace-keeping operation, the exercise which can be
carried out only with the consent of the parties
involved.
118. Perhaps recent events in the Middle East
have reminded us how precarious is the status of a
United Nations operation which depends for its very
continuance, not to mention its effectiveness, on the
will of the parties to the dispute.
119. When questions affecting international security
are debated in this Assembly, Jamaica speaks as
one of many small Powers, as a country which
desperately wants to rely on the United Nations
for the protection of its security. Being genuinely
peace-loving people, having no intention at any time
of committing acts of aggression, seeing ourselves
only as the potential victims of aggression, we are
naturally concerned to see the United Nations establish
and maintain arrangements under which protecting
forces can be interposed between us, or any other
potential victim, and aggressors. We are concerned,
of course, that these United Nations forces should
be interposed by the appropriate authority, legitimately
interposed by the full authority of the whole interna­
tional community. We regret to say that we cannot
find this sort of protection or this sort of promise
of protection in the peace-keeping operation as
it has evolved. It is natural, therefore, that we

should be less than enthusiastic about procedures
in the United Nations which decline to name aggressors,
which decline even to state who was attacked or
who it was that first resorted to force.
120. It was with these considerations in mind that
at the last session of the Assembly the Jamaican
delegation moved, in the Special Political Committee,
that certain decisions should be taken by the Assembly.
The Special Political Committee adopted, and then
transmitted to the plenary session, three draft resolu­
tions, from one of which I wish to quote. It is draft
resolution C, in the report of the Special Political
Committee to the Twenty-first session, under which
the Assembly would have requested the Security
Council—or, in the appropriate language of the draft
resolution, would recommend to the Security Council—
that, inter alia;
"it proceed to negotiate arrangements with Mem­
ber States or groups of Member States under which
armed forces, assistance and facilities would be
made available to the Council, at its call, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 43 of the
Charter", 2/
121. The Assembly would have assured the Security
Council of its full co-operation, if the Council required
it, in the negotiation of the arrangements mentioned
above. This draft resolution was available to the Com­
mittee of Thirty-three. The Committee has been
unable to make any recommendation in the matter.
This is regrettable, and it is a matter of regret to
my delegation that the draft resolution which the
Special Committee has proposed that the Assembly
should now adopt ignores entirely the resolution of the
General Assembly, resolution 2220 (XXI), of 19 Decem­
ber 1966, which referred that matter to this special
session.
122. Unless the Committee succeeds in reaching
a consensus on this particular proposal, which is
of special interest to States in our position; unless
the Special Committee manages to make a recom­
mendation in the matter for consideration by the
Assembly at the twenty-second session, the Jamaican
delegation may find itself obliged to reintroduce at
the twenty-second session a proposal to the same
effect as that which the Assembly failed to adopt
last year.
123. The PRESIDENT: We have now come to the
final stage of the Assembly's consideration of agenda
item 8. It is my understanding that Members would
wish first to take a decision on the recommendation
made by the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations. That recommendation is that the Assembly
adopt the draft resolution contained in the report of
the Special Committee [A/6654, para. 153] I now put
that draft resolution to the vote.
The draft resolution was adopted by 90 votes to 1,
with 11 abstentions.
124. The PRESIDENT: By the vote just taken the
General Assembly has decided to request the Special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations to continue
its work and to report on the progress thereof to
the General Assembly at its twenty-second session.
2/ Ibid.. Twenty-first Session. Annexes, agenda item 33, document
A/6603, para, 25,

13

1521st meeting — 23 May 1967
The Assembly must now decide on how to deal with
the report which the Special Political Committee
submitted during the twenty-first session of the
General Assembly and which was referred to this
special session. The Chairman of the Special Com­
mittee on Peace-keeping Operations proposed, during
his statement yesterday morning, that the General
Assembly should decide to transmit the report, with
the draft resolutions it contains, to the Special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations so that the
Special Committee may study it and take it into
account as its work proceeds. As members are aware,
that proposal was made at the outset of the 1519th
plenary meeting, held yesterday,
125. In the statements which have been made in the
debate on this item, no objection has been raised.

Litho in U.N.

I personally have had some contacts with a number
of representatives and have not heard any objection
to the proposal. It seems indeed that the general
feeling among Members of the General Assembly
is towards supporting that proposal made by the
Chairman of the Special Committee.
126. Therefore, if I hear no objections at this
stage, I shall take it that the Assembly approves
the proposal to transmit the report of the Special
Political Committee to the Special Committee on
Peace-keeping Operations.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

77005—September 1970-2,175
