A /72/PV.58

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

58th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 21 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 39 (continued)
The situation in Afghanistan
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/72/312 and
A/72/392)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.8)
Mr. Nasir (Maldives): The Maldives remains
encouraged by the strength, determination and enduring
commitment of the people of Afghanistan to lasting
peace and stability in the country. We share their vision
of a peaceful nation that is free from the clutches of
terrorism and extremism. A stable Afghanistan is
good for the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC) and for the region. Above all,
a peaceful Afghanistan is good for the people of that
country and will allow them to make it stronger and
more prosperous. The Maldives will always be with
the people of Afghanistan, extending whatever support
they. They can count on us.
The security situation in Afghanistan is undoubtedly
the biggest threat to maintaining stability in the
country. The Maldives believes that the Government
of Afghanistan needs more support from the United
Nations, its Member States and all stakeholders in
improving the security situation in the country. We
commend the Afghan Government for its perseverance
and its steadfastness in combating terrorism and violent
extremism. In that vein, we also express our support
for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process,

with the cooperation of the country’s regional partners.
Achieving durable peace and stability will be possible
only by involving all key stakeholders and allowing
Afghans to lead the discussions that shape their future.
Afghanistan has made significant strides in the
past few years towards promoting and protecting the
human rights and welfare of its people, particularly
women and girls. Its election as a member of the Human
Rights Council for the first time is testament to the
confidence that the international community has placed
in the commitment of Afghanistan, and recognition of
the progress that the country has achieved on human
rights issues. It is our strong belief that international
engagement in promoting human rights has a direct
positive effect on the progress of key human rights
issues nationally. We congratulate Afghanistan on
that important achievement and wish it every success
in its three-year term as a member of the Human
Rights Council.
The Maldives also welcomes the new Afghan
National Peace and Development Framework, which
sets out the strategic policy for the next five years
towards achieving self-reliance. That policy is framed
with the Afghan people in mind, in order to free them
from poverty and to improve their welfare. We are
particularly pleased with the special focus it places
on empowering women, guaranteeing their active
participation in maintaining security and stability and
in the broader social and economic development of
the country.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-39287 (E)

*1739287*

A/72/PV.58

We believe that greater economic integration
and the collaboration of regional partners, including
SAARC, are paramount to the development of
Afghanistan and to ensure the safety and security of its
people. For that to happen, the unwavering commitment
of all regional partners is essential. In that regard, the
Maldives recognizes the important steps taken so far by
Afghanistan towards enhancing regional cooperation.
Afghanistan is a beautiful country with a rich
culture and history. We should not allow that country to
be defined by war and instability. A safe, peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan is in the best interest of all its
neighbours and the entire world. We must strengthen
our efforts to support Afghanistan towards that end.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Afghanistan
and Chief Executive Abdullah for addressing the
General Assembly yesterday (see A/72/PV.56), as well
as Germany for leading efforts on the important draft
resolution before us (A/72/L.8).
As we have been discussing, Afghanistan continues
to face huge challenges to its peace and stability. The
insurgency in Afghanistan is hugely destabilizing and
has brought nothing but suffering for decades. Threats
remain to security, governance and development. The
people of Afghanistan deserve better.
Significant progress has been made by the
Government of Afghanistan as it seeks to overcome the
legacy of more than 40 years of conflict. Afghanistan
now has a democratic Government, and with
international assistance it has introduced huge social
improvements, including sending 6.4 million children
to school. The United Kingdom will keep working
closely with the Government of Afghanistan to achieve
a stable and secure future. We will continue to offer
development funds to secure the future of the Afghan
people, with confirmed funding of up to $1 billion
until 2020. We are also promoting sustainable security
by increasing the number of British military advisers
in Afghanistan.
However, despite that progress, a significant
amount of work remains to be done. There is no purely
military solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. A
credible peace process is the only way to end the
violence that impacts the lives of Afghan people on a
daily basis. Today’s draft resolution is an important
reaffirmation of both the United Kingdom’s and the
international community’s ongoing commitment to
stability in Afghanistan.
2/3

21/11/2017

We would like to extend our thanks to the President
for his tireless work to achieve a consensus on this
draft resolution, which underpins international support
on these important issues. We also commend all those
delegations that worked hard and displayed flexibility
to ensure that today’s draft resolution reflects the
international consensus and the needs of Afghanistan.
We are proud to co-sponsor this important document,
which highlights the need for all members of the
Assembly to fully support Afghanistan’s efforts towards
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
That is the only realistic solution to the conflict.
As President Ghani has said, the Taliban have a choice
between peace and war. They must choose to help to
rebuild Afghanistan. We call on the members of the
Assembly and the international community to support
the Government of Afghanistan in that effort, including
at the next meeting in January of the Kabul Process
for Peace and Security Cooperation. It is in all of our
interests to work together, under the leadership of the
Government of Afghanistan, to underpin its success.
Today’s draft resolution recognizes the need for
us all to continue to support Afghanistan so that it can
achieve self-reliance. The United Kingdom remains
fully committed to working with Afghanistan and
the international community in order to collectively
achieve that goal and to secure a prosperous, peaceful
and democratic Afghanistan.
Mr. Halvorsen (Norway): The international
engagement in Afghanistan is a long-term effort to
support security and economic development. Our
common goal is to stabilize the country and prevent
it from being a haven for terrorism. Afghanistan has
made progress, but that progress remains uncertain.
The National Unity Government is the best hope
for securing the long-term stability of Afghanistan.
Governance, service delivery and the fight against
corruption are major challenges. Poppy cultivation
and the smuggling of opium from Taliban-controlled
and other areas are additional challenges. The United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has made an
important contribution to the fight against narcotics.
The security situation in Afghanistan is precarious,
and international military and civilian assistance
remain essential. The Taliban has gained control over
large parts of Afghanistan’s territory and is attempting
to make more inroads. The Afghan security forces are
under heavy pressure and not able to assume complete
17-39287

21/11/2017

control over the whole of Afghanistan. There is a
broad agreement that continued international military
and civilian support for Afghanistan is necessary but
not sufficient to achieve our common goal. Stability
also requires a political process with the Taliban. The
National Unity Government and the international
community share that assessment. One challenge is to
find the right format and timing for engaging in such
a process.
Norway has contributed and will continue to
contribute to efforts aimed at bringing the different
parties together with a view to a political solution.
Norway welcomes the new strategy of the United States
in Afghanistan, which signals a continued United States
presence in Afghanistan on the diplomatic and military
fronts. We welcome the regional approach and the
opening towards a political settlement to the conflict.
Norway is prepared to play its part. Afghanistan
will remain one of the largest recipients of Norwegian
aid. Our annual aid to Afghanistan is around 700 million
Norwegian kroner, which is around $80 million.
Through the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission,
Norwegian special forces train and support the Afghan
special police crisis response unit in Kabul.
Elections are important for the legitimacy of
Afghanistan’s democracy. Plans for parliamentary,
provincial and district elections in 2018 and presidential
elections in 2019 are welcome. Much work remains
to be done to register voters and make practical
preparations. The Independent Election Commission of
Afghanistan must be in a position to prepare for and
oversee legitimate elections. The United Nations has a
crucial role to play. There is no time to lose. Norway
encourages the Afghan Government to continue its
efforts to hold timely, free and fair elections with
international support.

A/72/PV.58

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/72/L.8, as orally revised, entitled “The
situation in Afghanistan”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/72/L.8, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Finland,
Greece, Iceland, Indonesia, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Norway, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, San Marino,
Slovakia, the Sudan, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.8, as
orally revised?
Draft resolution A/72/L.8, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 72/10).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 39?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m.

17-392873/3
