RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMfl*l'EE
CONTENTS
Pag•

909 (X). The question of Algeria (25 November 1955) (item 64) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
910 (X). The Korean question (29 November 1955) (item 19) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
911 (X). The question of Morocco (3 December 1955) (item 58) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
912 (X). Peaceful uses of atomic energy (3 December 1955) (item 18) . . . . . . . . .
913 (X). Effects of atomic radiation (3 December 1955) (item 59)............
914 (X). Regulation, limitation and balanced redu~ion of all armed forces and all
armaments; conclusion of an international convention ( treaty) on the reduction
of armaments and the prohibition of atomic, hydrogen and other weapons of
mass destruction (16 December 1955) (items 17 and 66) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
915 (X). The question of West Irian (West New Guinea) (16 December 1955)
(item 65) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

909 (X). The question of Algerla
The General Assembly
Decides not to consider further the item entitled "The
question of Algeria" and is therefore no longer seized of
this item on the agenda of its tenth session.
548th plenary meetin_g,
25 N ovember 1955.

3
3
3

4
5

5
6

1. Reaffirms its intention to continue to seek an early
solution of the Korean q'!estion in accordance with the
objectives of the United Nations;
2. Urges that continuing efforts be made to achieve
these objectives;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to place the
Korean question on the provisional agenda of the
eleventh session of the General Assembly.
549th plenary nudÎllg,
29 N ovembw 1955.

910 (X). The Korean que1tion
A

B

REPORT OF THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION FOR THE
UNIFICATION AND REHABILITATION OF Kon=A

PROBLEM OF EX-PRISONEJlS OF THE Kou:AN Wil

The General Assembly,

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report1 of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea
signed at Seoul, Korea, on 7 September 1955,

N oting that, pending their final disposition, a number of ex-prisoners of the Korean war remain temporarily in India,
1. Notes with app,:_eciation that the Governments of
Argentina and Braztl have generously offered to raettle
as many of the ex-prisoners as opt to settle in those COUD•
tries and that, in respect of the offer of Brazil, consultations with regard to arrangements are taking place;
2. Requests the Govemments of Member States able
to do so, to assist in bringing about a full solution of thia
problem by accepting for resettlement those ex-prisœen
not covered by the present offers;
3. Requests the Govemment of India to report to the
General Assembly at its eleventh session on this prob1em. .

Recalling that, in resolution 811 (IX) of 11 December
1954, in approving the report1 of the fifteen Govemments parttcipating in the Geneva Korean Political Conference on behalf of the United Nations,. the General
Assembly expressed the hope that it would soon prove
possible to make progress towards the achievement by
peaceful means of a unified, independent and democratic
Korea under a representative form of govemment and
of full restoration of international peace and security
in the area,
Noting that paragraph 62 of the Armistice ~reement• of 27 July 1953 provides that the Agreement' shall
remain in effect until expressly superseded either by
mutually· acceptable amendments and additions or by
provision in an a~ropriate agreement for a :r,eaceful
. settleanent at a pobtical level between both sides ',
1 Olieial R•r:ortÜ of th. GfflfflJI Assn,ibly, Tn,tJa S11sion,
S•P,fffllffll No. 13 (A/2947).
• lbitl., Nwdh S•s.rion, ÂnMXII, agenda item 17, document
A/DW,.
.

549th 11,,.., JMfflfll.,
29 N ow,nbw 1955.

911 (X). The queatlon of Moroceo
The General Assembly,
H aving considered the question of Morocco,

N oting that negotiations between France and Morocco ·
will be initiated regarding
this questiœ,
,,

1 0 ~ R,eortls of Ill. S•r:.rily Co.neil B111h1h Y ,ar, $~Pl•ffllfll for JNly, AflgfUI and s,ptnnbw 1953, document

S/31119.

',

a

General Auemhl;r - Tenth Se.ion

4,

Expressing confidence that a satisfactory solution of
the question of Morocco will be achieved,
Decides to postpone further consideration of this
item.
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
912 (X). Peaceful uees of atomic energy
The General Assembly,
Desiring that mankind should be enabled to make the
fullest use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes,
Desiring to promote ener~etically the use of atomic
energy to the end that it w1ll serve only the peaceful
pursuits of mankind and ameliorate their living conditions,
Recognizing the deep interest ·of all Members of the
United Nations in achieving these ends,
Recalling its resolution 810 (IX) of 4 December 1954
concerning international co-operation in developing the
peaceful uses of atomic energy, and recognizing that,
in accordance with that resolution, significant progress
is being made in promoting international co-operation
for this purpose,
· H avin9 considered the report' of the Secretary-General, -submitted pursuant to paragraph 8 of section B _of
the above-mentioned resolution, on the International
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy
held in Geneva from 8 to 20 August 1955,
Recognizing the necessity of ensuring that the facilities of the International Atomic Energy Agency and such
fissionable mat-~riat as may be placed at its disposai are
not used for. or diverted to, other than peaceful purposes,
Believinf that continuing international co-operation
is essentia for further .developing and expanding the
peaceful uses of atomic energy,

I
CONCERNING INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES ON THE
PEACEFUL USES OF ATôMIC ENERGY

1. Expresses its satisfaction with the proceedings of
the International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of
Atomic Energy convened in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 810 (IX), and commends the participants therein for the high scientific quality of the
papers and discussions, and for the spirit of co-operation
which prevailed at the Conference;
2. Noies the impressive results achieved br, the Conference in facilitating the free ftow of scient1fic knowledge relating to the production and peaceful uses of
atomic energy and in laying a foundabon for the fuller
exchange of information on the development of atomic
energy for tl. e aims of human welfare ;
3. Expresses its appreciation of the work of the
Secretary-General and of the Advisory Committee established under paragraph 5 of section B of resolution 810
(IX) in preparing and organizing the Conference;
4. Recommends that a second international conference for the exchange of technical information regard'Official Rtcurd.r of th, Gm,ral Ass,mbly, T,nlh Snsion,
Annues, agenda item 18, document A(l967.

ing the peaceful uses of atomic energy should be held
under the auspices of the United Nations in two to three
years time;
S. Requests the Secretary-General, acting upon the
advice of the Advisory Committee referred to in paragraph 7 of section I of the present resolution and in
consultation with the appropriate specialized agencies,
to determine an appropriate place and date, to issue invitations to the conference in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 7 of section Bof resolution 810 (IX), to
prepare and circulate an agenda, and to provide the necessary staff and services ;
6. Invites the specialized agencies to consult with
the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee with
a view to ensuring proper Co-ordination between the
conference referred to in paragraph 4 above and such
technical conferences as they or their affiliated non-governmental scientific organizations may convene on the
more specialized aspects of the peaceful uses of atomic
energy;
7. Decides to continue the Advisory Committee established under paragraph S of section B of resolution
810 (IX) in order that it may assist the SecretaryGeneral in carrying out the provisions of the present
resolution;
II
CONCERNING AN INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY
AGENCY

1. Notes with satisfaction that substaritial progress
has been made toward negotiation of a draft statute establishing an International Atomic Energy Agency and
that this draft has been circulated to Govemments for
their consideration and comment;
2. Welcomes the announced intention. of Governments sponsoring the Agency to invite all States Members of the United Nations or members of the specialized
agencies to participate in a conference on the final text
of the statute of the International Atomic Energy
Agency;
3. Further welc<Jmes the extension of invitations to
the Governments of Brazil, Czechoslovakia, India and
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to participate,
as Governments concerned, with the present sponsoring
Governments in· neJotiations on the draft statute of the
International Atom1c Energy Agency;
4. Recommends that the Govemments concemed
take into account the views expressed on the Agency
during the present session of the General Assembly, as
well as the comments transmitted directly by Govern•
ments, and that they take all possible measures to establish the Agency without delay, bearing in mind the
provisions of the present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Advisory Committee referred to in paragraph
7 of section I of the present resolution, to study the
question of the relationship of the International Atœnic
Energy Agency to the United Nations, and to transmit
the_ results of their study to the Governments concemcd
be fore the conference ref erred to in paragraph 2 of section II above is convened ;
6. Requests the Govemments concemed to report to
the General Assembly as appropriate;
7. Suggests that the International Atomic Energy
Agency, when established, consider the desirability of
