United Nations

S/PV.6124

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6124th meeting
Wednesday, 13 May 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1863 (2009) (S/2009/210)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-33564 (E)

*0933564*

S/PV.6124

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

Security Council resolution 1863 (2009), document
S/2009/210.

Adoption of the agenda

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Mr. Alain Le Roy and
Ms. Susana Malcorra.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1863
(2009) (S/2009/210)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of the Czech Republic and Somalia,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Omaar
(Somalia) and Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic) took
seats at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Political
Affairs;
Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; and Ms. Susana Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on Somalia pursuant to

2

I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: We meet today at a critical moment
for Somalia. This is a time when the response of the
international community to an embattled Government’s
pleas for help could make the difference between
consolidating hopeful steps towards peace and a
descent once again into anarchy and hopelessness.
Since our last briefing to the Council, and despite
the heavy fighting of the past few days, we have
witnessed in recent months new-found reasons to hope.
The Somalia peace process, facilitated by the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, has produced a broadbased Somali Government, led by President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, which enjoys the support of
large segments of the population and States members
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
More importantly, the new Government is
actively reaching out to opposition groups to forge
national reconciliation. Negotiation, persuasion and
inclusion are at the core of the Government’s strategy
to achieve a lasting political settlement in Somalia. As
a result, the Somali people have the best chance in two
decades to end their suffering and move towards a
better and more stable future. And we, the international
community, have a unique opportunity to support
Somali leaders who have shown a commitment to
building peace. This opportunity must not be lost.
In order to assist Somalia to consolidate its stillfragile peace process and lay the foundation for
sustainable peace, reconstruction and development, the
Secretary-General has elaborated a political strategy
aimed at, first, importing the peace process from
Djibouti into Somalia; secondly, assisting the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to enhance
dialogue with opposition forces and build a critical
mass in support of the peace process; and, thirdly,
consolidating the Transitional Federal Institutions.
In this connection, the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia (UNPOS) and the United Nations
country team paid three high-level visits to Mogadishu
to hold consultations with the Government at the most

09-33564

S/PV.6124

senior levels. These consultations focused on the
preparations for the Brussels donors’ conference and
follow-up on the implementation of proposals
presented in the conference of the International Contact
Group on Somalia held in Brussels in February.
UNPOS has also worked with the Government of
Kenya in organizing training for senior civil servants.
Discussions have been held in Nairobi with
Government representatives on the establishment of the
Joint Security Committee. We anticipate agreement on
the future workings of the committee in additional
missions of UNPOS to Mogadishu.
For the Government to succeed in its efforts to
consolidate peace, it has to deal with the continuing
security challenge. The Government must be backed by
a credible security force that can help it to negotiate
from a position of strength and contain hard-line
elements bent on undermining it. The Government
must also be able to deliver security and demonstrate
clear dividends of peace and national reconciliation to
Somali communities.
The efforts to strengthen the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and build Somalia’s
security institutions respond to these needs and are part
and parcel of the broader United Nations political
strategy I mentioned a moment ago. Success in these
efforts will give peace a chance to take root as well as
create the conditions for a dramatic improvement in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and early recovery
and development activities.
It is in support of this political strategy and these
peacemaking efforts that the Secretary-General has
proposed, in his latest report to the Council
(S/2009/210), a three-phased approach to addressing
the ongoing security challenge: first, by supporting the
establishment of Somali security institutions and
strengthening AMISOM; secondly, by establishing a
United Nations light footprint in Somalia; and thirdly,
by deploying, at an appropriate time, a United Nations
peacekeeping operation.
The Brussels donors’ conference on 23 April was
organized with the aim of mobilizing international
support for the first phase, that is, the strengthening of
Somali security institutions and AMISOM forces. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank our
partners — including the Government of Somalia, the
African Union and the European Union — in making
the conference a success. The next urgent step is to

09-33564

ensure the full receipt of the pledged amount of $213
million. It is expected that AMISOM will receive $160
million and Somali security institutions $66 million in
both cash and in kind pledges.
AMISOM continues to play a critical role in
Somalia. We thank the Governments of Uganda and
Burundi for their continued commitment in the country.
We are also pleased with the offer of a battalion from
Sierra Leone, which would raise the strength of the
force to more than 5,000 troops.
Let me turn now to the dangers of the current
moment. On 9 May, there was an attempt to overthrow
the legitimate Government and take power in
Mogadishu by force. This attempted coup was, we
understand, led by Sheikh Hassan Dahir Aweys and
included Al-Shabaab fighters. While the Government
has been able to repel these forces so far, the situation
remains quite fragile. Media reports indicate that at
least 120 people have been killed in heavy fighting
around Mogadishu and that thousands of civilians have
fled to other parts of Somalia. It is noteworthy that the
reports indicate that the attacking forces include an
increasing number of foreign fighters. In fact, an
Al-Shabaab spokesman openly embraced and admitted
the presence of the foreign fighters only a few days
ago. The Government’s capacities, on its side, have a
limit, because of a lack of resources.
Through these last few days, the Government has
continued with some success to negotiate a resolution
to the conflict. Yesterday, religious leaders called for a
ceasefire and condemned the fighting. While the
ceasefire was initially accepted by all sides, it would
seem that, this afternoon, Al-Shabaab resumed attacks.
It is not clear whether the attacking forces are as
cohesive as they were prior to the call for ceasefire
from the religious leaders.
A point of interest in the report is that the trained
TFG forces seem to have constituted the backbone of
the Government’s defence. This is an encouraging sign
of the emergence of a nascent national force. This
latest surge in violence is clearly a response to the
Government’s strategy to reach out and build a critical
mass in support of peace. As the Government gains
success in its strategy of negotiation, persuasion and
inclusion, radical elements within the opposition feel
threatened and increase the level of violence.
International support for the Government of
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed is particularly

3

S/PV.6124

crucial now. The success of the Brussels conference
convened by the Secretary-General gives ground for
hope in this regard. The imperative now is, as I said, to
ensure that the assistance reaches President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed’s Government and AMISOM
quickly in order to limit the ability of hardliners to
threaten once again the ongoing efforts to build a
Somali State.
Such practical support can help the Government
strengthen its ability to address the security challenge,
become more cohesive, carry out reconstruction and
development planning, and generate and collect
revenue. The Government is committed to moving
forward and we should give it credit for the progress it
has made in three short months. The Government has
formulated a budget linked to the payment of security
forces, public investment and civil service wages. It is
collecting revenue from Mogadishu port and airport. It
has worked with UNPOS and members of the
international community to establish the Joint Security
Committee in Mogadishu, to carry out a security sector
assessment, and to develop a security sector
framework.
Establishing effective governance inside Somalia
is one of the keys to bringing law and order to the
waters off its coast. A strong Somali State would not
only curb the problem of piracy in the short term, but
would also address the underlying long-term social and
economic causes. It is important to understand that
piracy is turning into a business that, if left unchecked,
will create localized criminal economies with leaders
increasingly able to resist efforts to integrate them into
a broader national structure. That having been said, the
efforts of the international maritime forces are having a
significant effect. As a result of these operations, the
cost to pirates of their actions is steadily increasing as
they have to travel further to capture ships.
I want to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the contributions being made by the various naval
forces to deal with this problem. Their operations are
an integral part of a wider effort that includes assisting
local communities to undertake alternative forms of
employment, tracking the flow of money to identify
those benefiting from piracy, prosecuting those
responsible, and creating a coastal security force.
We welcome the establishment of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. Following
the working group meeting of the Contact Group held

4

in Cairo on 16 and 17 March, the United Nations was
requested by the Contact Group to propose a number of
counter-piracy initiatives on land. These initiatives will
be presented to the next Contact Group meeting in
May. In order to ensure greater coherence between the
different components in response to piracy, a
coordination mechanism is being established under the
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. This architecture brings together
efforts to address the piracy challenge on the high seas,
on land, in the region and internationally.
In conclusion, it is evident that the only lasting
solution for Somalia will be one that is created and led
by the Somalis themselves. The Government’s efforts
at building a consensus for reconciliation are slowly
gaining ground, despite the serious challenge by wellfunded radicals. The international community must
make a vital investment at this time to nurture the
fragile peace process, help the Government establish
its authority throughout the country and build its
security and rule of law institutions. Now is not the
time to analyse and discuss, but to provide concrete
help while it can still make a difference.
We must continue to engage in a credible and
practical manner. We cannot afford to miss this
opportunity to bring stability to that long-troubled
country and its people. The consequences of inaction
would be borne not only by Somalis, but by the region
and the world at large.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Le Roy.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/210) was prepared at the
Security Council’s request pursuant to resolution 1863
(2009), in which it requested the Secretary-General to
prepare recommendations on the possibility of
establishing a United Nations peacekeeping operation
in Somalia.
At the outset, I should like to echo UnderSecretary-General Pascoe by recalling that today’s
meeting is taking place in a very alarming security
context in Mogadishu. It is clear that we are at a
watershed moment for Somalia and the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG). The international
community must now firmly support the TFG and
leave no stone unturned in preventing extremist

09-33564

S/PV.6124

elements from frustrating this unique opportunity to
stabilize Somalia.
The peace process remains extremely fragile.
Progress generated by the Djibouti peace process
requires the ongoing support of the international
community. At the same time, we must ensure that the
role of the international community is accepted by
Somalis and that it not exacerbate tensions on the
ground.
It is in that spirit that the Secretary-General’s
report offers a holistic approach that takes into account
all the United Nations strategic objectives in Somalia,
including the political aspect, security, development
and the distribution of humanitarian assistance. The
report notes the Security Council’s expression of
intent, as formulated in paragraph 4 of resolution 1863
(2009), to establish a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia, and seeks to define a cautious
and carefully calibrated approach to that end. In that
respect, the report takes the volatile security situation
into account and attempts to craft a strategy tailored to
the new risks and opportunities in the field.
(spoke in English)
As indicated by Under-Secretary-General Pascoe,
the report recommends a three-phase incremental
approach. In the first phase, the United Nations would
maintain its current engagement, approved in
resolution 1863 (2009). This consists of support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to
enable it to fulfil its core functions of providing
security for TFG personnel, key infrastructure and
strategic installations, and assistance in building
Somalia’s security institutions. Under-SecretaryGeneral Malcorra will shortly provide further details
on that very important point. This would be pursued
alongside support for the political process and the
humanitarian and recovery activities of the United
Nations country team. Progress in the implementation
of the first phase would be assessed after three to four
months.
If security conditions permit, United Nations
engagement would then be extended to the second
phase, which would entail adding a light United
Nations footprint in Mogadishu consisting of elements
from the United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
the Department of Field Support and the United
Nations country team, which would continue to pursue
the strategic objectives laid out in the first phase.

09-33564

These two phases would form transitional steps,
allowing the United Nations to implement the full
support package to AMISOM, assess the progress of
the efforts of the TFG to build security and develop its
own security institutions, and, more importantly, gauge
the acceptability of a United Nations presence in
Mogadishu.
The second phase, like the first, would be
assessed three to four months after the commencement
of its implementation. Depending on progress, the
Security Council would then review the United Nations
role and decide whether conditions are conducive to a
shift to the final phase, in which a United Nations
peacekeeping operation could be established to take
over from AMISOM. That operation could be
authorized and deployed along the lines set out in the
Secretary-General’s present and previous reports.
It is important to emphasize that this incremental
approach is a flexible strategy. While an indicative
timescale for review of progress is appropriate,
movement from one phase to another should be based
on the evolution of prevailing conditions, and not on a
rigid timetable.
Throughout all three phases, it will be important
to maintain contingency plans for continuing United
Nations engagement on the political and humanitarian
fronts in case of a degeneration in the security situation
that makes it untenable to establish and retain an
international presence in Mogadishu. At the same time,
we should be ready to move quickly to take advantage
of security improvements should they occur.
In that regard, I recall to the Council the advice
of the Secretary-General that, while the deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation remains our
goal, such an operation should be deployed only after
the fulfilment of certain basic preconditions for
success. Important benchmarks will include the
implementation of a credible ceasefire, consent to the
deployment by all the major Somali actors on the
ground, and adequate pledges of troops and required
military capacities by Member States. It remains the
assessment of the Secretary-General that the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation at this stage, in the absence of those
conditions, would be a high-risk operation and that an
ill-timed mission would fail. Inserting a United Nations
peacekeeping operation under the current conditions

5

S/PV.6124

would attract resistance, which could detract from the
political process.
As Council members are aware, some key Somali
political players, as well as religious and clan elders,
are deeply divided over the issue of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. As such, deploying a
peacekeeping
operation
under
the
current
circumstances could undermine ongoing efforts at
political reconciliation. It would also risk attacks
against peacekeepers, which could draw the United
Nations force into the conflict.
In that regard, it is important to bear in mind
lessons from previous United Nations peacekeeping
experiences in Somalia and ensure that the
Organization decides on the appropriate engagement
this time. The Secretary-General’s report argues for the
prudent approach I have outlined. At the same time, it
acknowledges that the peace process is at a fluid stage
and that all options must remain on the table.
The Secretariat has continued to engage possible
troop contributors in preparation for an eventual United
Nations peacekeeping operation. On 19 February 2009,
as set out in the report, the Office of Military Affairs,
which is in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), sent notes verbales to 60 Member States to
ascertain if they would be willing to contribute troops,
should the Security Council decide to establish a
peacekeeping operation for Somalia.
To date, 14 Member States have responded. Ten
of the responses were negative. However, on 27 April,
DPKO received an offer from Bangladesh indicating its
willingness to contribute naval and air force assets.
Bangladesh noted that it would require United Nations
assistance to ensure that its contingents received the
necessary equipment to enable their deployment. Since
the publication of the Secretary-General’s report,
DPKO has also received verbal indications from
Indonesia that it would be ready to provide troops and
to take a lead role in a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia. Pakistan has also indicated
willingness to provide maritime assets, while Uruguay
has offered to contribute military observers. We are
now ascertaining the details of those offers as part of
our ongoing contingency planning for the possible
eventual establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation under the right conditions.
As has been said, the path to durable security in
Somalia lies in the hands of Somalis themselves. The

6

central aspect of the strategy set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report is the building of the Somali National
Security Force and a police force that are capable of
taking over responsibility for security in the country. In
that regard, we of course encourage Council members
to continue to lend their support to the Government in
developing security institutions, in line with a clear
plan and in the framework of the rule of law.
We all hope that, in the coming weeks, the
Government will expedite its preparation of a strategic
plan for the building of national security forces. That
would enable bilateral partners to determine the nature
of assistance required and what they can best
contribute in a coordinated way. The United Nations
has been providing expertise to that process through
the Joint Security Committee. We are also working
with AMISOM to build on the existing effort of the
United Nations Development Programme to train the
Somali police.
(spoke in French)
In the coming weeks, the United Nations will
continue to contribute to that process by providing
experts and deploying its good offices. That will, of
course, be done under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We hope that
the international community will also provide its
support and effectively coordinate its efforts through
the Joint Security Committee in order to support the
Government’s own efforts. Of course, also in the
coming weeks, we will continue to closely monitor the
situation and regularly inform the Council of all
ongoing efforts, including as regards contingency
planning for a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Le
Roy for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Susana Malcorra.
Ms. Malcorra: I appreciate this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the steps being taken on
the support side to strengthen the security institutions
of Somalia and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM).
Resolution 1863 (2009) established a strategy of
support for security in Mogadishu, integrating
voluntary contributions through a United Nations trust
fund, bilateral donor support for AMISOM and Somali
forces, and United Nations-funded logistical support
for AMISOM. Each is equally critical if we are to

09-33564

S/PV.6124

succeed in establishing the peace and security in
Somalia necessary to pursue stable governance and
lasting recovery efforts.

becoming more sophisticated, coordinated and
lethal — key milestones have been achieved. Let me
now speak about some of them.

The contributions pledged at the 23 April donors’
conference were very positive — more than $200
million was pledged. They are expected to support the
significant requirements identified to strengthen
AMISOM and to develop Somali security institutions.
While the success of the donors’ conference highlights
the level of international commitment to security in
Somalia, the disparate funding mechanisms and
approaches represent a coordination challenge.
Measures must be taken to ensure that we arrive at an
alignment of views to address gaps and avoid potential
areas of duplication. Work is being done on that as we
speak.

On 22 April, essential expendable assets were
delivered to AMISOM in Mogadishu. This delivery, the
first one the United Nations has made, included United
Nations supplies of security equipment and field
defence storage, pharmaceuticals and other essential
medical supplies. Specialized support equipment, one
airfield firefighting truck, engineering vehicles,
information and communications equipment and
related infrastructure were delivered to Entebbe in
April for the initial training of AMISOM troops before
being delivered to Mogadishu. These training
programmes are in progress and are scheduled to be
concluded by the end of this month. With that, all
equipment and trained troops will be deployed into
Mogadishu to take full advantage of this additional
support.

The gains achieved by Somali leaders and the
international community to build peace must not be
lost. The current situation on the ground provides
evidence that Somalia’s nascent and yet-fragile peace
process must be protected. Our window for action is
small. The disbursement of donor pledges must be
expedited.
There are still a number of critical requirements
to meeting the security challenges. Those include the
acquisition and maintenance of military equipment for
AMISOM, such are armoured personnel carriers and
patrol boats. The commitment of the African Union
(AU) to bringing the AMISOM force up to its full
mandated strength of 8,000 troops must be supported
to ensure the protection of key installations in
Mogadishu, including the airport, seaport and other
strategic areas. Sierra Leone pledged a full battalion
this week. That is a critical pledge. All measures must
be taken to hasten its deployment and ensure its full
capacities.
With regard to AMISOM, the complementary
strategies of United Nations-funded logistics and donor
support for other requirements are both essential if we
are to establish conditions for AMISOM to source the
additional troops and equipment it needs to reach its
mandated strength and operate effectively. The African
Union is mapping all donor trust fund and in-kind
contributions to ensure appropriate coordination and
address gaps and possible areas of duplication.
Although progress has been hampered by the volatile
and unpredictable security situation in Mogadishu —
which has seen a rise in insurgent attacks, which are

09-33564

Separately, following the liquidation of the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, the
United Nations-owned equipment was deployed into
Mogadishu by the end of this past March. Among other
things, the equipment included 400 prefabricated
accommodation and ablution units, which are very
important for the AMISOM troops. Action is under
way to establish a maintenance arrangement and
assistance in construction.
A comprehensive funding proposal for 2009 and
2010, based on the current Security Council resolution
and United Nations standards of support and
operational requirements, has been submitted for
comptroller review and should be before the General
Assembly shortly.
The United Nations support to AMISOM will
require unprecedented action in ensuring effectiveness
and accountability, with our significant United Nations
presence in the theatre of operations and with multiple
ways to channel contributions. The core team of the
United Nations Support Office has been established,
recruitment of the staff is ongoing, and the initial team
is already deployed in Nairobi and working closely
with the United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
AMISOM and the AU in Addis Ababa.
Resolution 1863 (2009) requires that a
memorandum of understanding be signed with the AU
and AMISOM to ensure that support provided through
the United Nations is used transparently and effectively

7

S/PV.6124

for the intended purposes. This includes payments and
other support provided through the United Nations
trust fund. The draft memorandum of understanding
has been finalized and is being sent this week to the
African Union for its final approval. Assistance
arrangements are also being negotiated with a Member
State for the United Nations to fund a continuation of
the existing AMISOM life-support services through a
vendor until the United Nations completes its own
procurement processes. All procurement processes are
launched, with proposals starting to arrive this week.

To conclude, I must tell you, Sir, that I have to go
to the Fifth Committee to present the overall
peacekeeping budget, so I will be leaving shortly and
will return a little later.

A small passenger jet is expected to be deployed
in Nairobi later this month. As well as providing for
United Nations passenger movement in support of
AMISOM, this jet is critical to providing standing
medical evacuation capacity, which AMISOM lacks
today.

Mr. Omaar (Somalia): Allow me to take this
opportunity to thank, first and foremost, the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and the United Nations
as a whole for organizing the donors’ conference in
Brussels on 23 April, and the international community
and the donor organizations for the pledges and
commitments that were made and fulfilled at that
event.

To advance the construction of the AMISOM
headquarters and level 2 hospital, current greenfield
sites in Mogadishu are being assessed. We are also
undertaking the construction of a small infrastructure
at the airport to have minimal accommodations for an
initial footprint deployment.
Lastly, in direct response to the 9 May insurgent
attack in close proximity to the AMISOM troops who
are protecting Villa Somalia, the seat of the presidency,
the Department of Field Support is deploying trauma
kits and airfield lighting equipment to enable AMISOM
to conduct 24-hour operations at Mogadishu and to
improve immediate casualty treatment. Arrangements
are also under way to provide AMISOM with a
strategic reserve of rations to mitigate any threat to the
AMISOM supply chain.
In conclusion, we have a unique opportunity to
support this process. Our partnership with the AU is
key to ensuring streamlined support among all the
stakeholders involved. One major challenge stems from
the need to deliver this level of support within the
standards of oversight traditionally associated with a
United Nations peacekeeping operation of an
analogous size. Such a level of oversight calls for an
international United Nations footprint on the ground in
Somalia, which is at present precluded by the current
security situation. Until the United Nations support
office for AMISOM can establish a small footprint in
Mogadishu, interim oversight mechanisms will be put
in place, using United Nations, AU and contractual
personnel in order to achieve our core objectives.

8

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Malcorra for her briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia.

Secondly, allow me to also take the opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General for the report
(S/2009/210) that is before us today. We welcome this
report. We believe that it outlines in a clear format the
basic structure and partnership between the Somali
Government and the international community for the
peace and stability of Somalia, which are the desire
and the goal that have been sought for the past
20 years.
If I may return to that, I think this is the first
occasion upon which the international community and
Somalia have established an effective basis for
stabilizing Somalia and for establishing the rule of law.
The rule of law was the basis of the agreement that was
reached in Djibouti, and the central parameter and the
backbone of that policy is peace. This is what we have
sought. It was the basis on which the President was
elected, the cabinet named and the ministers
authorized. I am pleased to confirm that the Somali
people in all parts of the country, be it in the North, in
Central Somalia or in the South, have not only
welcomed, but in essence have seen this as what they
have lacked and have been looking for.
We therefore welcome the report and we are fully
ready, willing and able to work with the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations and its agencies to
implement these proposals for the empowerment of the
Somali security forces, the capacity-building of the
institutions of governance and the expanded ability of

09-33564

S/PV.6124

the African Union Mission in Somalia. We are
committed and ready to move ahead.
I would, on this occasion, however, like to take a
moment to speak on current events, as matters are
developing on the ground. I personally left Mogadishu
on Friday afternoon, and these events started on
Wednesday evening. The Government and the
President, as confirmed by the council of religious
elders, have been ready, are ready and will be ready for
a ceasefire and negotiations to implement peace.
We have never missed any opportunity to
encourage any party, whether in the country or outside,
not to remain outside the process or unengaged by us.
With regard to the current leadership of the opposition,
Hizbul Islam and Mr. Hassan Dahir Aweys, we have
sought every opportunity, including in the past three
days, to make personal contact with him to find out
what it will take to stop the bloodshed. That is our only
requirement: stop the bloodshed and let us talk. Our
door is open. We are not setting preconditions.
Our difficulty, throughout these past three
months, has been that we cannot get an answer. Since
the election of the President on 30 January, we have
sought out Mr. Aweys and Hizbul Islam. We have gone
to every part of the globe, and we have offered our
table and our hand for that purpose. But if we cannot
get a response, we are left in silence. With all that we
see happening today in Mogadishu — with all the
bombings and firefights that are going on — the only
reply that we have received has been this past week.
Yet, our commitment is the commitment that we
made to the international community, the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council, that we support the
rule of law, the re-establishment of the State
institutions,
good-neighbourliness
with
our
neighbouring countries in the subregion, respect for
human rights, structured and implemented by the
organs of the State, and respect for all faiths, which is
the basis of sharia law. Sharia respects every faith and
there is no compulsion in faith. That is the way that we
have implemented it. So we remain committed to that
programme, and we will not be dislodged.
The issue, though, remains what answer can we
expect and what answer can the world expect from the
opposition. We have sought to engage at every
opportunity, but we have no clarity either on their
requirements locally or on their proposals
internationally. The Somali people, whom I represent

09-33564

here today, are not willing to give up or to miss the
opportunity that is here today. We will do whatever
needs to be done. We ask for the Council’s assistance,
as it has pledged to give us the resources, the support
and the partnership that we previously enjoyed, so that
the turmoil in Somalia, both on land and in
international waters, can be addressed and we can
contribute to resolving the problems offshore in the
high seas.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Foreign Minister Omaar of Somalia for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Czech Republic.
Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
First of all, I would like to express our
appreciation for having been invited to participate in
today’s meeting on behalf of the European Union. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretaries-General
Malcorra, Pascoe and Le Roy for their respective
briefings, and extend my gratitude to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia for his contribution to
today’s debate.
The EU acknowledges the recommendations of
the Secretary-General contained in his report
(S/2009/210). Given the current security conditions,
we believe that the proposed phased approach of
continued support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the strengthening of Somali
security institutions is the best available option. The
European Union takes note that, after the two first
phases, the Secretary-General recommends that the
Security Council decide whether the conditions set out
in his report and the timing are conducive to a shift to
the final phase, in which a United Nations
peacekeeping operation could be established to take
over from AMISOM.
Despite the positive developments at the political
level and the powerful political momentum created by
the Djibouti peace process, the overall security

9

S/PV.6124

situation on the ground remains extremely volatile, as
demonstrated by the recent outburst of fighting in
Mogadishu. In that context, the EU welcomes the
continued efforts of President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed to reach out to those groups that remain
opposed to the Djibouti process.
The humanitarian situation, the continued plight
of the internally displaced persons and the dramatic
increase in pirate attacks off the Somalia coast and on
the international high seas are still of great concern.
The European Union welcomes the pledges made
during the International Conference in Support of the
Somali Security Institutions and the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which was held in Brussels on
22 and 23 April 2009, under the joint auspices of the
United Nations, the European Union, the African
Union and the League of Arab States. The pledges
made at that conference amounted to €164 million —
both for AMISOM needs not covered by the United
Nations logistical support package and to support the
Somali transitional security institutions — of which the
European Commission alone pledged more than €80
million. That testifies to the strong commitment of the
European Union to working with the international
community to help the new Somali Transitional Federal
Government to bring about peace and stability.
The European Union stresses that building up the
Somali security and police forces is vital to the
country’s stability. The European Union also calls on
the international community to step up its support for
Somali institutions in order to take on challenges and
opportunities to further consolidate reconciliation,
restore peace and rebuild the country. The European
Union remains committed to engaging in such support.
In Brussels, the international community also
highlighted the need to continue to address the issue of
piracy, inter alia, through an international naval
presence, emphasizing that land-based solutions to the
root causes of piracy must be urgently addressed.
The European Union would also like to express
its gratitude to AMISOM troop-contributing countries
for their contributions to stabilizing the situation in
Mogadishu, given the difficult operating environment.
It is also important to continue to support AMISOM
through the United Nations logistical support package,
through the United Nations trust funds and bilaterally,
with a coordinated approach.

In addition, the European Union and its member
States are supporting AMISOM in the training of the
Somali National Security Force and Somali police.
With regard to support for AMISOM, the European
Commission has so far committed a total of €40
million. Moreover, several EU member States have
offered financial, material and logistical assistance.
The EU’s priority is to support good governance,
human rights and the rule of law. At the Brussels
pledging conference, the European Commission
announced that it planned to allocate more than €215
million to those areas for the period 2008-2013. The
European Union also provides humanitarian emergency
relief and other forms of assistance to ease the
suffering of the Somali people.
The European Union is contributing to
international efforts to curb piracy off the Somali coast
and in the Gulf of Aden. The EU is ready to continue,
through the deployment of the maritime military
mission Atalanta, to protect United Nations vessels
delivering the logistical support package to AMISOM
and shipments of humanitarian relief, as well as
surveillance and patrolling in maritime areas. At the
same time, the EU is aware of and committed to
helping to meet the need to address the root causes of
piracy through sustainable development and the full
restoration of the rule of law in Somalia.
In conclusion, I wish to assure the Council that
the European Union, together with other members of
the international community, stands ready to continue
assisting Somalia. However, Somalia must do its part.
The immediate goal is to develop its own National
Security Force and civilian police force. A long-term
security strategy is a precondition for future
development. The European Union welcomes the
announcement by President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed in Brussels that the issue of security is one of
his Government’s highest priorities. Any meaningful
progress can be based only on Somalia’s ownership of
and responsibility for its implementation.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

10

09-33564
